
--- Page 1 ---
‘04-10273-10003 -- [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ¥~"r=7"

ise ene

| ; “ ; As _
nt [oe AL. a4 '

REMORANDUM POR: Deputy Directer (Plans)
SUBJECT ¢ Related Mission Directive fcr Mexico

1. Attached in the revised Reloted
Kexico, Rission Directive for

2. Your approval 1s requested.

4 WA APPROVED:
MA ‘ . : H
8 ers ‘ LUUs RG Ua.
efiapaty Director (Plessy—

; 2% Jemary 1962 3 YuN gee :
| Distributions Wate Bprover—
, Orig & 2 = wip

1-PG

1-CA .
; 1 = cr
: 1 -~ SR
l- ans !
i 1 - rYylur
_



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

I.

RELATLD MISSION DIRECTIVE PCR MEXICO

ORIERAL PROVISIONS

A.

b

c.

Xaticnal Policy. The leng-range naticnal poliey objoc-
ties ot nT tes. Gcvernmment toward Kexico are to reduce
to an ineffectual level the tafluence of international
Coemumisma, to encourege desecratic governzent, and te
keep the Mexican government friendly and faverably in-
elined toward U. 8. policies. Purther guidance is given
in the current CCB Regional Operations Plan for Latin
azerica, :

cperational Enphasis. The Station's prissary emphasis

wlil continue to piaced on clandcatine collection
operations and covert ection operaticns against the
Sino-Seviet bloc, Cuban, and Ccamunist elesents in Hoxicco.

Changes in the iM, This basic policy instructicn for
activities tn Hexlso has teen revised in light of the
Statica's last Annual Assesanent of Pregresan Report and
to reflect sore accurately operational conditicas, capa-
btiities a.d direction. In view of the tmapcrtance and
threat presented by Cozennist Cuba to U, 8, interests in
latin America, coveraze cf Cuban revoluticnary ectivities
in Mexico has been waie a apecific requircment under
Priority A. Fricrity B obfectives and tasxs include
refinenents cf desired efferts and alao pssvids fcr covert

: -eeticn cperaticns agains? Cuban targets in werico. The

former task for preductica of acticn prturez and their
d@iatribution has been deleted, as it iz no icnger a valid
requirenent; two fcorner tasks pertaining to the possible
use of fcreign diplomate have been combined; a tasx to
develcp young potentlat political leaders (ZREAGER) has
teen added. Two previcus Priority C cbhjectives have been
elininated, aa thore 1s no established Kexican intellii-
gence service, and the Station regularly reports oa
activities of the security services. Coverage of Chinese
Ccmmunists hes been raised to Priority B coincident with
the eliminaticn of the former Pricrity C section.

Contingency Reperting. In addition to the specifics
chyestives Bat forth ia Section II, the Station will from
time to time be called cn to attempt to satisfy Intelligenc:

i
'
|
i
:
H
!



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000 . {
: >

Guldes and Intelilgence Directives, Est tt ts oxpected

that these requirezenta be batisficd uttitzing existing .
easets. Cf partioular interest Ch € continuing basis :
ie information on: (a) any indications that Mexico may \
be used as a base for clandestine activity directed :
Ogainst the U.S. (CI Beck Mesgazes C3 ani 115); (b)

aotivities of non-bloc latelcigence services, eapectally

those that are potentialiy harcful tc U. 3. interests;

(c) the Plotting of revoluticnary groups asccorming te

their current importance 1a Atteapts to cverthreow the

regines of their respective Latin Azerican countries;

(4) the current @lignsent and activitles of politica)

forces with the potential for assuning ceatro: of the

Mexican Governsent; (e) U. 8, Comiuntates residing in

Mexioos and (f) the Spanish Ccccaunist greup.

It will bo noted that certain Previous contingency
reporting requirements have been azended as follows:
Te former levy for reporting on the stability of the
Nexicen Government has been changed to s more reaiistic ‘
and meaningful statemant a3 reflected by (d) above. :
This modification is @ppropriate, as political changes :
in Hextco ase moat likely to occur within the fremencrk i
of conatitutionality. The Frevicus charge for reporting
on secret shipaents of otrategic materiais frig Hexicc
to bloc countries is no longer Syecificaily required and
has been doleted,

TI, OBSECTIVES

JORITY A

1. Cbtain information on Sino-Scviet blce plans end activi-

ties in Nexico, inoluding those of bles inteliigence
services,

|

a@. Continue and, where possible, increase physical and
technical surveillance of dloe installations and
residcnoes,

db. Through controlled agent assets, identify and monitor
the activities of bloe Personnel; {f conditions
werrant, attempt recruitzeat cr defection of blos
personnel.

NRC RY MI ee > ~~

ots ee See oe ae or



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

Seek to reduce and,
and leftist control
ad non-governsental

Continue CI operations Qgainst bice intel .igance
perscnnel.

1f possible, elininate Communist
or infiuence in key ecverrecatal
organizaticns, politics) parties,

Mase media outlets, and cther elenents that Influence

public cr official opinion and

ov,

ce

a

£.

Policies,

Develep politica) action Penetration

ticna: groups, such es students, teachers and
organized labor, tn order tc aisrupt and recuce
their capacity for Carrying out action harzty; to
©. 3. ebjectives and interests,

Expese and discredit ilieral cr subveratye Siao-
Soviet bloc activities end Tepreacntatives tn Mexice,
as wel: a8 the activities su) Porécnnel cf ¢nter-
naticnal and Iccal Ccamunist front organizations.

Identify, GQiscredit, and if powatble €. iminate
Commmists and pre -Comuunists from strategic positicas
in goverment, educaticnal instituticns, state.
controlled industrial end eagricuitural entarprises,
iaber unions, and student organizations,

agents tn key

Blve guidance t, individuals. and .__
organizations. that can be induced ¢o produce and dis-

Seminate @nti-Comsunist, pre-Free wurid prcpeganda

papers, cr other media,
and carry cut political astion operations against
S. e¢lenenta,

Identify, develop, and utilize Important neon-Cemmunist
politics), business or Civic leaders to earry cut pro-
paganda, eccnomie or Political acticns egsinst Com
unist influence end induce them to support views
Coinciding with u, 3, Goverment Policy interests.

Continue to support and guide anti~-Cenennist youth

end student organizations, publications or agents,

anda when necessary, cevelop additicnai aazeta in key
Sehools in Mexico City and Selected previnses,

4
oem.


--- Page 5 ---
ook

&. Develop and support covert press assets <n the :
ateffs cf influentia: newspapers. i

b. Develop socess te individuals and organizaticns
in the labor field and support acn-Communivs
leaders and groups in key unions.

3. Obtain infcrmation on the organizational atructure,
key perscnnel, financing, covert Flana and activities
of the Ccommist Party cf Kexico (PCH), Communist front
orgenisations and groups, eapesialiy the Partido Pupular
Scialista (PP8), and non-Comzuniat endfor anti-i. $,
ercups that may be susceptible to exploitaticn by Inter-
naticnal Communism,

@. Exploit and extend exlating penetraticns in the
PCA and the PPS.

db. Maintain pessiretiona of the PCH and seek to
ponetrate the anti-~RicINA Wing cf the PCH,

©. Develep and, if conditicns warrent, recrutt a key
source in the Workers’ University capable of ucaitor- '
ing cultural contacta between the University and bloe
diplomatic installations,

@. Continue to moniter the activities of seleoted
Ccumnist-influencea labor unicns and front grcups
through the penetration in the PPS} Lf conditions
warrant, make ss.ected recruiteents in the unions
oY groups, .

4. Continue to obtein informaticn on Cuban Reveluti
@ctivities in mexico ana Support U. S, Goverment efforts
against the CASTRO regine,

@. Continue to conduet penetration operations cf Cunan
and induce defecticns of Cuban dlpicaata,

b. Recruit egents in Mexico for operational use in :

@. &ecure support of high Mexican Government officials
for the conduct of operations against Cuba,

da. Continue to provide operational support for activities

RS ne ete ee ee ee ee me ee

sop we



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

directod against the CASTRO regine in Cura,

i
i
!

e. Utilise propaganda media, political asticn assets,
@nd other covert means tc ccnbat the influence cf
Cuban revolutionary ideologies in Mexico,

PRIORITY B

1. Combat ultra-nationslistioc and anti-U, 8, activit:es in
Kexico, and propagandtze the daggers of Ccammian,

@ Utilise exleting media and political ecticn assets
to combat anti-U. S, propaganda or activities. i

b. Utilize existing media and political action assets to
prevent or negate collaboration between ultra-naticna, igty
and Communists,

C. Utilize media and political acticn assets tc prevent ‘
or negate the soolc-economic and cultural peretraticn :
plans cr activities cof the Sino-Scviet bloc.

a. Spot and develcp fcr future covert collatcraticn yousg :
local figures aho chew petential for Pelitica: losters
Sip and who may be influenced t« beocne eeneraliy :
favorable to U. S$. interests.

2. Obdtain information en the eecret intenticns and activities
of the Mexican Gevermment in foreign affairs, yarticularsy
toward the U, 8., the Sino-Soviet bloc, and Cuta,

& Continue to develop and influonce high level scatacts
in the Hexican Ocvernment, particularly the Office of
the President and the Foreign Rinlotry,

3. Collect information on the Sino-Soviet dDloa,
@. Continue penetration of airline and steanship offices

and official governacnt agencies to cbtain advance
information on travellers.

B. Reoruit or obtain the willing ccllavoretion of selected
travellers toa bloo ccumtries, especially these who will
renain in bloo countries fer an extended Pericd and
who may be on scientific nissicns.

a te RNG Pe An anne ee ee : soe wee



--- Page 7 ---
t
,

GO. Recruit third naticnnls and Latin Anerican

Giplexats to be esalignet or traneferred to bles
countries,

a. Chtain ccemuniestions intelligence on bloo dipio-
MAtiO traffic,

&. Obtain information ca the Chinese Ceesunists tn Mexico,

&. Spot, assess and recruit or develep scurces tn the
Chinese community,

be Exploit the Gobernacicn files on Chinese living in
Rexico and effect Penetratica of the SHACP,

|
t
'


