
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10183-10276| [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

ede ot ee Rny .
ee 4, ri RETURN TO CIA
: rot Pe « Background Use Only
. . Do Not Reproduce
‘ t
ay a \ ” ‘
ae " ¥ .

MEWORANDUM FOR: Chief, WH/SA/éx |
VIA - : Chief, WH/PO/A

SUBJECT - ¢ AMMUG/1 ,Operation
Target Analysis and Non-surfac@ble Leads

r 1. Reference ig made to your memorandum date 16 June 1964
requesting Target Analysis Summary Reports on leads to be
exploited and lists of those leads which the Branch desires
not to be surfaced to the Intelligence community.

2. Attached are separate lists for each appropriate
Central American and Caribbean country detailing nationals
of each country whose names have been mentioned or otherwise
cropped up during the debriefing of AMHLG/1. WH/2 considers,
at this time, that it is not feasible nor desirable to surface
any of these leads to the intelligence community, pending a
final determination as to the feasibility of gureuring some
of these leads for operational exploitation. Those leads
which are determined to be of no operational potential will he
released to your office on a continuing basie for surfacing

to appropriate agencies,

3. Attached also are seven completed Target Analysis
Bummary Reports on:

a} Francisco Javier MBLLA Pena
““p) Jaine DURAN Hernando
.¢) Socrates Isaias PEGUSRO Sehuroer
a) Jean Norbert MONTERO
pian e@) Mauricio de la SELVA Venegas
f) Roque DALTON Garcia


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

Vol

“”

-2~

g) Noel GUERRZRO Santiago

These individuals represent immediate targets on whon we
have already undertaken action. We anticipate that certain
selected other individuals from the lists cited in

‘paragraph one above will become targets, and accordingly,

are in’ the process of examining and investigating these.
As these individuals are culled through, Target Analysis
Summary Reports shall be prepared and forwarded to your
office.

26
hn M. Whitten
Bonn Mn j J

Attachments:
Target Analysis Summary Reports
ANMUG/1 Leads Not to be Disseminated

Distribution:
O& 1 ~ C/HH/sA/CI (w/atts)
1 = WH/PO/A (w/atts) -
3 = WH/2 (w/atts)



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000 : : : \
a soe \

x rn Cn Ad

4

Dosinican Republic Loads Mot to be Disseninated ANAUG rstion

Francisco Javier ALLA Pena
Jaine DORAN Hernando
Socrates Isaiss P2GUEW Sohuroer
““Hipidie RUIZ (tals is an alias of *TIGURON" - true nane still not known)

David Onelio ESPAILLAT Caapos

Francisco Zleuterio RAMUS Peguero
Francisco lizard RAMOS Peguero
Teresa Inoconcia SPAILLAT Hernandez

“Jase Stenvenido CUSIKA Rouel , :
Hector Aususto CARL Ortesa
Leopoldo Ariosto SRULNON cuiz
Jose CASSA Lacrone

Silvano LO2A Vicente :
Tlander Zanoni S2L1G Usluonve
Ana Hercedas SSPTIAL da Castro

Baldeniro “ASTRO Garcia

Marcelino GRULLON Jimenez

Denito ALZO German

Norge BOTS) Fernanda: ’

Rafael Francisco TAVENAS Aosario

dayo TOYIS Vargas

Cayetano Armando hODUGQIE: Del Prado


--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

Antonio Sulio Jose I5A Conde . - ~
~ : “Simon BOLIVAR .
Artaro Rafsel sSPAILLAT aodrigues
Carmen B, HERNANDEZ do Faxas
Emesto LOPEZ Molina
Maximo LOP=? Molina -



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

Hey Aveo ft ALE x

21 Salvador Leads Not to be Dissexinated © KEUO/L Operation
Salvador Leads Not_to be Disseainated_ AUUO/L Operation

- Roberto BEICIAND Marin GUERRA WARFARE PA wiVG owey
Real Fornando CORR Nelendes Cuixencd naxrace TACs ey x
~ Carlos Albarto FLORES Hernandez Gureicea Wart rare PAMwee Cocy x

~uanRanon LOZAND Resales AWAS o£ ReBerte Bewcrnwe MAMI :
~~ Carlos MARTINEZ Ortiz DEAL - Gukeeittn wactaxe TRA wil ovcy
Ricardo Augusto MARTINEZ Vanegas Guree ica KARFAKE JKAINING wey :
+ Ivan Danilo aobitcuss leon Gurexcnta LenkpaKe beAimirnc cacy XK
SY Uisandro RAMIAY Selis Gurecicca LUAR FORE pe Ate iuG cory X

“Pedro HODRIGUEZ Guewn seen LEARFARE TKAIMIVE Oly

02 ,
ey Los , Py ecere Ae
— Ciro arturo ROT! Torres Gurenitta wnmnramé APA. owe oY ON ee.

-~ Vietor Manual SANCHEZ Bonilla Gureeihid LAKFAME  psenrnie euey
Pafest COWES Moline /75210¢ CK WET GAwen EL Bowed
arturo ALPAHO Fuentes Que 2erita tine hawG Paarviv® gacy
“ Raul Antonio VARDAS “Gur ee RiLca LUNE FARE [RAIAMME CAL y
- hodres Antonio VELASIGZE Gut welucn war Faw e eat eet’ cacy
Roque DALTON Garcia :
TA Sanvel Antonio CALERO Cerin tba ener fe UING 4 Coy pein &
TA Joea Alberto CARRTLIO Calderon Awewe Te Anu yp pre ft latent)
~ sone Salvador Sosales Cur manic wiwFnwk ye Aviv’ puey
rs :
TA Steardo GAsTi0 Bteas aceer © [Sees ee covrms wire GASine
-” Praneisco O02AN Sardana Quire KAILA Len RSA tele LUG crey
wv Freddy Guerra Gaerntccs Lone Cart feeding ctey
ACAI CL ve Pa

~ Arnando LOPEZ Mantiel G.-feeinc A fe atFarce

7 Voss Antonio GARCIA Rivera Gu pK LA LEAKS ANE TAMIA Cn ey


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

Wp

— pedro SANIACHUZ Castro CuERRILEA AKePArcle

“7 Ruben MARTI. Quardado Gow Fetes” HARP ORE

2 gayd Concopcion Morales wo Xfec<e

— Jose MAICIA Martine2 Gufennen
ju Die Des

° ue MAE

- Jesus Antonio PAZ Guerre nnea

Rita AMTREZ «GUERILLA

Pedro AZ{ViL0 Melzer ALsAS oF JE

o&
TA [forge Federico pass} acest ©

ana Leticla BiJLAZA (BARRAGA?) Suiroa

¢ Raul CagtolLanos, merida py wit] Perms

Aare. 6

raised Fea lee sone S bonsz}0 afeewe BZ Anew paws

an

pat Alama

CAE AME

L samen RAK ee Aap prenisE 2

usta ay AL kYAu Oe Ge

WARFARE

Len FAK

FRAMES
RE HD JRMIMIVE
WEL Ameerawe

paaraneG

PRAIA OO

ped ieee any

Svo Awtesie

Anan / Haws?

Geared ese ARE

oe

th Ceonas orga nivag2e {2 yoy 2 Bac, at ob

(Retuel sceeh mance | Acco Aenaes ~~
(Gose Nanlio Ofcuzta canaal 20) GC ase Dep .

E PRA IAS ‘gaey

PAR

pee! -1

Beret SE

woery 4
own y

sapex 4 ppsaset

oaty
PV oree. 2a

w cease

w

Prenii ue wey x

fo meet

oz
#3 ice!

Suc BU:


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

Guatemala Leads Sot to de Dissouinated : ROG /1 Operation .
4 oe
Antonio JON Harcos : sh

Y Julio camzu sierra G/M
& Pranetsco CiUZ Figueroa G/ te .
/ Victor Manel CUZLLAR Carranza C/

- Bernardo DIAZ Mendez C Wy eu Y _
‘ _/ Rolando HERRS2\ Hornande: oe. -
v Marco Antonio LEGNT Aguilar uw AumuC-1 UAtiv

‘ Adgar Roberte L080 buon GY Amuuc 4 PINES

/ soso Aquiles L. AORALES G/w Anmidue-/ Wuews

Maruel Jooue ORTIDA Par : .

lt angel PALENCIA Sanches G/w evey :
Ricardo Arturo GUZMAN (pseudo: Alberto JANIUS Uelrar}
Jacobo ARBEN/Z Ouzman
Hario BARRLENTOS
Manvel CALICH
Caraen RONE2O50 Sea
Fomnando SOSA Pol
Marca Antonio YON Sosa
Lals Augueto TUZCIOS Lina
Francisco AHAnO Granados .
Alicia HOYA do Anado :
Joso Manuel PORTUWY
Victor Manuel GUTIEE. Gardin
Iaabel iOHL Ressro de Sosa
Jose RUSAL S a

Nelida TURCIOS



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

Eaiti Leads Sot to be Disseninated . AMUO/L Operation

Jorge Norbert MONTERO
Reng DEPESTRS
(Un<nown) *PrrTy

ane |



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

Hienduras Leads Not to be Disseninated

Maglio MRED Espinal
Farto SO5A Havarro
lais Randolfo BAREGAS

AMUS/L Operation

——


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

Ricarayua- Leads Not to be Jissaninated
ee me Jissoninated

* Noel OUER2:20 Santiago
Professor: TORRES (probably idelberto TORR:S Hspinoza)

Silvio MATURGA (or MALLORCA)
Ernesto MARTINEZ ,
German PALACHT Baca

Efrain SANCHSZ

Carlos A. TINO) Montiel
Marvin CASTRO

Felix MONTERSZY Dobil
S1icio Dtharinto GONZALE. Moreno
Alosandro ALZGNIA Beraudes
Juan Jose GAXCIA Lorio

ELL AUTAMIRANO

Bayardo ALTAHIRAWO Lopes
Ivan BACA

Alejandro 2:7 Ex

Anibal LORIO Garcia

Snrique KAR EXO

Orlando QUuT Juintsna
Rolando QUANT

Monterrey "C55

Rodolfo ROML Cones

Sfrain SANGH-Z Sancho

amar

a



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

Panama Leads Not to be Dissexinated

Thelma KINO
Jorge TUALER
(Unknow) "Luis Sonrisa Case* - 2 male guitarists

i

ae). Opera tion


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

Veet
eluad

Doninican 2epublic

ane

Target Analysis ¥ Report AMHUG/L Operation

SUBJECT: Francisco Javier NELLA Pena aka Francisco Lavier MZLLA Done

iL

aka “Pichi*

Significance of Target

a)

d)

-e)

Caden Intelligence Service Connection

KSLIA has been identified as a Singleton Cuban Intelligence
Service Agent in the Dominican Republic, trained as a frogsan,
and algo in S/d and cipaers, itis exact mission on behalf of
the CIS is not knowm,

Communist Party Affiliation

Subject is a member of the Castroist revolutionary Acrupacion
Folitica Catorce do Junio (APCJ - bth of June Political Group).
Tha APCJ fe not a Commmnist Party per sey however, its present,
dominant leaders are Narxist-Comnnist In their political
direction, The APCJ is premmed penetrated by ectual Carunista,
and is imqwn to receive coral and material support from Cubs.

Infornation “hich Could be Sbteained

1, fis exact mission on behalf of the Cuban Intellicence Service.
what inforsation is he required to furnish to the Jervice?
The reason for this informtion.

2, ‘shat persons will he use to acquire this information? Will
they all be unwitting?

3. what ie his erect role a3 a Crogan? (for arms caches,
demolition stc..)

4. Inforeation on his accosodation address in France. Addittonal
information on his accomodation address in Jenaica,:

S. Inforsation on the relationship between Cuba and tha APcd
and plans for tho Doainican Ropublic.

6. Information on other Cuban [7 agents known to ala,

7. Dewbling (soe [iI for more datails).


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

ner aake
Sele

If, Current Location

: Herwanog Miralles So. 5, Madrid, Spain (since February 196L, ben

{ he went there froa Caba. In Hadrid,; he was joined by his Dosiaican
girl-friead, Cionara S\LADDi Decillo, whoa he married there. Koitner

: . hag yet returned to tho Doinican Republic.) His last mow address

: din the Dominican Republic is Avenida Independencia Bo. 55, Santo Domingo.

: TI. Vulnerabilities (for recruitment or defection)

! None <nown. The only inforzation on NSLLA was acquired in April 1763
when be trangited Mexico enroute to Saba. At that tize NcLLA became
quite upset when "salio a Cuba" (left for Cuba) was staaged in his
passport. Accordingly, with this bein. thie only past inforsstion oa
subject, we would be starting from "scratch". —

i 1. Faaily and lielatives

a) vifer Xtonara GAIADLI Jecillo, Douinican citizen (no inforsation)
Father: Lnis Milla, Goninican citizan (no infarsation)
Motaert Noeai (nes unxtown) de “ELLA, Dominican citizen {no inforzation)

(Tas canto Saainco Station ig presently conductin: au Lavestivation
ef hia relatives)

b) Hone <nowm to be in tre United itates.
Y% Bio-raohte
Erorragts

Date of Birth: @3 Fabruary 1737

Place of Birth: janto Toatn:o, Josinican Republic

: Chtisensnaip: Naninican sepublic

Lanmiaves: dative jpanisn {only lancaaze capsbility xnowm to us at

this tive)

Physical Descriptions ¢* Lo® tall
1 poands
blac. hair (cut short - tut not crev-cut)
dam brom eysa
swartny canpleatan

Protorranh: (3 avallable at tre Jes:

Otner pertinent “altar Nit.& ould oe deserioed a3 “pretiy". wonas
nO sustacng and dona not snare.



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

vi.

vir.

Gcerational Leads and Lines to Ribiect for necru{trent or Defection

(25
a) (2TAAS - Lives in saxe apartsent vuilding area as Subject.

Has furnished sose inforsation on Subject and bis girl-friend,
which he obtained tnrouz, normal contacts.
06

bv) Gane. DURAN Hernando] - Operational Lead only (see serarate

tarzet sheet). tle ia close to MILLA and also could lead us to
a@ still unifentified CIS arent "TIBUHON" wno used DURAN as an
unwitting courier for tne delivery of nicrofila to Cuba.

c) Goan = Althouzh not a leader of the ArCJ, no.nas zood access

to the APCJ's extrenist "circle’. He nas been used witn extremely
good resulta for inforcation on othar Cuban tarvets of interest.

Sealvation:

a)

b)

As was stated above, NELLA 1a completely nev to us. Hovever,
the Station Ia currently conductinz aa investication of HELLA
in sa effort to detsrmina nis vulnerability for racruitment/defection.

wita the present raling Desinican Triumvirate, Subject could be
arrested {f ne cane to security notice, not only in nis position
witn tne C{S but also if he became involved ia any subversive
Comminist activities. in the event ho is arrested se undoubtedly
would be desorted.



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

Doainicen Republic ee

Target Analysis Jumary Réport AMOC/L Operation

SUBJECT: Jaime OURAN Nernando aca Jaime SOHAN Hernandes aka ‘Jinsy*

I. Significance of Target
a) Connection with Cuban Intellisence Service

Subject is not a Cuban Intelligence Service agent, but did
receivo guerrilla training in Cuba.

b) Commnist Party Affiliation

DURAN is Secretary~General of tne pro-Castro Agrupacion Politica
de Catorce Junio (APCJ ~ llth of June Xoveuent) in the Dosinican
Republic, and is a seaber of tnat faction of the APCS favoring
the training of its ma:bers to direct the future of 2 socialist
governcent.

. c) Subject is a close friend of Francisco Javier MELLA fensa, an
identified Cuban ({ntelligency Service Avant in the Doxisican
Republic. Subject waz also used as an "unvitting” courier by
a still unidentified Cuban [5 ajent *TISUMON® in tie orinican
Republic, subject unwittingly carried to Cuba for "TiRsN"
in weptexber 1743, a atch-boox containing microfils.

d) Utility -  Fenotration of the 1. June & alana & intentions
of the vubans vs 3.2,

II. Current Location

Believed to be in Guba. fias been there aince Septexber 21> 3.
Last <nowm Dosinican depublic addreas: capaillat 72), ssnta Sominzo,

Derainican Kepubdlic.

Il. Vulnerabilities (for rscrultsent or defection)
None ynomm. (Also see VII - <cvaluation)

Ty. Fasily and selativoo

a) Wife - Gloria ACBY=LO da uren, Ouninican citizen (no ianforsation)
No otner molatives ‘“nown.

b} Ho known relatives in the U.S.A.


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000 «

ve Blographic Data

date of Birth: 17 June 1933
Place of Birth: Jarabacos, Deuinican Republic
Citizenshivs Joeinican kewbdlic
\ Lanwace bility: sative Spanish (only ability <nowm to us at ils tine)
Ynysical description: (requestin; from the ~tation)
Photogreph: Is available at the Des

. VI. Operational Leads and Lines to Subject for Recruitaont or Defection
aa On .

Capri ~ Lives in the sane residential section as UURAN. Fes

fumished some infornation on Subject, which be obtaina throuzh ;
normal contacts. . : :
' e

7 Copeoss/ - Has provided numerous reports on DUUUN!s activities
tin the APCJ.

Z. , i
GHG/| = Has provided trief information oa Subject's activities H
within the AiGJ and his travel to Cuba, : ,

;
!
!
i

| VT. Evaluation

In that 4e presuno that KUN is a aarc-core Coumalst and ab present
have scant information for a tarzet asse3sz0nt, imodiate nrossects
for recrultaent are virtually nill. deqiirenents can be lovicd on

° #D3/L since hg is a controlled source ‘ormation could be ,
elicited fronG4pin/l? and possibly tres EBS 3/1. Aa devalozed, :
leads froe forsrsoinz could bo followed wo on, but, a8 indicated ‘
above, vo vill bo startin: at the oottos of the ladder on WAN as an :
operational target. i

wares
* +

Cuvee


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

- Cuba - Dominican Republic

AMCO/L Operation

Tarcet Analysis Suusary Report

SUBJECT: Socrates Isaias PuWEO Sehuorer alias Neleon BARcT Disla aca “?upo"

I. Sicniticance of Target

! In that Subject Lives in Cuba he could be extrenoly valuable to
- SH/SA and arl/2/Vorsinican Republic.

i
|
i
1
i
|
;

a) Comection with Cuban Intellizence Service
P2QUEW) is the APCJ (Agrupacion Politica Catorce de Junio -
Lith of dune Political Group) representative in Cuba acting
as focal point between the APCJ and the Cuban Intellixence
service (D0T}.

>) Commnist Party Affiliation
ACJ representative in Cuda. Subject nas been reported a3 &
nenber of tne pro-Castro faction of the Arcd since lyvl men
he vas exiled ia Curacao.

i
i
'
H

, ec) Information “hich Subfect Could Furnish

1. wbject could furnish information on the relationsnip
betwen the Cuban Intelligence service ara) tae Alcs. }

2. Inforsstion on the Arcd ss a party, plans, menbers otc.

3. Information on Cuban Intelli -ence Eervice personnel xnom
to hia.

‘ . t fossible operations of the Cutan Intellizence service avainst
tne Domiatcaa Hepublic.

voasiple information on mattara of interest to JH/SA aitnin Cuba.

Toublin:; ag a penetration of the Cusan IntelLicence Service
and the Arcd, .

7 Inforeation on Sosinicans deta: trained in Cuba, not only in
guerrilla trainin: but as a.cnts.


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

Cerrent Location .
Se ee

Lives in Habana, Cuba (address uninown). In Cuba be coes by the
naps of Nolson BART.

Vulncrabilities (for recruitasnt or defection)
Hone «now. No infomation on his activities since 1751 is xnown.

Facil y snd telatives

v.

a} Wife - Gisela SSiCION de Perusro, danyhtor of former dominican
Coneul in Curacao.

b) Children - one dauchter (naze and ace un«nown), and ons gon
(name uncnown) born in Habana, Cuba in Deceaber 19/3.

c) Fathor - [sales Pasar) Ferez (deceased)
4) Mother ~ Tulin (nee unznom) de PUGUERD (no additional information)

@) Brother + Noleon Ramon PcGUiN) Senuorer (deceased)

) Sisters ~ Sobeya 0. FiNUsiO Suuourer and Maria a, yYONSw Seauorer
(no additional inforsation)

g) No relatives cnown to be in tie United -tates.

Biograpnic Data

Date of Birth: 1). January 1923
Place of Birtht San ledro de Haceris, Goalnican Hepublic
(NOTS: -~hen travelling uses Dominican oassport issued 23 July 1363
in the nane of ielson 21i2T Disla, date arsi place of birtas
23 January 1934, Douinican Repudlic; occupation: student)
Citizenship: Noninican Xemudlic ? possibly chan,ed to Cubana.
Languazo ability: lative sgani{sh; otaers not xnowm.
rtystcal Description: 5'7" tal
159 pounds
brownes-~ianed
blac« cyes
wears eye-lasses
wears noustacne

rhotorraph fs available of Aina and aleo the real felson BARZT Disla

Oiner pertinent data: Lsborscony Tecnaician



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

Bled

| 8

VI. Operational Leads and uines to subject for ecraitacnt or Defection

se have several, sources reportin. on activities of the APCJ, its
menbors etc. within the loninican Republic (piwosc/1 and/or

OLGEPTI/L? could be used, to elicit information on euvEny throagh
tipiy normal contacts (oGi.0ss/1 1s being used at this tine to
report on otner Cuban targets. a

VII. <cvaluation

‘hile there is no inforastion on hand to indicate dubject is
approachable, the fact that be ie in Cubs, xnowo to AM-UG/l - “hom
aient approach hig - and tas been identified to us he bocomes of
operational interest. Obviously our objective is to continze our
interest and collect what information we might, awaiting tas day for
his exit from Cuba. At that tins sore definitive action miznt be
considered. Nis importance a8 a source of infornation on inside
Cuba and that country's intontion and capabilities on tie Soninican
Republic cannot bo discounted and merit our continved alertnass to
hig activities and whsreabouts,

|
!
i
i


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

Target Analysie Summary Report . AMMUG/1 Operation

SUBJECT: Roque DALTON Garcia

I. Significance of Target

DALTON is a recruited agent of the Cuban PGI. He has been
trained in guerrilla warfare, 8/v, radio transmission,
and radio reception. AMMUG/1 claims that Subject is a
menber of the Central Committee of the PCES. AMMUG/L
, characterized Subject as having excellent contacts within
. the DGI in Cuba. Subject is in contact with Mauricio
. de la Selva Venegas, the Salvadoran intermediary, in
Wexico City. In view of the above, Subject could be
expected to furnish considerable information on both the
PCES in B1 Salvador and his activities for the DGI.

Il. Current Location

Subject was deported fron £l Salvador to Mexico in late
January 1964. On 16 June 1964 Subject was spotted by the
Salvadoran National Police in San Salvador, and {s now
under surveillance. Exact address will be obtained by

the San Salvadoran Station. ‘

III. Vulnerabilities

AMMUG/1 lists Subject as his lending candidate for recruit=
ment by us. His reasoning on this is that Subject is not

: highly motivated, has a weakness for women and the easy
life, and a generally weak nature. AMWUG/1 says that
Subject is very intelligent, but never showod a real desire
to learn during bis Cuban training. Subject was given
600 dollars to purchase a radio receiver upon his return
from Cuba, but he apparently spent the soney on himself.

IV. Faully and Relatives

Pather (deceased) waa U.S. citizen. One of Subject’s three
brothers fought for tse U.S. in Okinawa. A sister,
Margarita, 1a Mexican citizen who now is in Cubaas a

student.


--- Page 21 ---
e200

=20

V. Biographic Data

DOB: 14 May 1935

pop: San Salvador, El Salvador

Rationality: Salvadoran

Language Ability: Native Spanish; others not known
Physical Description: Height 1.68 meters; long thin
face; black eyes; two gold teech; thinlipped; black
hair parted on left side.

Photo Available: Yes

VI. rational Leads and Lines to Subject for Recruituent
or pefection : 7
—— 6-2 oz i

Subject is nnové Porsonaily by Avatcc-1! and by (JOBRIN-2,
recently (recruited agent) of\San Salvador Station Subject an
is presently under surveillance by tho National Police

in San Salvador (Station has(mnilaterai penetration of ey

the policeywho might be used ag a lead into Subject).

VII. Evaluation

From AMMUG-l's assessment of Subject, based on personal
knowledge and observation, it would appear that Subject
would not be a too difficult target to hit. However,

some of his personal characteristics which have made hin
a handling problem for the DCI vould presumably meke him
a handling probles for us. His failure to perforn for
the DGI since October 1963 might mitigate against our

use of him which would incluce, presumably, resumption of
his s/w channel. Nonetheless, AMMUG-1‘'s clain that Subject
is a meber of the Central Comittee of the PCES (nevs to
us) makes him an operstional target for that reason alone.


--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

. «
are os
Haiti
: \
Tarzet Analysis sucmary Report . AwUC/1 Operation

SUBJECT: Joan Norbert SONTERO

I.

If.

Significance of Tarzet

a) Comection «ita Cuban Intellicence Service

At tnis time Subject is not an avent of the Cuban Intelligence
Service, Se is currently in Cuba see.<ing assistance from tha
DGI for the trainins of Haitians in sverrille warfare activities
for an eventual thrust against daiti to oust President

Francois WVaLIan. .

bd) Communist Party Affiltation

Secretary-Jeneral of the Haitian Liberation ?ront, a newly forned
party, witn tie ultiaate aim of merzing Lio two comsunist partics
of daiti. Sensitive inforzation available at the vesx iniicates
that this party is Moscow influenced./

ce) Inforaation hich dubject Could Furnish

1. Subject could provide valuable information on the Haitian ©
Liberation Front, 1.6., its mesbers, plans, status with the
Uo5t/Cuba ate.

2. Information on the US3R/Cuba position with respect to iiaiti.

3. Inforasilea on U352/Cuba influence and penetrations of
Haitian extle circles.

L. Inforuation on Cuban'y relationship with iresident
¥rancois DUVALL. :

5. Inforsation on Haitians now in Cuda and/or the USSR.

Current Location

as of April 1041 he was living at the Sotel Calina tn Habana, Cuba.

iis permanent residence is believed to be in Santo Deains, “cocinican
Reowblic wiere ne hes been in oxtie.



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

eprl

Iu.

ve

vil.

-2-

Vulnerabilities (for recruitaent or cafection) : .

Mone .ngun. 36 fs stroasly anti-DUVALICX%. In tnat many daitisa .
exile circles sm3 .saesnat dow on tre United States aa a result

of tne unsuccess Tal Septexber 17:3 invasion of sisiti, it is possible
hat Subject serely turned to tha "left" for assistanco in overthrowing
MUTALIER. It is sovever quite feasible tnat ho vould cooperate wita
te United States if he felt we were ta:ing an mti-XIVALIEN stand.

Faxily and Nelatives

None -nown. .

Biosrazhic Data

Tate of Birth: Ja-nown
Place of Birth: isiti (7) +
Citizenshivt saitian
Language abilitr: Uative Frenca or Creole; very little Spanish
Puysical descriztion: . fect tall
1° peunds .
wears noustacha
He sro
Fhotovrash is not availavie
Uther pertinest dstaz sone

Operational iesds and Lines to vubsect for Recrukteont or defscvion
ou . .
a) Calaceyi -Gsician eile leader in tne dominican siepublic wo i
housed the -C5Tss) extle eroup in 1363.)

pY4 .
bo) Gatrsu/. -Gastian exile in the Daxinican Mepuplio who stayed O24
wito HUNTi35 In tne Darinican Kepublic in 173.7,

02. a2
c) (Seo A. ~(asset in Et es Quno is only in a gosition to mace
Giscreet invuirias recardin.« HOATcw.

a 74
a) Geer. - Esser in Haitijero ts only in @ position to mace
@isercet wciries recsarding “U1.

valuation _

a) Unthl infos tiga nas boen floaned frou the assets citod in 7I above

revardin= 4 tu'gs vulneraoflity to reeruitaent Littie can be dorm,
Howover. aa vas cointed out in [If sdovs, it is hichly probable t.at
oudsect narely turned to Cuba for assistance fn overturowin: rresident
DOVALIES af -altt.



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

1]

Subject is not subject to arrest when he returns to the

Deeinican Republic, unless of course, his activities with
the Cubana becona mown. In any ‘event he definitely would
not return to Haiti, as he would {mnediately be inpriscasd

and most probably torturod and xilled.



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

|

Target Analysis Sumaary Peport ALYUG/1 Operation

SUBJECT: Noel GUFREEEO Santiago (2301-81510) \

I. Significance of Target

GUBIER RRO ie presently in Zexico and is “lotermediary”
between Cuban IS and the FLN in Nicaragua. His Cubaa
Intel pseudo is Andres Madartaye. AUG] saw hin ta’
Hexico in March 1964 regarding funds which the DGI had
provided the FLN. According to AYNUGe1 GULRKERO is
involved in "Hijos ce la Teupestad™ which also iavolves Py
three or four other [CI agents. AKWUC-1 also reported
that GUERRERO ia in trouble with the FLY whicn claina

he spent money improperly. ‘The FLY bes no confidence

in bia and considers him covardly and lacking in

fighting spirit. Ny other sources ho nas been described
as ose of the main Communists in Central Aserica. se

waa in Cuba in 1959 to get Cubes aid frontbe revoluticaary
movement acainegt Nicaragua. He wre tormerly a rexuver

of the Communist Purty in Hexico. ve vas a cell leader
in Corinto and suvisor to the itevador's Unioa,

Il. Current Location

He ig presently in Hexico. tie was a political exile

in Hoaduraa in 1953. He has travelled extensively
throughout Central /merica ami any Gave veen clancestinely
in Nicaragua in July 19sa.

TI. Vulnerabilities (for recrulteent or da fection)

AMMUG-1: GUZERAAG ia in trouble vith the FLN which clains
he spent nouey tapruperly. The PLi haa no cont idence

in his, and constders hin cowardly and lacking 1a

fighting spirit, Among AVOT-i documsnts 1a a critique
of tho abortive tacursion in Nicaragua la July 1943 by
Silvio Mayorgs and Orlando Quant Cuintana whlch viases
GURRAFRO for ite failure. GUEZEENU's owa account adalta
certain mistakes and tries to Justify others, sowever,

{t sust be borne in olnd that GUERRERO is a long tise


--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

Cocumunist, anti-Somoza revolutionsry.

‘ Iv. Family and kelatives

- . : Wife: Ofelia Chacon
“ Brother: ir. Eloy GUERRERO Santiago, suspected
Communist, says Noel is Comasunist. Eloy ts enti-
Sonozn, has spent tine in jail.
Father: Jose F. GURKRERO Castillo, resident of Leona .

(pot: 1955) .
v. Pergonalia : : ;

DOB; 12 April 1914

POR: Leon, Nicaragua

Nationality: Niceraguan

Laoguages: Spanish and English

Religion: Profeescs none

Zducation: 2 courses first year lav

Photo: Available in Bio;raphic Register

Physical description; O'3'. grey hair, dark brown
eyus, conpleaton tylguenodaro (light brunetts).'

vi. Onerattonal Leads anu Lines to Subject jor Leerulteeat
or Lerzce on .

AWBUG-1 knows bin personally, was in contact vith his
in Kexico Lo Userch 1ea4.

VII, Evaluation

_In 1942 or 1947 (reported both ways) CUERSEKO was expelled
from the Yexican Communist Ourty (PQ!) according to
another mombor of tne PC (Li4ua4) who was @ reeruitaeat
candicete (uut dropped), and who said that CUEREERD aight
then be agenatle to recruitmsat. Aopareatly no attenpt .
was made to recruit him. be hae begun recorded throughout
the years since as an- netive Communist revolutionary eau
was exiled from Hicaragua for revoluttonary activities
da 195%. Also in:1959 ne went to Cy be and was ective
there tn preoaring for tha revolutionars povenent ta sli
Latin America. Ho apparently eas werkting for Cuban [5
at the tise of tha alortive revolutionary attempt aeainst
Niearapua in 1962, as a document provided by AHMUG-1


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

MOTE:

written by Madariaga (GUFRRERO’s pavedo) atteapts to
point out reasons for its failure. fnother doazent
written by Silvio Hayorga and Orlando Cuant blenes
“andres” (GURRRESO) for its fnilure. GLZRHINO, however,
must still be in the good graces of the Cuban 18, if
he is an agent in the “Hijos de la Texpestad” and
gerves 45 “intermediary” to the FLX, or remnants which
may be reorganizirg. It seens highly enlizely that
GURRRERO would be receptive to either recruitment or
defection. AMWUG~1 knows him personally end met with
his in Kexico in Herch 1964. It would appesr that
AMNUC=1 could furnish more information about bis
eostact sith GUEHTRO which woule be helpful in an
assezsnent of GUEIUKZO.

There is a report thet GUERRERG was io Nicararua
ciandeatinely in 1962. He waoule undoubtecly be
arrested should be return there and ois presence
discoverec by the Aicaraguans.

Thin is oot a complate target analywis and should not

be used a8 euch.


