
--- Page 1 ---
14-annan
‘|104-10227-10150)

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992,

10 Cetobor 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

BUBJECT: leeting elth De, ALEC Cardone on 6 Cctober

Il, Be. Mine arrived about 9:80 a.m. for tho meeting « we hed
. 864 at 35:60; again be was driven by his secratary whem he introduced.
As during the (rot ineeting, whe remained outeide inthe car, Our
raesting lasted enill 12:09 noon, : .

: "2 First, De, MIRG handed me a aote in tonghand listing the
piss dlscussed with wa om + Cetober, These points are:

. 8, Croups Conducting propaganda, ote, w with Ageney suppore
ohewid receive theiy support and te Coordinated taPoagh the Couecil.

i

i

i

{

b A propaganda campaign should be waped by the Council : |
alued at: : , |
: ‘ i
(1) Gaba, via a leng wave radio ctation tp Key “cot. i

. t

(2) Cubana in Miami and other. U, 5. aresa by: |

i

(a) Subsidising Diario de Jan Americas. :

(2) Contracting for time on radio etations.

(3) Latia Americas, with a plan such ao the Operacion
Crista." .

¢. Underground Activitios.

(i) Provision of monthly funds to Council for procuring !
Cuban pesos to eeud to the saven-odd resistance , :
6roupa in Cuba through reliable chansels (such as i
previously eent throuch the Italian 2 rabaasy).. :

AEM AREIA TE Ea iter sar stene SE.



--- Page 2 ---
De

(2) Commando action as outlined ta plan presented
£0 ina un 6 Letober,
: : . , \
3. Commando ion i
Then Dr, -(1GC handed me 4 pian (in Englioh) for clandestina

action prepared by his military collaborators, whom he named 46 .
Colone? ?anuel VAKELA Castro, an otficer of the Acadenty, ‘Captain
Earique DESPAIGNE, and Colonel (fou) MON TEACULI:, He stated —
that they wore of the BARCUIN gfoup and had been prisoners,

With Foopect to the plan far Claadeating operations in Cuba,
he stated that 300 men could be Coanted ugen for coramando action, part
Of thern-bore, part tu Cubs, He reiterated thar 4 Comraandse uperation
Was ossuatial to dol eter marale among the antl-Castro shoments In Cuba
ated in exile sa well.as to conduct sabotaye that would further weaken .
Cabap economy aud the Comununiat regime, Ha sald treat for thig opera en
U.S. help would be necessary in erovidiug weapons, arnine, demelittons,
equipmont, and funde, tia proposed that if thia plan was considered ta
have merit, that I arrange ¢o have somsoue mect with his niltacy men
to work out the dotaila. After all preparations had bees made and
wmatoriel provided, ote, the operatica would be purely a Cuban affair.
WACTE: Plan turned over to Thomegeca at our ne eting at 15:39 dn
& Cetober for tranaimiaaton. } :

4. Kequect for Arma, ete, to send to Lacambray

Lr.c4IRG remarked that over 2 month ago he had made a requsst
fo Clavk for arma for the anti-Castro ineuryents in the iscambray, but
to Gato had heard nothing relative te the request, He commented wryly,

"1 aok but never hear an auavor,” Ho eaid that the Ughtera there should

be supported. Er, ALitC stated that he bad a boat (provided by ua} and
& meano for delivery of the arma, C-avaldo RAMIREZ ta chief of the

S scambray group. *
COMMANT: Has anything been done abcut this request?

3. Information on Arine beceivad by Castro Ferime
nnn ae arene Le Bt FO Fegiima

be, tG handed tae a ions report which he said was brought
to him by the Argentine A:obasgador to Cuba when the latter came to the
U. 3. at the time af President PRONGILV visit. *He sald the Ambasgador
would not divulge the source of the jaformation but commented, “You will

know,
* Report turned over to Thompson on 6 October,



--- Page 3 ---
44-0000

DOr. MIRG oald thers was no way to determine the accuracy
of the (igures zivon of planes, guns, etc, received. jrum the Soviet bloc
{and Raly end Canada) but even tf tha (iguves wore skaggeratod 100 per
cent, thay would still be impressive,

. Ho added that Castro to daily becoming stronger militarily
with weapons and with a largo militia of lose to 303,059 being trained
to wee them while the sconomy coutinues to deteriorate, ferhape only
half the militia wouid be effective. But tuat is eiseable. Thus, Ne eaid,
the longer tha delay in positive military action to overthrow Castro, the

‘greater will be the task, “"@ mast act soon, vigorously and effectively,
\ to fesure victery. Anothsr cofeat would be disastrous and would make
Cubaas, Latin Armerléaas and others believe Castro to be invincibia,
Then would come accommadations and oven worso, the (raplanting of
Castro-becked Poygimea in the hersjaphere, And tha UL 5S. would sufiez
worst of all, being discredited for defeat and "gullt of laterforence.
“in tue UN na nation wouid stand beside the U, 3."

6. Proposal that Connell go to Cuba with’ Commando Group and
Eatabligh a Gavernoiuant on Labaa oadl . :

Dy, MUG thea declared that he v WSS Coavinced that Castro
would never be cverthzown by all tho propaganda, the sobctage, commands

vaide, guerrilla activities, rupture of diplomatic relations and deteriorating

ecanoniy, aad that tt was inconceivable to. establish a sovernment-hrexile
fox aothing would c:.me of it; that the only aoluilon for defeating the
Castro regime was ior the Revolutionary Cenacil ta go te Cuba and ostab-
lish @ goveramert on Cuban soll, abk recognition by all friendly countries
aad nillitary assistance af tio prireipal ally, the U, 5., ond that the U.S.
be ready to intervene tmimediately with ts Forces. ‘This would ail have
tc take place ina matter ci 43 hours, cthrrwise ie would fail, J recepnine
that thie is a bold pian, but boldness ie necossary, Thors will be many
Figko, many may ba billed. As for myseli, Idon't care if idie, fhave
faat all my e0reonal possessions and ray gen isa privoner, ' hie reitesated
that all oust be well prepared in advance, there must be no vaciliation,
everything must proceed rapidly. Firat, a commando raid in feres to
Selina & pisce of Cuban lerritory, groferably near Gaantansmo, sou iosnie-
Giately the members uf the Council go ashore, proclaim a provisional
government, breadcast by radiv te atl nations an appenl for recojniticn
(and cables prepared in advance would aloo be went out), requeat U, 3,
aestetance, ani the U. 5. should furnish ouch assistance at uvca in ade-
quate strongth to ensure victory.

|
;
:
4
2
5
;
2
&
:
E
:
5

ae

ct



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

srast be

Belore such an eetion ia undertake, tha enemy
softened by propaganda, sabctare, raidy, under arcund action, and the
aed of the peanie ef Cuba rousi be prepared ta accept the prs Sionas
government through propazanda, {ne reased kaowledye of the Council |
aad tts unifying efforts, . -

Or, MIRC asked me what Tthought of ibreproject; did 7 think |
that Castro could be overthrown in Boy other way. Ladrnitted that
strong tiililary action appeared neceasary. 1 otated furtner tat
«f course bis plan would have to be otudied at the. highest government
lovala, He proposed that he might elaborate a plan with his rllitar y
‘ collaborators, and I suggested that he do this 6o that it might be examined
and considered, :

: ‘Dr, MIRU declared that he waa convinced that thie Communist
-dagger in the side of the Ptates could only be eradicated by euch action,
thal the U.S, tg and will be blamed fer ail adati-Castre prota janéca, :
sabotage, ete, aad that enemy otaton witl Genounce it Yor Late rvention

In Cuba, but that ithe U. 5. g0e8 to the aid of a frienaly revoistlonary

regime establiehed In the ceuntry and helyo it defeat the Soviet-baczed
Comzunist regime, sil fritadly governmeuts will applaad, i

“Ehaye no personal polltice: ambitions," dectared MIRO,
“I merely am trying to chair tae Council, whose mission is ts unify tae
anti-Castro elemsats inaide aad outside of Cuba, if the team fen't con-
sidered offective, thea change the pitcher, But I betieve the Couneil Tawst
esteblish itself on Cuban euti, and seua. Tine is against us..""The : unta
dol Este agreoment will backfire ayvahist the U. 5S, if Castro te alowed .
to remain in Cuba. Ina year, after tho politicsa of the ceuntriss re- :
ceiving U. 5. of have gottea their hands on U.S, gold, they wild eay, .
“Thanks to Castro, ve got thio.’ And they will spond tt as in the past
with no denefite to the social and economic welfare of the peapis.

7% Views about the Judges and lawyora

Tquevicd Dy, AIRC as to his views relative to the pedges aud
lawyers and their future atates. Ho oaht he Roped that they ecaldé all
roanite and that they cuuld be given aastotance as. in tha past. ie deo
clared that Dr, ALABAU wan not quatified to be a justice and that as wae -

daing acthing but mabing politics and trying tu discredit the Council uo

and MIRC and VARONAL Dr. 2IKO doclared that he, as Prise Liimister
in the early days cf the Castro aovernoment, had named - LAZAL te tho

RITA YA VSPANIETE Metre Lone een ran

Pane he Hag aren



--- Page 5 ---
¥4-00000

Supreme Court, but thst oow he considered * LABAU unlit to hold any
Judicial position, foo ‘ i

_ 8. Mambera of the Revolutionary Council

. . Dr, MIRC. remorked that he had a meeting of the Counetl on
10 Cetober, I asked what etements now composed it and-what he pro-

_ posed to add, He named-the following as presently in tho Conaajo:

Rescato-

30 de Noviembre |
+ MRR -

Acciun Damoeratica . . |

20 de Mayo - —_ —-- 4

AAA Indopondiento H

MDC j
Montecristi ‘

Ho said ho had invited to join:

MAP
| ‘Unidad Revolucionarta :-

and awaited their reply.

He would also like to have the Workers, Stadenta, and the
Professionals (Doctors, Lawyera, ote.) come into. the Council. He be~

Neves Batistiancs aad Comunistas and elements unwilling to.cooperate. .

should be excluded, but that all other groups should be brought together
under the Council. .

Ho contends that all anti-Castro activities, exce clandesting

‘and miltary, should be coordinated by mombdare of the Council, but that

the excepted activities should ba known only to him (MIRO),

9. Probable Argentine Rupture of Relations with Cuba

Dr. MIRO declared that he believed finminent the Argentine
rupture of relations with Cuba. He said the Argentine Ambassador to
Guba (Julio AMCE.DO) was ordered to return to Havana the had been

vacationing in the U. S, after FAONDIZI"s visit); that VILLANUEVA, a .

Secretary of tho Argentino Embassy in Cuba wao coming to see MIRO
today; and further that he (MIRC) had received a Phore call last night

i
Rast cded



--- Page 6 ---
with ‘im

from.a Spaniard (Nicanor FERNANDEZ) in Buenos Aires, ‘urging MIRC

‘to go te Buonos Airca to Arouse Batl-Castro centiment of the people,

Inasmuch as some Argentine action agoinest Cuba appeared imminent.

(FERNANDEZ said be had already writtea MIRC a letter.) MIRC says,

“Of course, I cannot go. Lbave the Connejo. meeting on the 16th,

‘Farthermore, lam going to New York on Cetober 11th or 12th for the

SIP, (Sociaded Interamericans de Prensa) meeting and havo. been allowed,
12 taiautes to addross tae: ‘modting. * .

Dr, MIRO sald ho planned to. remain in New York City. latter
11 and 12 Cetober SIP meoting) until October 15th to attend the homago
for LACERDA, the Governor of Guanabara province In Brasil, i1IRO
probably” will stay at the Fark Chambare Hote}, but will advise Clark

of bie location. -

i cominanted that 1 would probably remata in \ aebington o noxt

week in view of his plans, but that I might go to New York City to mest
ould get tn touch with him and arrange &@ moeting

11. Propaganda Comnteston :
I asked: Dr. MIRO ‘about his ideas on the future organization.

and atracture. of the Propaganda Comnilesion, Ho stated that it is out-
aids the Consejo and not under Ais’ direct contro}, although tho Council

accountant has been passing funds to it. Ho said CAIRRILLC had Feasgned
as head of Propaganda and $hat he would like CONTE AGUF.RC to handle .
‘it.: He ¢laimed that. MESTRE: haa not done. Qnything with propaganda,

12. MIRO'e Views Relative to Suprems Court Justice or PRIO

being Kecovnised ag Head of a Provisional Government

Tasked Dr, MIRO if he believed that there were many anti-
Castro Cubase (both fn and out of Cuba) who favored PRIC,-or the head

of the Supreme Court to be the provisional president if a government wore

to be established on Cuban soil, Or. MIRC doclared that the revolution
ie a fact, and that practically nobody wants to go back to any former

rogime, The people in Caba would resist any such Possibility. He dae



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

nounced FRIC’s activities acainat the Council and ita efforts ‘to ually
the anti-Castro clements, fic aaid that the people should ba given an
opportunity fo elect their chief of state af fter Castro's overthrow and

reestablishment of arder in the island,

13. Offices of Gouneit (Coaseja Revoluctonario) co ns

When ‘questioned about his business aud private telephones, ne

_ MIRO" sata, “1 busine phone is also:in my houss. have no office
' except in my “house, but that phone is always busy: GJEMeresn. 2-4680),
So use tho. other phone (WEfforean, “4-2751) when you wish to call me."

i

H

!

|

I

i

1

! “IL need to have 8 sma}} office somewhere, away from my. home |
{ decause all the activities there are driving my wifé.crazy, I-wint te.

| find something modost 30 that no accusation can be made of ostontation oan
! merely a-room for mysall,. one {cr my secretary, and.one for: rieotings. i+
H of the’ Council, ate.. The FRD had 3 place but at that place also « was the
H - proas, the relugee ‘center, otc, It-would not be satisfactory. Tho FRD
i :
I

t

i

i

i

i

:

|

i

f

{

fo now practically dead, It was the foreruanor of the Consojo as the
unify ing agency of the anti-Castro rosistaace, "

Activities of Cther Exite-

4. OMIRO's. Views. on Coordinatin tho
Group oo ‘

: Anter Dr MIRC | reiterated. his view that he should be the
channel for funds and coordinating the activities of groupe outside the ©
Consejo auch as the Students, FORD {Laber), ste., I ocaid that I undere —
stood that geome of those elomenta were unwijling to function ander. the
Cansojo;: and that-in.wiew of that cituation, did hé consider that an. .
ivity might.be organized with a dolegat from sech of.

theae groupe sad under tke chairmanship of'a.momber of the ‘Consejo.
This would sorve to ‘oordinate their activitios, give them a tie-in with
! the Consejo, yet not make them subservient to it. Dr. MIRC replicd
j that this would merely set up ancther Consejo outside of and paraliel to
i _ the existing Consejo. I did not pureue thie further, not having enough
background of those organizations to be abla to discuso the matter

effectively.

15, Toler 9 Conversation with MIRO on 7 Cetober

Before my departure {rom Miami for Washington on 7 October,
: I telophaned to Dr. MIRO (vom the airport. He appreciated the call and
' asked if { had seen in the morning paper the action taxen yestorday by


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

”

tho ALABAU Lawyera! group in proclatraing Julio CARCE RAN (one iy
; : of the chief justices in exile) as “Preaident of Cuba at Yor." He ene . ot
: pressed bis indiynation at this unilateral “political” move by ALABAU 4
‘and hia adhorents ameng the exiled lawyers and judges. Ha added his
beat wishes to 1r0.and reminded me that he would probably go to Now i
York on Cetover JIth or 12th for the SLIP (Sociedad Interamericona de _ a
; hmoeting. I replied that.I would appreciate if he would contact - i
Sr hie arrival to-give his location in New York City, aodthat st
‘from me for an-appointrnéat with bin, if : wife
reasons that in ‘future phone conversations
j He agreed with pleasuse that: -thia would,

Ve, “16: Comment . oe

: During | thoes. first two meetings L endoavored to. eotabitsh os
myself favorabl with: ‘Dr. MIRO and therobre. refrained-f{rom bringing ©
up up dstaile of budget or. opposition to any ‘of bis specifle- proposals. -
1 Motoned, joked various ‘quosticas, and he talked at length.

. la future meetings, after I have gatoed further background and.
-baive. more. polie guidance, I shall be able to discuss with him specific |
isaucs and endssvor ‘to Feach agreémento or compromises, ae" may bee a

required, - . oo

cle tren ZiteTt ata tae

.
:
SEER en ince Sart, ae entra h Ab UY Baer, BONe., asses

