
--- Page 1 ---
Toa 10064-10012)... -~ 12025 F RELEASE UNDER THE UNDER THE ERESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)" a
t a

“DISPATCH | ==

MAP ED FOR rect re;

D ef, SO BLO Div; hief Far Ea D

thro, .
Chief, WOMUSE/r0G | Eee |
Frou a ms Be .

TOKYO. 7263

As noted in reference, forwarded herewith is @ copy of the sub-
ject memorandum. Please note that the information in the memorandum

‘ Paragraph B. 4. b) is particularly sensitive and should only be

given properly restricted dissemination. : a ot —

. werk J. weet.
"ATTACHMENT .

. Memo dtd 27 Nov 67

. Distribution
ee - C/SB Div w/l.cy attach .

“.. 1 = C/FE w/l cy attach. .
- a 1 - C/MOMUSE/TCG w/l1 attach



--- Page 2 ---
27 Novenber. 1967,

icwORANDUX FOR THE BECORD: as pane
SUBJECT: BSHEIREN and the Four U.S, avy. Desertors, a

“origin ana and Dovelopent t of BEHSIREN

os Founding: - BEHEIREN (Japan "Peace for Vietnam" Com

was organized in eae EEE
Gndependent group of intellectuals and cultured persons whose .
purpose was “to help restore peace in Vietnam." Actually, it’
is a loosely organized group of ox-JCP. members, progressive.
intellectuals, leftist cultured persons, and leftwing students |
~ banded together in the name of opposition to the Vietnam war. a
by two common denominators, dedicated anti-Americanism and=; -
vefusal to be dominated or controlled by the orthodox < Japan
Communist Party.

G Be Rard-Core Secretariat: - “The real ‘force behind the.
organization of BEESIREN, right from the beginning -to the.
present, has been a brilliant Communist named YOSHIEAWA.
quichi, whose conspiratorial organizational skilis bavé -

een perhaps the most indispensible ingredients in BEHEIREN‘’s
Gevelopment. YOSHIKAWA was expelled from Tokyo University
for his role as a ZENGAKUREN leader in the 1960 U.S./Japan™
Security Treaty riots. He then went into fulltime JCP mass
movement professional work, becoming the Secretariat official’
in charge of international relations for the Japan Peace :
Committee. YCSRYKAWA breke with the JCP in late 1964, .
following the rupture in relations between the JCP and CPSU
.dn May that year. The inspiration for BEBZIREN springs in’
‘large measure from YOSHIKAWA's personal desire to use his
organizational talents in countering the JCP and its Japan
Peace Committee. YOSHIEAWA, in addition to being a well .-
‘qualified English linguist himself, years. ago surrounded
‘himself with a small following of similarly qualified:
licutenants, whom he brought along into BEREIREN to give
“him the necessary depth and experience to run this new ©

: YOSHIKAWA functions as BEHEIREN's Secretar



--- Page 3 ---
~ / 3. Respectable Intellectual Front: Foliovwin -
mental Communist principles for nase novenent were, chee ce
‘than the JCP itsel? follows these tenets), the ex-JCP .
organizers of BEREIREN kept themselves in the background -
and lined up a number of prominent Japanese: progressive.
intellectuals and leftist cultured persons to front for
BEREIREN. The choice of OBA Makoto, ex-Fulbrighter and —
popular young novelist, to be the chief front man — Chair-
man - Was an extremely lucky stroke for BEHEIREN. ODA has
‘taken to this grand-standing, front work like a duck to. 99°.)
water. It has given him 2 chance to give unbridled vent ta: -
bis own latent anti-American foelings, puffed him up to the 7
extent that he has been dubbed “the emperor" by other BEHEIREN .
activista, and givon him at long last an ideological mission .
to pursue. ‘YOSHIKAWA has performed magnificently in feeding
: OBDA's ego needs and in infusing and indoctrinating ODA so. |
that his words and actions take on sufficiently virulent:
” anti-Anerican overtones, ODA has served another vital. o.0°0 7"
function for BENEIREN by recruiting a sizeable number of :
fellow intellectuals to join the ranks of BEHEIREN activists.
(Attachnent 1 is a listing of a number of those Japanese tho |.
have been identified as active BEHEIREN supporters or aympa~ ..

hizers.}

\ 4. Organizational Development: In its 2 “1/2 year history,
BEELIREN has not appreciably changed its organizational format,
eithough it has moved its office three tines and modified its ...
mame even oftener. PEHEIREN ig not a “mass organization", be-° .
cause it has bad no ‘sizeable popular backing to the present --. ;
timc. Its hard core, secretariat organization is run by = =...
YOSHIKAWA and his lieutenants. Its public image, inteliectual ..
_front is led by ODA, and given body by a score of like-minded an
“intellectual friends of ODA and YOSHIKAGA, who form the loose... -
_ body of BEBEIREN's activist leadership.. Under this BEDEIREN ...
leadership superstructure lies a paltry base of only several
‘hundred BEHEIREN “rank-and-file“::supporters, mostly young . : ..
‘Japanese students. Organizationaily, BEHEIREN has no ferrsl .
‘gembership system, so its base of supporters is fluid and not)...
precisely measurzble. However, the base support for BEHBIREN =|”
hss definitely been on the upswing during 1967, and made such... *
notable strides during the past summer that JCP Headquarters
officials finally feit constrained to note with concern that ~ _
BEBEIREN was beginning to drain off a growing number of pro- °°
gregsive youth who otherwise would have been absorbed into _
the JCP's own youth movement. BEHEIREN leaders:.have tried to. .
‘help this growth along hy setting up 2 youth section, calling :
at "Young BEHEIREN." BEERIREN's imaginative actions and.
“ publicity-conscious programs have been responsible for its .
:; .xecent growth, and this period of growth seems to be now on



--- Page 4 ---
14-000

the verge of y renlly ‘pleking up speed. and momentun.”- “AB a result. ;

of its role in the case of the four deserting sailors, BEHEIREN °\.
has reaped bountiful publicity, has succeeded in touching a

delicate Japanese public nerve of sympathy and pacifism, open---: |
ing a floodgate of support for BEHEIREN from all over Japan. Pa
When this case fades from the limelight, it is still most ~~ —°.-
likely that a fair percentage of current wave of _popular

support fox BEHEIREN wil i rmanent mass backing, —

support its future activities, _

&. Activities and Accomplishnents: “ BEBEIREN has engaged
in a number of propaganda actions, and. participated in inter~
national anti-Vietnam War activities. It has tried to co- -~.:
operate with certain front activities in Japan controlled by.
the JCP, most notably the Japan Committee to Investigate War
Crimes in Vietnam activitiés, which culminated in the Tokyo  .
Court of last Atigust, but has been soundly and rudely rebuffed.
by the JCP. In spite of this, BEHEIREN has churned along at.
its own pace, with a continuing series of anti-Vietnam war. ~-
actions, most of. them related in some way to the American - Pos
pacifist movement. In this regard, BEHEIREN has succeeded in:
cornering a virtual monopoly on Japanese contacts with the U.S...
pacifist movements, and has effectually capitalized on this to 7 ae
promote its own action program. The case of the four aaah hea
sailors, while an-apparent lucky windfall for BEHEIREN, only
points up the fact that BEHSIREN, through past organizational |
work and promotional activities, was “johnny~on-~the-spot", _-
ready and capable (unique in Japan in this regard) to take - |
the ball and run with it. BEMEIREN ran all the way in this”
case and scored its most notable success since it was organized. a,
(Attachment 2 is a listing of BEEEINEN's more notable activities . :
since its founding. Attachment 3 is a partial listing of. be
American and other foreign persons mo. to have been in.
contact with or. cooperated with BEHET a

'B.» The Case of the Four Sailor Deserters. and BEEETREN.

~ Ze How It Started: © “The consensus of all available overt
median material, with no recorded dissent, indicates that the an
‘Zour sailors voluntarily left their ship, went AWOL, and ended
up wallowing around Tokyo's hippie-land. - Precisely what : ‘personal —
‘grievances prompted the four to embark on this mis-adventure is _
not yet known. . But, up to this point, the four could fairly be
categorized ag misguided youngsters, gone astray in a foreign ae
land, and due to get slapped back in line with traditional...
Navy justice when they finally decided to stop the fun and BO -
back to the ern 50 far, this: made their canes far. from ek,

aah ee 8 E 6 R E L



--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
for hiding the four deserters. Other Private.d —
lJonging to BEHEIREN leaders and loyal ee eat oa
_ Sbroughout both the Kanto and Kansai sreas,.

. Le) BEUEIREN/Soviet Linison: PEDEIREN Secretary Genera
“YOSHIKAWA has maintained periodic contact with Soviet Embassy.
officials for years. BEEEZIREN Chairman ODA hes met Soviet
Peace Committee officials in Moscow. The exact means of how
this Jiaison was accomplished in this case is préecisely—ba -
rom @ covert phone tap on the Soviet Embassy's line; A full, >.
: transeript. is available of two phone calls made on 30 October, —
first by Brian o Chief Press Attache Nikola ae
| Vasiiyey (ch, and second by YOSHIKAWA to First S@erétary =. | j:
inoy, urgently requesting a private mesting | | a

ster that ay to discuss “an extremely important, extrencly;
sate matter", without _ doubt the case. of the four sailors.

as =e} BEEEININ/U.S. Pacizist Linison: BEHEIREN contacted i” .
Dartmouth ‘University professor Ernest. Pp. Young, who flew to... ~
Japan om & November, apparently helped BEBEIREN leaders chock

on 11 Nevemher. (Attachment 6 is,tho translation of a Sanket Sole
Shimbun article, dated 21 Novexher, reporting an intervier cae,
vith Young, giving his version of his role in this case. > .

5. Esea to Hoscow: ‘The four desertexs turnea up in Se
- mozcow on 20-Novenber. The press has speculeted widely and ~~.
“unanimously that the four left Japan on the Soviet passenger -
_ whip Baikal on 11 Novembor. Again, there ig no dissenting = .
. opinion, overt nor covert. The only mystery concerning this -

- mechanics of how the four boarded the Baikal and who assisted -.
Yokohama, DEHSIREN completed its most highly successful and - ee

only did BEHUIREN smear the American Government's inage in

Japan, not only did BEHEIREN gain a vast amount of priceless: §-
: publicity that will swell the ranks of its supporters and be.
: dnvaluable in future activities, but BEZEIREN doubtlessly =~‘.
even made a profit, financially, on this low budget operation °

_ donations are still’ pouring into SEEZIRGN Headquarters from _
. all ever Japan to “help and protect U.S.. deserters". a

out the bona fides of the deserters, and returned to the U.S.” *

finnl phase of the Japanese portion of this case concerns the °*-
. in this maneauver. But with the sailing of the Baikal from’ - .
beautifully executed activity in its 21/2 year history. Not" ~



--- Page 7 ---
‘Active. DEALIREN Supporters or Syepathizers

“SOSHTKAWA Yuichi (oouninaN Becretary 7 Genorad) | - former scp
a member. * ;

. ODA Makoto (sameinx ¢ Chatrean) ~ poputar novelist. 5

. RATKO Kon ~ Akutagava prize winning novelist.

““@. KUBO Keinosuke ~ filo producer and director, i

———Senoeerrnw—nor-

{SURUET Shunsuke - Doshisha University professor. oa
TSUROUT Shunsule

| TSURUMT Kazuko - sister of Shunsuke (ehoir father io the late o -
a “philosopher, Yusuke). ce. _ oe et

FORDYALA Yozo =~ high school ‘teacher. o _

MUTO Iehivo, ~ exauce (tried to travel to u. 3. t to ‘yepresent . a
a denied 2 visa to enter seein “se year e pat wee

9.. YAMADA TAUADA Atsushi. ~ ex-JCP, .
10. FUEUDA Yoshiyuki - playeriter.
11, TQIINAGA Ichiro ~ cartoonist. /
12... FUKASAEU uitsusada ~ professor:
13. ANAZU Kiyoshi - ~- , graphic designer.
“1d.. TAKADO Kanane ~ ~ Christian leader.
15. YOSHIDA Kiju - ~ £12m director.
16.° UMIHARA Shun ~ writer. ne
17.. HASHIMOTO Mineo ~ Buddhist priest
18. HOTTA Yoshie: - novelist. a
9. GOTO Hiroyuki ~ scientist. ne

0. KOWABARA Takeo ~ - professor at Kyoto University. ; _ a .


--- Page 8 ---
14-00000

25, TERAR Minako geo oan
26. ANAT ‘Funthike: io
“27. : NASU Masann0 Se ,
98. MATSUMOTO Ichiju |
, 29. FUKUTONI Setsuo oe
30. KORIHARA Yukio Peo . _
| Bi. ete ANDO S4mbet, CHEDA HEDA Hidoy EGAWA ‘Take, ‘YOSIE Nittaten,
; _manrya Echiro, HOSHINO Yasuseburo, ICHIX Saburo, IZEYAUA Juro,
2 ISHIDA Takeshi, KARAT Yoshiko, EASA Seiichi, KATAGIRI Yuzuru, —
" “HATO Shuichi, KAZAMA Michitaro, HATSUURA Sone, KIDOEORO lasso,
- EATSKOJI Satoshi, KOBAYASHI Shoichixo, KOWATSU Sakyo,
‘KOBAYASEI Tond,, KONO Osamu (Shu), KURODA Hidetoshi, BAROVAMA ,
“Masao, MIDORIKAWA Toru, HIZUSAWA Yana, MORITAKT Ichiro, oh
MUCHAKI Seikyo, BURANATSU Hiro, NISHIO SHO Noboru, NOHURA Koichi, a
4 OGOsEt Teruo, OISUKQISY Yoshiko, SERIZAWA Tae, ‘SHIRT Shinpel,

- SHINMIRA Takeshi, SHISHIDO Hiroshi, SUGIURA Hitsuo, SUGIYAMA *
‘Tatsusaru, SUZUKI Kasahira, TAMSUCHI Yoshitono, WADA Nagahisa, —
- YAMADA Munenitsu, YAMADA Toshio, YAMAGUCHE Kosaku, YANANISHI -
R4SohS, YASUDA Takeshs, YOSHINO Gonzabure, YOSHIWARA Koiehizo,

* OKANOTO Taro, MATSUMOTO MATSUWOTO Seicho,. EL Rokusuke, IZUVUI Taku, an
“ANAYA Noriko ,_ KATO Yoshiro, SHTROVAMA Saburo, TAKABASHI
- Taketono, ODAGIRI Hideo, OXUKA Hinove, SANG Kenji, SUZUKI
a Michsniko, KUBATA creat Haag eorinceana Select, MARUYAWA unio,

SEGRET



--- Page 9 ---
14-00000

URO Kenji, 3 KONAKA  Fotare, SAKAMOTO

PSURUSIIMA Sotsurei,
—_—
Yoshikazu, SAITO. Masahiko, etc.”

"Coenen “Although not recorded here, many ‘of the above persons .
“are (eznICP.



--- Page 10 ---
; : Regular once-per-nonth denonstrations ata public park ‘an
: Toxyo ’ consisting | of antinAmerican s Epceches & aad tollowed by street a.
: marches. JX . a oe fade oe oe

: An ‘all ight 1 teach-in" vith: ‘BEREITEN netivist deadors, woe

“along with special guest, U. 8. pacifist Carl Oglesby (Chaizpan | of. ;
the Students for a Denocratic ‘Society. de ae wa cole

a Par. fuld page advertisement in the New York tines “as Novenber
1965)" “followed by another full page ad in the Washington Fost - :
G april 1967), appealing to Americans to stop the war in “Vietnam. | bee

wo hen A ‘weet in Conference of Two Nations for Peace in Vietuan, “
held in Tokyo in August 1866, and attended by EEHEIREN activists and ©

-seven U.S. pacifist leaders (including Dave Dellinger), and ebservers ,
. fron Frances England, Canada, the uss, istan, an Mongolia. oo

So A mass meeting in Tokyo in October 1966, ‘quest speakers of ;
which ' were French pacixiats, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir. ;

ae 6. ‘Nationwide tours of Japan ‘for lectures and peace rallies for
such anti-Vietnam war pacifists as Professor Howard Zinn and the late
A. 3, Huste of the United States, Claude Bourdet of France, and Thich
hat Hanh of South Vietnam, we enna _

a Caer mass meeting in Tokyo in January “Wer, sponsored by
_ BBERIREN and featuring U8. folic singer ond. pacifist Joan BaeZei
i
ae 8. ke continuing progran of direct distribution of panphicts to
U.S. troops stationed in Japan, and those coning to Japan on a warshivs,
: and for rest or hospitalization fron Vietnax. C8 Bs ;

Dae O° ‘Participation by two BEREIREN activist leaders 5 (Kyoto |
’ University professor KUWABARA Takeo and Internationrzl House staffer |
. TSURVUL Foshikyuks» taking advantage of a trip to the U.S..teo attend |
gf non~ps. ea Epa Neer Congress ou Caltural Problensy in _ me

eanti-Vietnam war artmouth os
University in early May 1967, “folloved by an unsuccessful attempt et
“So invite Cassius Clay to visit Japan on -bebalf of BEHEIREN. oa 2

“ 20. Continuing efforts to bring te > Japan for a nationwice ce Me



--- Page 11 ---
14-00000

speech tour on “ponale of PERSREN, Soviet: poet ¥. evgont Yevtushenko,
: an effort that has not yet reached fruition but “is stiii porriege .

at “participation in the Stockholm duly 1867 “World Conzerérce |
on Vietnam," by sending two BEMEIREN activist leaders as delegates.

re Pe Cooperation with the: U.S. Quakers,’ pacifists, and Earle
Reynolds in sending the yacht “Phoenix” with modical aid, first te
‘Haiphong, then on 4 second trip in the Fall of 1967, secking but —

failing to find landfall, to seliver medical aid to eithor North or
South Vietuam. 7 ;

13. * Attenptea, but failed. due to inabilits to , obtain 1 vs ‘visa,’

to send a HEHEIREN activist leader ea ichiyo} to the U.&. to - oo
participate an the 21 October 1967 enti-Vietnan War denoastrations. _

: 14:: ‘Currently carrying outa “fund raising canpaign to send 2

id ship ta. North Vietnam. In this, and other activities, REEEIREN
leaders arc maintaining ever closer liaison contact with their a
counterparts abroad, such as the Fr “Céthite® Vietnam National.” .- «4
in an effort to generate public suipport for this aid ship Tun ;
raising canupaign, BEHEIREN succeeded ta isauing 4 public appeal,
under the endorsing signatures of Tokyo Governor MINOBE Ryokichi and -
Yokohana Mayor ASUKATA Eehios as woll as the suai inte. lectuals :
supporting BELE REN. F

18. ‘tn October 1967, 1 BEREINEN solicited apploval to hold anti-~
Vietnam Var demonstrations in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo, :
expecting to be denied end then intending to make this denial a court
test case. Instead, DEHSIREN was given this’ permission, and corducted
two orderly and yvoli-~publicized demonstrations in front of the Amcrican
Eabassy, garnering a larger public turn out of particdpants than ia
any y Previous ‘SEHEIREN-sponsored Genonstration. . ; ;

16. Assisted and abetted the defection to. the USSR of £ four oe
American sailors from the U.S. Navy carrier intrepid. Following this
success, BEUEIREN's most effective activity to date, HEHEIREN leaders
are organizing a permanent “underground railway" of Japanese intell~ — -
ectuals who will volunteer their homes as possible “way stops" for = |
hiding future U.S. + military deserters that BEHEIREN | now hopes to .2

For other details, seo co ‘Bote yovintelligence = reporting

M11547, 32 Hay 1966
dt el2046, 14 October 1966 .
EITHI2GSO, 10 May 1967.
EFP-12951, 5 July 1967".
EST+-13981, 8 September 1967 :
0 EYE-13154, 27 Septenber 1967 -
Y iso, 8s" 22 November 1967
: es-s700, Ll Saly 1967



--- Page 12 ---
14-00000

= partial Listing of of Anortean and Other Foreign
. Persons Known to Have ‘Been in Contact with gE

~ .  Cooperated with BEER. |.

; ‘Anericans. o
: Staughten } iand (ez-Yale protescos).
- Korman Hailer (novelist) ©
Dave Dellinger (ditor of Liberation) |
 Boward Zinn @oston uw. professor). :

“Donald Keyes (Nationel Comittee for a Bane :.
an . Buclear Policy, .

“David ucReynolés (Chairman, War Resisterst = |
7 : League) ,

“A. 3. Buste (now deceased) =
. Willdam Davidson
i Bradford Lyttle oe

. a Charlotte Thurber os

: (Hiss) Quentin Bassett (Students ‘for : a Denocratic
rr ae - Society) _

Murray Levin | Boston B. » professors)

y Barbara Dening asociate « editor « ot Liberation . ae i
, . Joan Booz ‘(folk singer) - . . a



--- Page 13 ---
14-00000

; Ira Norris: ‘(earis expatriate)

19. ott Naisan (honetic, Hew York city peace sctavist)

a Barbara and Earle Reynolds “(divorced but separately .

., active Lone-tane xesidents ;
CS in Japan) :

: Willian Re christensen “(an’ ‘Aner tenn pacifist aritter, BY:

: _ who gave BEEEIRNEN its first...
: |; @sperionce in the ssummer of ~~. -

2866 in exploiting for pro- >.

' paganda in Japan, and then in: ©
- arvanging the onward journey. —
of an American who wanted to” aon
defect to the USSR) :

Brian Vietoria ‘(hoad-shaved pacifist ‘and neonverted"

, Buddhist priest, Enewn to be in
- regular contact with the Soviet
Embassy in Tokyo) Oats

ur. sntowby ‘Geau, phonetic, : "chief ‘of ‘the ‘Quaker.
we Peace Action movement in the B. 8"). ;

7 An unidentified “anerdoan of Js panese descent, ‘fron
7 Hawaii, who is currently a student at Waseda ‘tnivereity

Kosaku Yonaguohi: (reportedly born in U.S., present” a
a. Citizenship status unclear) (formerly
a was & professor at Homoyame University»
‘4m Osaka, hut has been teachin at the
Waiversity of Calizornia ia Berkoley.

Claude Bourdet, France (french
_ Se the Vie opie) -. a:
Posey bute, Great Britain (Canpaign for Huciear D: S~

‘Sones Endicott, Canada (Word Peace eounet})
‘Faiz Abmed Faiz, Pakistan - ye :
‘ ea
' Gabita Muslepov,. USSR
—

Toney



--- Page 14 ---
14-00000

. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, ‘France
on eeeraenemene angnennemn ener we

: lirs. ‘Erdenebat Ojon; Mongolia. :
: Konstantin Shugnov, USSR

>” Francis Marcel kebn, 3 ‘France (comitet Vietnan
an ine ae arr " National) _

3
?

Thich Nhat: Hands South Vietnam ©

ants is not, by any moans, a complete listing, nor ae
-; does it necessarily list BEBSIREN's most important. -
- aetivist contacts abroad. But this list is ra~.-

- presentative in showing the breadth of BEHEIREN

- disison abroad, particularly. with the American.
“new left"

“SECRET



--- Page 15 ---
KAWA, " sece

. "
retary-general of 4, tHle

tee (Beheiren), tells
conference Tue:

ision appearance Manday
by the. Soviot -liner. Raikes
oviet port of Nakhodka,
* Sources in the.- Metropolitan
Police Department sald -‘Tues-

could have boarded the ship by

special -gangway for Soviet || -f
i | peacefully

Government officials,

:. Japanese’ watchmen’ werd ton
guard at another gangway; for
ordinary . passengers when $222

. cd.: passengers. ° Including

“elght .. Americans,

, nama’

gangway.
Tt was ‘learned: that 17. offi.
f clals of the Soviet Embassy and
‘ trade mission In: .

~The police
it was “quite pe Y
Soviet authorities in Tokyo ar
ranged * e deserters’ exit...

Beheiren Pledge | pie-

Yuichi Yoshikawa, ,becretary-

" |Seneral of the Japan Peace-For
‘Vietnam Committee: (Beheiren),
told a press.conference Tues-
day that the committee could
not | disclose - show. «the ‘four
Americans left “pecause’ it’ had
romised. not to do oe

He nelther affirmed
ed th

‘| Naito. said..

m.'the US aircraft carrier Intrepid

boarded the] th
‘Mner ‘before: it: departed Yoko-}-
50 r

sources Gald that
possible” that the

x. aa ee q af
RE GH yo
id who made a dramatic tele-
in Moscow are believed’ to have ‘left Japan irregularly
which

left’ Yokohama on November 1i for the Far. East
. i . Not Worried.

- they* were — practicalt iy
‘| Penniless but appeared - quite}
unconcerned, Naito said, . a
He ia he feserters~ aph
see parently .. enjoy: ippie’ life,;
tc en npn and. asked | frying on cheep vapepes, food;
ine Behelren ito find them-Joba ange ono such as udon
in. which they’ could "utilize (moodles) ‘and shochu.” - 3
thelr english Profelency. "He said the four Americans:
tate Ben tren 0 ins .wanted ‘to: live in Japan, and!
ey. could mn aPan fie “possible “in Tokyo. _t
{Naito and his friend. Yamao-
decided to ask the help
Beheiren ‘and delivered the} .
four men - to: the Beheiren,
around: November 26.

Japariese: police.
authorities soon
hikawa -sald.”

nos tor th teountry - e.
- Naito. said’ he met ‘two ‘of/after they learned tha
the. .four — deserters—Airman| could: not. live in: Japan.

Dick 19, and Airman|~.A spokesman. for. the Justi
Wike- av indegr tonne -hip- Ministry * sald” ‘Tuesday
angout in. Shinjukujthere was. nothing’
“we. sald bo he Al ndrteans| leavin
ie. . both. Americans! r t .
Wore leather jackets and other:ministrative ‘agreement ‘in the
informal clothing which they!Japan-US Security Treaty gua-
sald they, borrowed from their:rantees Us. military ‘personnel
Japanese hippie friends hang-.the right to come, to stay in
: . ‘He sald he understood. tha
other ye, Lindner and the ‘the four Americans were . tech.
Barilia, 20, -and -Aireoq we
CraleW." Anderson,"tary personnel, -” _
20-—went - “around Furthermore, " if: their: exit
" she : was before: ic US authorities | -
piNaite. ay roverhtont ae ana made. an official request to the
iu, : -2g.ithem, he added, |. : .
bia . fo. -28.4 qe" algo said there. were no
_ be preferred against the
heiren officials and-other Ja-
».jthe Americans ‘‘in ‘Japan and
helped ‘their departure to the

ing around: the Shinjuku: area. or leave Japan, |.
ically still enlisted .US mi
Prentice “Craig: Ww, : - gnete! exit}
in pal took place: on’ Novemher ‘11, it
house .in Hayamiyacho,.. Neri-\Japanese police to search for
ber: 2
_ Wapanese Jaws allowing charges
* ypanese people who: “protected”
Soviet: Unio a



--- Page 16 ---
Went: to Tokyo and Tridd to Dissuade Them; St
“Frobab Bly Escaped roa Japan_on, the T 2th or the 13th
4 et
- (New York, ' November’ 20, Correspondent Tadashi, ONODERA)’ ” Professor ~
‘Ernest P-iYOING of Dartmouth College in the U.S., -consented to an: “interview .
with. this reporter: on the question of the four American ‘seamen who deserted
from the U.S. aircraft carrier Intrepid. At the interview held on the 19th,
Professor ‘YOUNG clarified that the:Peace for Vietnam Association ‘(Beheiren, .
with Makoto ODA acting as its nepresentative) . contacted an anti-war organiza~
tion in ‘the U.S., and at this, Professor YOUNG hurriedly visited Tokyo, and .
‘meeting the four seamen in a room. in an apartment house in Tokyo on the 9th
t-and 10th; tried to persuade -them .to return. In regard . to ‘the’ ‘pres ent ‘where- *
yrabouts of these four seamen, he made :the ‘noteworthy,, statement’ ‘that “those .

“four were still in Japan, up until. the night. of the ith, when: = dere, Japan, "
2 p but. t they are _Probaby. no: Long
tf uA

: Professor: Behedren ‘contacted ‘Davia ‘DENNER, ‘a sact#ist: aztivist™
in the U.S., asking him to "send someone to Japan to hear the stories of *
ythe four seamen and announce them in the U.S." I have been in Japan twice,
, and I also once served as special. assistant. to Ambassador REISCHAUER.
uring that’ time, I became friends with Beheiren representative’ ODA’ and
‘ther intellectuals in Japan. It was for these reasons that I was given
«this assignment...; I personally have never, participated, actively fn the
or anti-Vietnam war movement. so far... . : ; _ er
(o La ude "TOS TTA ” “
~~ When: did you arrive in, Sapa
"seamen? wo Bo ee,
i600 .- Professor: I arrived. ‘in Haneda on November. 8, and net the four seamen
gren the Sth and the. LOth.... The, place of interview was in an apartment house”
pe dn Tokyo, but I ‘cannot say. at. this time where that apartment, hoyse was and”
ziwho owned it... However, on both days, I talked’ fully with, these. four seamen,
gefor more than. three hours. on each occasion (according ‘to an investigation:
made by the public security authorities, Professor YOUNG. ‘arrived in, Japan
‘toward the evening of the 8th, and stayed at Hotel Tanakanwa’ ‘in Shiba,
‘£5 Minato-ku, until: ‘the: morning of. the, ith)... 5 ces ; :

. What 1 were “the motives for these ‘four seamea's ‘desertion? ; a

"professor: The desertion’ was. 5 completely the decision, ° ‘these four ©
persons. . It seems that the four seamen decided not to return. ‘to the sship, —
=,when the Intrepid ‘entered, Yokosuka Port on October 17, and they were per- ©
oy mitted to go ashore for rest for one week. | My impression.on meeting these’ _-
.'yp.foun seamen was that they were definitely not ‘deserting’ for the purpose of |
ths selfeadvertisement or that they, were giving false reasons. I am. convinced
‘_terthat mney. @ deserted veally. out of doubt. about. the Nietnan ware : .

* professor: Ton: the “aight ¢ of ‘the need, ‘two. 5 days b ‘pefore’ ‘the "penegia
"was due to.sail, the four went to Shinjuku, and told the people whom they |
met at a bar they happened to visit, that “we are fed up with war." The
i... Japanese who heard them sympathized “ith ‘then,: and. atone time, the. four
lived with some hippies (according ‘to this paper's investigations, they’,
include Mx, K., a student of Tokyo University's Liberal Arts Department,’
and vanguard artist Ae who gather a at Fugeteudo 4 in a Shinjuku. ). Finally» i



--- Page 17 ---

