
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10232-10013)

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

20 Ootober 1961

SUBJEATs eeting with Dr. Kiro in New York City on
October 16, 1:42

.

The rocting with br. Miro on October 16 wa poatruned from 10100
until suck tine as bia sutience ten inated with Cuntinal Sreliran. He
artived at ry poor at about J0150. He declared that the Carini] had
wert wien he leurned the detailu uf the suffering of the Cubana ot the
hania of Castros ceclured that the Archttahop of Miarl wantlt doing
enough for the Cubnn reiiyjeess thit the U.de wasn't doing enough for
thems that Custro cust be overthrown, Piro tolé the Cardinal that in
all Latin Arerica there vere going to be orsarired acts of ayrpathy
for the Cutan sufferers, The Cardinal said he woul say 4 Mase for
thes cn October 17, He invited Hiro to see hin at any thre.

Miro anawored ry query as to the Lacenia utCrirs by stating that

*" $e wag vary successfuls 2,%CO poonle were inaive the suditoriun and

another 1,000 peole outuides that Lacerda had recotwed such appluuses

The inter-Arerican Press Association affatrs also had given an
opportunity to present the Cuban tragedy. He nal! that te (Firo) had
tolé how Fidel had alot 31 peonle in Septer.ber alone, an! other vetallsy

“had described how Ccemunisr: vas gaining groun! day by days that in

Cuba they have Installed a powerful radio station breedcusting to Latin
Arericas that ten countrica have broken with Cuba, but Argentina has

nots that everybody 1s confused.

He inCorned ro that as for the dociments relating to the Cuban
plots in Argontina, the Arpentine rilitary ren care to talk to Varons,
and he gave then ecne‘doouwents that have no imvortance. The officers
told Verona textually "se heve no confidence in the Argentine Foreiga
Office,* nevertheless, when they arrived there, they turned over the
docurenta to the Foreirn Office, Put these documents had no inortances
they were ccrely to .eronstrate tha’ there hac teen an extradition of
decumanta, an’ that they vere originals, The ft rortant accurents are

held by Varona in Mionf. ;

Miro eaid they also visunlized another uct involving Lacerda in
Miani, Dut that bis “adr inistrative” budget really does net “rovids for
prop3-arda activities (auch as the Current SIP and Lacenia affairs). I
countered that it wos cunaldered that his budget was sufficient for his.
to ecnduct sore propaganda activitioss obviously nothing on @ pajor
scale = but some things. :

“pre
& a T

a


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

Miro declared that interna) provegzanca and claniestine action in
Cuba ev:ld not be delayed any longer. I szreed on the necnanity, and
that 1¢ was believed that measures are recessary to forrent in Cuba.
the opposition to Castro. "The seoxle are eyainat hint" declared Miro.

‘ "But. increase it," I anavered. Miro Uar stated “If this action doesn't

ster. fra tho Consejo (CRC) -—= not aa a: ‘ndependent agency, tut in.

close euntact with you (the Agency), — vhst ve forrent is a ourplete
disorder in Cuba, ani aftervarcs no government can succeed; secondly,
Af ve do ret have a central plan, and carry it out vell in 4 core or
less lirited veriod of tine, there iil rerely te tore shouting of

'. people (prisoners) by Fidel.*

"ard thie is my insistence. Eaw I ar afrald to go to Miant. bhat
an I % tell the poonle there? hat co J .07 Converse? Meanwhile the
Ageney ceeps on infiltrating pocple into Cute but disconnected frox. the
Counei2. I was told in ry conversation with the President to enplity
the senteratiip in the Consejo, I rave endeavored to do that. Ia the
Council there sre other preat organizations - delegates from each of the
organizations = that ask ze for arvs, tymsite, thinys, and I us here
powerless, Therefore I rust work wit you people in order to seo how
ve nay bord over arma and @ plan of actin zo they ray see that this le
not rerezy cn endlosa series .of aatotaze actions.” I revliod, "-ell, I
believe that a wellevorked~out plan tzet al.cva yood chances cf success
will ve favorably considored.” . : .

"How ubout arta for the Escartrey?® ssked Miro. I replied that
it wan rz7 understanding that urms for *ze Escar.brey could only te
landed on the North Coast; how then wil: they pet to the Escarbrey?
Miro e4fd that the boaf which had rand zany trips (working Sor YoU),
would Lave to establigh connunicetion 2s: find out when they would pick
wp the arra; what cannot be done “io averr.& Cuvaldo Ranires in fis
pituaticn of anguish because he 18 the only reol regional focus of
resistance thut there ia there, and te bas teen really loft in « deaporete
situation for three ronthe. :

I interposed that there seered some question about the puper frow
Ramirez 2eking for arms, whether it was we real thing. "Perfectly
identified® ronlied Miro, "ks assured thet it is perfectly identified and
requests have come to me through different channels oaking for these prs.
Tex still waiting now for a month and a belf, All you huve'to do Je tell
us the reans of delivery, tha neorle tc ovntact and then ‘eliver to our
Cutans the urna, dynatite, fuses, I ux stil) waiting, and critician (of

Cubans against. inaction) ineressea caily.” :

“411 the delegations of revoluticrary groups in the Council 38k re
for arrs eri ceans for fighting. but I cannot crovide ther anything.
Heamé.tle the Agency is infiltrating -evzie into Cuba without counting on
the Corsejo for anyt!:ing. This puta it inte an absurd position - merely
a "coureil vainted on the wall.” I Lave seid, "Look for someone elee if Tt
am not ecosidered able to do the job tut we rust work. I have confidence
in ths agency, but I cannot work inttis feshion.” :

Sorry
. eighth tt \



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

"I've asked for roney for the clandestine erours. that have they aaid
about that?" Firo asked, I reslied that there is a problem of the reans of
delivery, that the Italian & bassy at present appeers undesirable. The
Ambassador ian't there, well, ve look for another reans; the Argentine -
anything - those peonle need : onsy" he countered. I have to carry out con=
crete things,” he declared. *I'r now like 6 person’ in a swirring pool
without water." "For three emi a half ronths I've struggled to maintain a
revolutionary spirit. My rilitary veople are waiting till I urrived and
tell then, "thia ust be done, that must be done. fothing yet! and without
any cian, I don't go unywhere; nowhere!

"The other time I went with my eyes closed, through faith, Ke hed a
fallure and the failure fel. upon-res—T cannot proceed under such circur-
atances in no way. I've asked for-$50,000 to send in to the unjerground.
The Russians are spending $40C,CO0 in propaganda and have leas than the
U.S. ¥e srall not compronise the U.S. Toll ne the way to vend it in, The

_ Council is to aid them, not merely to conduct reatings.”

*0On that request they bsven't renlied anytting?" he asked, I snsvored
that on this iter, I had made known Miro's desire, but that so far nothing

had been resolved,

"I'm not corplaining," he stated, "but for three rontha I have been
asking fcr a con.ict withthe authority to resolve. Why? Because I'm
getting nowhere, When I return now I shall be asked, "Kow sbout 4t?" and
must anawer, "You will have to walt becauge I have ncthing.! And meanwhile
the Agency keeps on infiltrating people into Cuba incderendent of the.
Consejo. Let us go back. Without being in agrserent, I cannot serve you.
I have no interest in presiding over a Council that is of no use."

T pointed out that the Council rust continue to exist, with him as
its president, aa the coordinating body uf the resistance roverent, but
that there are certain difficulties in putting the student or labor activie
ties under the direction of the Council; that these groupa are now functioning
efficiently and that I trusted that he could see the croblers of completely
changing their control, direction, and coordination. I added that I
believed that he should know sonething of what they are doing and that I
believed that should be kept inforced,

"I know absolutely nothing,” he revlied., "what cores to me is from
these same individuals, I aw not in agreenent with that, I'n becoming ridie
culous. Under these e!rcumstances I cannot continus, I have nlanted the
probler. of tho underground, the probler of the collateral organizations
(that he vould like tc have in Council by teing their source of support
and cocrdination), of the ragistrates, and now you have seon chet ALABAU has
done (reclaiming GARCEKAN as president of exile government), tho is worke
ing with you people, and you have seen the reaction cf ths State Departrent.
How yosterday ALABAU is publishing political denunciations against the
Council. I have discussed the ratter of the :agistrates with the C.1.A., I
don't remenber the naxe of the person. A month kas psesed and the other
Bagistrates (those with ALABAU) haven't been stooped (in their activities)
and they haven't had elections aa I requested to select another leacer.®

: SLReny
t


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

eeas T

~~

"The students are eont!nung their activities. I ‘believe that I have
sonetiing in ry head ag a tasis for the deterinaticn of what should be
discussed in the Council wite ra; and in agresrent with you; but these
exioting circurs*%ances, witz.wut any connection, rake it ‘so that J cannot
Continue the clandestine aic. Yo the first problez, I presented your reply,
"Ye uhall ce." To tha seca: probler, the collteral orgenizations ——
whieh continuea the suna ss *efures the third protler I presented, on arts
to serd in, nothing. The Scurtt. nrobler, the nropaganca’ operation "Griets"
that I showed you, nothine.* 7 reclied thut on the latter I had discussed
the ratter, that it was, I telieves, a suggention given to rir in the Departe
rent of State. Jd :

: i

"If we don't rake prevazenda and send arra isto Cute now, it's useless,"
he declared. "And I canset rerein in ellenco,” I renlicd that I telieved
quite a bit of nropagarca wes Leing conducted, "Yea, but. incependent of the
Comeil, I CaNNUT LE A PUF2ETI® “They (the Agency) keep.on dealing with the
MRP, vith the Unidad Revolusicrz rio, and they haven't ontered into the Council
aipnly becausn they ara in cirect contact wlth the Ayency. Thus it appears
that none of the vreblers ict I took up with you sore twenty daya ago have
been resolved, and I'l] tate to taxe another solution, I'vant to know the truth
Af T'r not ecceptable, I'll leave and witheut an; scardYo wnatoouver. I have
avalloved 11 the criticise, i5 ry own house, in allence, as though I vere
Tesponsitle or everything, I curnot continua to do this/end te doing nothing.
I cannot be a pusipet! I rave we ars to give.” | :

Hy

He reiterated that noviing had been resolved cn any of bis requeats and
procesals, am that he eculia't ecntinue thus, That he could quit, go to. -
Puerto Kico as o profasscr. Re eddcd te would want te vor with us. He then
referred to the acts of Linevés tn Maw York, which had cost four thousund
dollers, plus passare, & ricic.icus sur spend from the sdzinistrative Budget.

"ie heuve paid the psssare, nis living costa here.” he aaid,

Hl

"Now I yo to Fiard where I beve to face the organizaticns grouped inte
the Council, "Aira for ever; sere?” *I haven't any. All the organizations free=
Wheeling there which. don't sext to join torether Lecause trey ere working
directly with your peonle.* I ssid this sas unfortumte and askia whether
there could nct te sure fomm.+* realizin. contacta with ther without neces
sarily channelizing their sccert ard direction through the Council, such
as ty forming a committee sicrge the lines I had suger sted) in Vieni.

. Miro then referred t. the e-reement reached in the thite House reeting
with Fr. Goodvin, Mr. Koodwerd, with sertleren of the C.I.A., and with }r.
Hurvita, Firat, [rat the caly tain: that ts recorndeed 19; the Coneejo (CRC);
Cr. biro is the :erscn of cur ecurfidence and will have ao ect iniatrative
budget which he will ocntrs? am: will report Juter the exenses of coordinae
tion, an: that any other excenses, troparanda cr clandestine activity, will be
paid by the Avency; for the trecviers of the organizations! in the Couroil there
will be « ccntact to assist ic working out their soluticns; that is to say,
that their pretlera of toats az: ars," Another point waa|that in case there
are organizations that dco act choose to Join tre Courcll, Pr. hiro vill te
perfectly informed in actance of the ratters at hand anc vill give his
authorisation, That fa to asy, it estatiishes a unifying Control over tie



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

on

he

en Ty
5
(CRC), Ihave seven, to wrk with you, with ne, vith the people who are

going to carry out the activities, with the people that I designate.
Nothing of that is being donee Then what they want is to work alone.”

. "I will not continue. I will not continue from the:tine I return to
Miami, I have gone on for five ronthe, struggling. I cannot accept this
situation, I have tried to pull together those sroupa 4s asked in the
White House. I haven't succeeded in Grouping any rore, tecause ~ I want to
speak clearly in order to rerain good friends alvays © beontze you huve
prevented tt. The etuventa haven't joined, not because of no political
reason, but nerely tecauss you suport ther: directly. Preswubly the idea
ia that in thie vay the seourlty of this nation 1s better saferuarted.

A Consejo was desired to serve aa the Coordinnting group and to provide a
feana by which the United States vould not appear toto intervening in Cuba.
Ir there ia to be a Consejo, it must have all the dignity of a Council.”

“When I try to form a Council, grouping all elexents together, they
don't join because they are talkin, directly with your people ~ and there
1s an office for that vurpose in Fiami ~ which deals with all the ren vho
want to work, tho vant to do things. This is all indecendent of tho Council,
And some vork for a destruction of the Council, I cannot tolerate this. I
have a gon vho 1s a vrisoner; either I know the plana, and I knew the saneuver
and tho problems that they are going to carry out, or I, when I arrive in
Milani, will say, "Xo," and send woud to washington, Let them co without me.
There will be scmeone who will submit to these things, but not 1,"

®and of the four iters that prorised me to resolve, there
shave not been resolved any, and I find ryself in the dark, And I as. very
sorry. Iam not going to corvrevise the security of this Nation, but
neither un I going to conprorise the situation of these boya. When they
disappeared, lost their lives, atc,, I vasa contronted with "And you are the
preeidont of the Counoil.”* I carnot remaine in this wayee®

"I haven't been able to group together anything. I ‘as prowised that
the zagistrates vould all incorrorate together (into the Council), but
that rascal ALALAU 1s working against the Couneil and I have reason to
believe that he 4s doing it with Agency aupport, otherwise how would he pay
for his polities] denunciations." I resooncded, that [ believed this could
not be true, He skcuted, "I kave expressed my position te you, and I want
you to get an ansver when you can. If thesa vrotlers that I have yet forth
do not have an irmediate solution, I & not‘to knew and to dispose of
relative actions to be taken, then how, in view of ry situation, rust I do.*

He asked about the olan for clandestine sabotaze action by cormando
raid, that he had given us, ani what had core of it, I replied that he rust
realize that the study of such a vlen necessarily was slow ond must be

” considered by rany. He said he was convinced that there vas no intention of

accepting such plans, ard that while now we discues such plans, we lose out.
“I cannot accept this situation, nor would you.* : .

i
‘
,



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

He then said that he could ¢o ahead an? dissolve. the Counci1, and let
euch organization go ahead ani do aa It plecacd; that he couldn't proaide
over & reaningless councils thet this vas not a threat, but he would step
out. I reassured hi that he vas hishly esteerot in. Washinton and It vas
necoowry that he continue ap head oj the Council, He rerlied, "But they

dlereyard re.

He reiteratrd that he had slanted four oroblors, none of which nad
: keen renolvods reiterutcd that ie bad rlantod the cronueanca oroblen. @
‘ long tire ago, but that :ropagamia continues indeponient ot the Counotl
! ant people cre net out ike those to the Conerusga of stuconts in Jao
Paulo, Wiore they repeat ¢ inga like purrots wileh don't go. with Latin .
Averican audiences. , re

"I have asked for orras elthar vive us rassive ald, one, tvo, three
: willioa = whatevor {9 necensary, Iecause this is to veatroy Conpuniar,
i and we'll ru:ke our plans. And ve'li furnish the dead, fcr vo can do no
: Tore. *e rust work in ayreerent, tacauso new onch time that I spuak,
| it's ‘we nkall sea, ware going ta study," - und nothing apoens. No,
i "1, T akal) not preaice over another Council existing: under these ciroum-
_ stances, I have often srent 24 hours without sleeping, trying to pull

together the groupa, and meantine, problecs arise ot all sides. why?
i Becaurze so long as other prousa et suncort, they won't enter tho Council,
: Tha ¥E? is in contact with you an? getting area; now the Unidad Rovolu=

" efonar$o. I rerain the ridiculous ons. Alroaty I've ‘suffered a lot and
heve 9 son who laa prisoner, And I've talked a Jot during theay daya,
ond T keen on being « puppet, vut vorse than & purret, becuse a vuppet
is woved, but I's not even roved."

: *Thercfore, I say to you that the grouns that want to work with us,

" you, the chief of that grou:, end I, ve ought to rusolve all these questions,
for eyazvle, with the chic? of the nilitary group, beennae he has pulled
together the profassicnal arry and the rebel ary (elorents) and the arwy
of ifkeraticn, such us Varnlo, Sotus, Nino und the boys, sho have core

' fron the Lrigade." He declared that 37'S fo 0 fighter, 18 willing to

: Peturn to Cuba, ard that he had grest conficonce in SOTUS, an

i I assured him that the legalization of SOTUS! residence would be
arranyed, and that Yr. Hurwitz inforred ne tht he believed. sorething
could be dora for the other tnree returnees vlose nares Tr. Hiro had

+ gives ta.

: Dr. ¥iro reiterated that he rust speak clearly, that he could not
continue thus as a travelling presicent without having anything to give to
: : hia ceccle —- nothing to the undoryroun! through Couneil sction; mcr sould
' ‘he be ignorent of plans which he o:noved where Cubans yo out to dis, and
i then having thelr relatives core to hi ag responsible, He declared, *I
* don't want to live on a budget, reside over an adr inistrative office,
+ Fecelve peorle, tell the: lies, esying, "We wall seo." The ren vho are

: . ereeny ,



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

aearce
at ‘

Je

here (4n Council) representing organisations rust know soncthing of vhat
they are going to do and if they ask for 40 rifles, I pust be able to say,
“Mere they are” ~ nut to give arma directly into their hands = but through
& contact for this, Otherviee you people suke your plone, ond I'1] retire
from ovorything, And bo assured that never, never vill I say « single word
against the Agency or tho United Staten, never; nor oxvlain reasons which
ahouldn'’t be explained,

"If I cannot have the responsibility that I should have, I shall not
lend ryself to vhat nay regult in a tragedy. None of tho problems [ have
bianted have been rusolveds not that of tha reyistrates nor that of the
Eecambrey, nor the ronwy to the underground, haa boon ronolved, not the

‘plan of propagamia that I gave you. I cannot continua to ait in an office,

While you continue operating, aa you wish, with ry silont ounsent. You may
chowss nozaons else like Pr. Godoy, who 48 agking for arms. Choone and
geo vhothor his nare will save Cuba. You aro roing to create another Fidel,

Who fa nothing.

T repinded him that I had my talke with hin only ton daya tefore, not
twenty, and that I could talk to no one in Wauhington until a week ago and
had to have rany ecnversations with rany people, and that his proposals
could not be rosolved In auch a short tire, He returned ta the a;tecront
thet "plana of action be discussed jointly; that i there vere objections,
that the objoctiona be discunsed. He said thero had been no objections so
fer to discuss; nor objections to propaganda plans, He vas to have contact
with « representative of C.I.A. to meet with representatives of orgunicae
tions that want to collaborate, and with Dr. Viro — nothing developed on
thet! He declared that he should have knowledge of the activities of
thone that don't vant to collatorates and said each day there will te sore,
tecaune they want to cuin the power for therselves; to act on their om
aconint, Ho said he knows there 1a o "Jin® and a "Robert" and others that

ore doing thinge,

T assured bir he cust realize that there ware sany problens involved
in his proposals and that tire was essential to work then out, I rerinded
hiv. of Lia conversation with Mr. Goodwin and the lattera’ state: ent to the
effect that there could be no thought in the foreseeuble future of a mille
tery operution against or invasion of Cuba, Miro countered by referring tu
hie oonverastion with the President on 16 July and his (Miro's) corplaint
of inactivity, He sald the President pronosed the recruiting of Cubans in
different units of tho arry for training so aa to utilize ther at the
opportune tine, and that the officers would be invited to our pilitery
achools, Miro said he had gathered soce of the military tcpether and ine
forzed them of this offer, and tho next voex he was:culled to discuss the

‘recruiting, wi:ich he a-proved, Ther Genera) Herahey went to sea bin at

hia house, telling hic thet Cubans wouldn't be sent, to Berlin or any suoh
Place but kept in the U.3, availuble for use later, Piro said, “If there
1s to Le no invasion, then let's utilize the underground, which needa ars

and roney.® .

. qvaonty

qed


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

grace |
He agoin repeated, "Thure rust be rasaive oroparandas asoondly arras

we hall furnish the dead, but I need to zn0u filow are we going to die.”
Hw commented that he was going to ask that his photo;raph vot be put on

. the cover of a certain zagasino because he didn’t know vhothor ho was

going to continue; that in the present cire:zestances he didn't see how be

eould continue, Again I urged that Le rust do so, ard that I felt certain -

that ve could recolve sure of his provosals, srohably not to the extent
that he desired, but at least in purt, tut that tine was necessary to.

accotplish this. :

He repeated that the Council needs to have scare sotion'aken in Cuda,
tut the Agency keens on uncertaking actiora without any connection with
the Council. Further, that he rust have tho raann fur ecnductiong prowe
ganda, such ns outlined in the "Operaticn Griota.” He asked, so when could
I give hin sore aravers, I replied that during the current week T expected
to have reotings in which these ratters wule Le discussed = the Lepartcent
of State, with Kr. Goodwin, with representatives of the Agency, and that I
hopod thut surething would te resolved, tut thet he must realize that rany
people are involved in auch matters and svlutions are rot reached quickly.
He reiterated that he had to keon telling '.15 orynnications Frait a little
longur® and that thio wan, becoming onturragsings  - . :

Ther ho brought up hia preposal of havin him and the Council go to
Cuba, saying “perhans it would be advantageous that I die in Cuba; that
the Counci] sk recoymition fron Cuban 40/1 and the military aid of the
United Statea -- alt to tuto place within 42 iourn, Ho added, “I have
told you of the reuction of Cardinal Srellran, °¥o have dono vory badly
in the Cuban affair.® . :

t rerinded hir that deseite the urperey taat we all recognized in the
Cuban situation am ita threat to the Urit-d Statue and «12 the Azericas,
there are rany other vorld problera - Laca, rerlin, ate., - wideh also
occupy the attention of our govercrent cacnles

Then I aid I wished to take edvantag. of our reeting to ask him for
information relative to his current budents first, did he believe that
there were atiy neonle receiving + salary fru the Councd] wo misht also
be getting Financial aid trom H.E.4, He seid, "Xo, £ would never parr it
that." Then he declaged that he had two ways cf orer.ting: when ho absorbed
the perscnnel of the various organizations int, the CRCs either to cut off
their salaries auidenly, vr to put ther to wary Sor their ony; that tre
"nor ina" (cayroll) prew a little tit tecuuse be had to take Jn certain
neovle, ant that he coraiderad tts ubsorbing ther was secorsing to the
policy of C.I.A. Then he declared that the roxipu bererit received by
rofugees "ron. H.f,W, waa $10 per far tly cer rentr, ani that no vhere tere
could a farily live o» a hunired a ronth. Hence, be did not fee] that he
could cut off the pebvle on the staffs of the Cit organizations, and secd
ther. to tha H.E.wW, ‘Therofore, they were unsigned to the different

: |
eno A

ech? . :

olen. J a4


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

‘excuse, The problem vf Cuba costs u lot of «4

Bo

"The money for the un‘erground 1a ruch and contact fs doubtful, an
ey! The poole of the
Escanbruy = it's difficult to deliver arms to them? But we are going to
run that risk. The urrs are guing to be lost? Vell, risks must te taken.”
Hire aguin referred tu the groups that didi't want to colluborate with the
Council but would cullaborate directly vith the Apvency stating that he

had opvesed it und util) op;osed It; ‘that he recudved a very affectionate
Jetter ssking bin to try work out all the oroblors tetween us snd accept

u solution, an! that a ruorusentative woullt bo ceslinited to work with hing
that Thad auprared unt he had spent two very pleasant days with re; that

I waa very unarotarding; that twent; @ayn bad peased of creat arzteaty.
("hot twenty but ten," I tnteroued.} He guid he figured that probably ha
right have arr.o and hein for the underprown! an) ‘row about plano of ection
and had felt stremcthened, "Eut® ho sald, "now I tual knocked dow, kone
of the plana or propsgania propoanls hove bean accepted, none. The tiring
wall in Cuba continues functioning, 31 dead Jn %) days. by resignation has
been written long ago, und ¥ am ready to sule it it aa soon as I return to
Miari ‘

I declared that he rust not do that, that he cust have patience,, that
it takes time to resolve these things; He replied that he has been waiting
since April and rentioned all the sufferin: he tad gone through, attacks
by everyonn, rothers of prisoners ami dead, the Arerican Press, Forture,

Time, Lifo, Hew York Tinas, ete., ll against bin alom: with ALABAU Trelles, —

and othoras and that he had suvvorted ol2 of trie in uilonce. He had been
asked it it were true that thore was no air sunrort and had not answered,
"tho other tire I kept my Jips closed with ateslute reitt, the noxt tire I
oFull huve ry eyes open ami have rany questions. I don't uncveratand how
You people can deal wth sore of thee unknown Cubans. _—

He said, "I've given rany vroofa of loyulty to you. What they attribute
to me the other day in Miari that "thero would be an invasion in a few
daya", that 19 not true, I havo a tape recording of vhot I sadd Ulich vas
"very soun (without rentioning any date) in Cuba there would be unveilod
the great Pascuna (resurrection) of the Fatherlerd, and the presa hag rise
interpreted Puscuss ua the Pascuns de Navided (Cirdutoas).

. i

"Thus the pread cones out with staterents sttrituted to Dr. Miro that
the invasion will take place by Chrintras, cormletely a lie and rothing
iike whut I said.” I conceded to Pr. liro that i had suffered a trerendous
number of attacks in silence ani that the prosa hed over a period of time
core out with critical re:varks. I asked his. tf ba planned to pass: through
Wastington before returning to Miami and he sais he didn't have money for
such expenses; that tis wife waa terribly vorried about their sor, but
that he would have to reruin in Kew York unt] wednesday to atterd the
luncheon for all the editors of the Latin A:erican press, who want to con=
verse with him, to help with propaganda but wittcut costing the U.S. a
cent. an .

qrare
be

Lye

i
{
i


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

Qe

cormissions within the CRCt finance, propaganda, clandestine, rilitary,
organisation, etc. The .nes who ere ro Kood or don’t sant to vork, he

said, he would cut off, but that he couldn't Just fire acreone auldenly,
He then said saluries vere srall @ $200, $225 per ronth as an everago
except for particular individuals, such as hie usaietant Aragon, o very
capable person, and the chie!s of the various organizations who work "full
tine" and receive $400 each; further that he planned to give each organizae
tion approximately $700 per ronth for their operating expenaes, somo leas, |
some a little more ~ (FRR, Rescate, 30 de Nov, 20 de Maye, AAA Indenend=
jentes, Montecriat1). . _ Sd

t .

Won I questioned whethor tha Fonteoristi orvanizaticn wac util] in
the ChC, he said it. waa, that only Justo Carillo had dropped cut of the
CHE but the group rerained in and had a nev head. He added that he had
just had a requost from Carillo to provide hin (Carille) with a thousand
dollars; that Carillo had photographic copies of some checks that he had
paid,to Waldo Frank for propaganda activities azainst Cuba and that
Carillowad asking roimburserent but Miro said he didn't consider he had
to give it to Carille. |

Returning to the budgot, Miro Said, "There are ‘tho verlous exployoeas
there is the item of trips; there are the military jeople grouped uncer
the military comminaion ~ I cannot let the. suffer nisery. There sre no
atudenta on the payroll beceuse they are being suodrtad by you (the
Agency). And right there a difference ia estubl ished betwvwen those in
the Coune!] and those who receive money (ror. the Agency directly, which
fe more than thet received by my people, Sea how you (the Ayency) withe
out intending to, and for reavona of insecurity, ard going to destroy
the Council." He then stated that ho had placed Alvares Dias, who had
been Kinioter of Finance, in charge of finance mattera because he (Mire)
could not be everywhere, anito make certain that no expenses were paid
on which they were not in agreeront, and which Paule would carry out.

t

3 querried whether Paula would continue as accountant, and Miro said,
"certainly, 4 accountant." He said that everyone has beon coring to him
(Mire) with all kirds of pleas for money and therefore it was necessary
to have Alvarez Diaz in hore so that he and Poula night resolve the finance
matrera. Miro added words of praise for Paulu, "It's like I want to have
for each section of the Council, like I vanted Conte! Aguero to handle
propaganda, but since he is receiving roney from you, (the agency) he
doesn't want to, I have to have soreone to take this load of f of re; first
aa in Naval affairs, eazeone to lock for boats, arpa, etc.”

I asked atout Festre for proparanda and Miro replied that hestre is
no good, never wis of value; that he lad leen put ini charze of the proca~
ganda cormission previously and given $48,000 ronthly, but had done nothings
Then he launched into a criticiar of the Swan proparands; thut it wae a
shame, handled by Batistianos: Fernandes VARELA, & Catholics Suares
Hemandes, a senator in the epoch of Batista. He nared another (sounded

|
SEE T

|
|
{
j


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

like Chau Miller) a bad peraon and n fatiutero. Virc' said ha had asked
that Svan te stoy:ad but, since they work directly, these people ore
vefenied. He added wryly that he wished they (the Agerey) would defend
him (Firo) that way. :

He said thoy (the Aseney) had posed the wrotle: five ronths ago in
Fiori relative to Joaquin, Jagerio, a Cuban who wea working with the
Councs2 and has worded regrificently, but tien he uecepted work with the
€.1.A. and continues doing thio (ard dua vhatever he slesien) - intele
divorces ara, recr.iting, atc, -~ and vili have nothing to do with the
Councile - .

Again Miro declared thut he had the hivhest regard for Paulo and
couldn't desnonue vith hir 5 hat ‘aven propowd his nare to Le the lagtatrate
of the Tribural of Aceounta inthe futuro poverzzent of Cuba. I udded
ay understardin: that Prslo had dono an excellent Job, oarticulerly
sentioniny his bandling of paying cerender.ta, a meticulous and arduous
task, Hiro exciuined that he had never eonsicercd replacing Paula but
merely needed Alvares fiaz to handle details with Pavla. He antd every~
one An Mast joows it is Puila vho has the morey to cake paynents by
check, an? that he thought 1% would be ketter for the people to get pay=
rents Jn cash ani sign a receiot; that soretines sucacce right rob Paula
and then people will suk “fro: where docs this zoney ecrs,* aince the
Cubuno have no roney,# :

Then Dr. ¥iro said he would like to clarify any doubtf.l questiona, I
asked whether he hind received an; other communication fecx the Eacambray
group, He revlied thet io had rot, but that the ona had cora through the
Kontecristi vroun ani thay continued toaek hi: for this ars ald, I
asked whether any chanyis or additions had been rade is the Council] at the
October 10th neeting. He replied that the MRP had not answered hie ine
vitation bucause they wore working with the Azency, and that the new
group, the Union kevoluctonario, had replied that they did not, because
they have a delegste in vashington who ie seeking direct contact with
U.S. Goverrsent Agercies, . .

Miro then declared that in order to call a Council reeting, he had to
have a preas cunfarerce or a press rolense (about, calling w CRC rwoting)
but Prio, ALARA, and everybody wero rpainat all tila, and were doubtful

- Vhether to core or not to cove. “'Z talked with Conte szuero and with Are

reliano pany hours. Arreliano is a fuwehrers if things eren't done 4a he
wants, he son't co slong, Mornover, he has « atrong anti-American
sentinont, I talxed to ther, tut they said, "Ko." "There were tuo
proble.as their lack of confidexce in the Covermmert, and ry contradictory
view that wo vant to be with them (with .5,), I woula like to have had
to call a Council reetiig alrost by force, Therefore I cecided to have

ro meeting and no press conference, and to come here (to Eew York City).

There vaa no session *// H



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

"The Fastistianos ure very veil organised and «lso the Frio followers,
vaiting for re to do sorething, end I cannot do anything. I'r ihe St,
Lawrence, roasted on one sida and fried on the other.®

T asked whother the Couo1] vas looked tron too ruch as a political
entity rather than a unifying nedium, Miro rerlied, "Those pecple (Pric,
Alabau, eto.) wint to obstruct the ones who are fightin; Castro thro
the redium of the Counc], They are divided into two xreurs: (1) .
Politiciarss Prio, Alonso Pujol; thoso thit wart to te the directors;

(2) The <roura that want to act within Cuba who don't want to Join CRC
but rather to deal directly with you neonle in order to have the power
Ytoworrow In Cuba; necple only of action, b t not of corzon sense and who
cannot rean ruch to the future of Cuba; uldiy would cause another era
like that of Fidel, who is rothing but a otudent. That:ts extrerely
dangerous, You give these neuvle the menns and if one of them over=
throws Fidel he 1s the oe who ausumes rower, He ray be a scod ran of
action but only 24 or 25 years old ari not one who can orfent Cuba in
the way of derocracy, After ranching 40, reople think difrorently.
Fighters are capable of curry ing cut the action you give then to do, but

hot to govern, /

Dr. Miro continued to cwell on }:i9 concern as to the future if these
young fighters are given a free hand to co as they plesse; that care must
be taken as to who ip sunported, that these people are the onea who don't
want to work with us; thet the fk? hopes that 1t will be the ore who will
led torerrow in Cuba; that onos of the future will be sorething to which
you tho U.S. has contributad by suprorting such clerents.

Dr, Miro corrented in further detail his views and again ha tered on
the ranner of uring funds to avoid being like the ostrich. "Everyone
knows where the money is coming fror ani io hava to be carefil of the
form. Lveryons doow rot know of you, but of whore the help is coming
from"

"Wa are the pulitices of the var against Costré," affirved Dr. Mires
Let acilitury ren funetion aa chief of: staff as long as the rilitary action
against Castro continues, but then the civil action must, be carricd out
by non-rilitary ren, ,

He added that durin the softening-un action against Castro, ve
rust take good cars of the ranner in which th: «ction is taxen to avcid
exrosing the 0.S, suv-ort; and that he considered that the colluteral,
incependent groups were not safeguarding it; so wo are losing tire now
as you (U.5, Arenciea) deal with each. of thease crours. Arc te rust not
lose, ve rust win.

me

see


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

i
|
|

erat
Vow

-13-

I told tr. Firo that I wa anxious to werk cut sore ranner of linsirg
these groups vith ir. Miro ani the Council, without having to channel
direction and funce through Dr. Miro, since these groups are now function=
ing well uncer «xisting arrangerents.

Dr. Mire #-1d he would te rleased to meet vith ther. outside of the
Couneil], and they ray continue to function as c-llateral or;anizations
independently; tut tet they realize that they tsve one: direction. Or,
Yiro ad:'ed tret like the Independent magistrates vith their attitude —
they are injuricy the Council.

Dr. Miro c-atent«d that he winted the raziatrates to have on election
and select their leacer according to the resuits of a vote. He reiterated
that all the eclleteral organisations rust overate within the orbit of tze.
Councils and that be would be glad to discusa with ther their opinions
just as he es & professor had done with stuterts--cften tines resulting
in excellent iteaa end viewpoints,

Then I rautioned that I hud read in one of our magazines 4 laucatcry
item describirg nis ceronatrated capabilities as a redlator botween
political grows end individuals. ~

Dr. Miro egain returned to his belief tiut Cunis of all organizatiors
should furnei through the Council because every Cuban haz a sense of szell
that inclanes bis to go where he knowa the money is dispensed; that this is
sad but trues ent that those who are still outside and hope to get direct
support, /ithey mew that the noney was here (in hte hands), would core
running without urging. He then said that he had seven hundred collars,
more or less, Zor each organization's operating sxpenses. He concluded
by saying that te dida't wish to operate without us (Agency) or without
any of the Avency cmonle, but merely desired to pull tegether the diverse
groups and otter activities, ‘

He then rs Zerred to his conversations with Mr. Berle and Seneraol
Taylor, and ris view expressed to then that in the April affair he felt
that the Agerey t2¢ functioned more or leas effectively — soretires
their peovle kad Leen "rough", or "tough", but that he bad no corplaint;
that tho lack of efr cover no doubt caused defeat. khen he had been
querried by recerters and other on specific Guesticns designed to pry
eecreta out of riz, te had replied, "I didn't see ther," or oiziliar
evaaions, and thus hed ondeavcred to be loyal to ua. :

He said his son had heen certain that hig father vould be with the
emediticnary force, and, in route to the Bay of Pigs from Guaterala
the gon bad searched for hir. on he boats, and was disillusioned because
his father wasn't there. :

| nes


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

Again he ercphasised his viev that the stucents sent to Latin Arerican
countries on rropaganda rlesions should be indoctrinated by veople in the
Council to prepare them for the cross exiining that they vould undergo,
and thereby prepare thes against trans and foolish statortnts; and to
insure that no Batista suoporters vere sent out. He erphazised that one
of the first questions asked of these propaganda orissaries would be
“hith what roney do you come here?" “shat Yankeo organization is behind
you." He added, "The peorle have to be will prevared. to answers just ag
ZT bad to undergo a succession of penetrating questions when T first vent
into exile in Argentine and could ansver ther without hesitation because
of a clean record, .

Again he care back to his urgurent that the collatoral organisations
should function through the Council = nok "forgetting the Agency, tut not
teing forjottan by the Agency." I told Pr. Miro that I hoped during the
course of the week to have a nerlos of conversations inthe course of
Which certain decisions and solutions would te reached thet vould enable
me te sit dow with him the following seek and work out sore details on
propaganda and other ratters.

fr, Mire then asked, "How best canthe sceurity of this nation be
insured = the Agency dealing directly with those neonle or working with
the: through Firo7* Aud he errhasized that he saa concerned toth with
the security of Cuba and of the United States, and that these people
{Cubans with whor. the Ayency is dealing <lirectly) at any monent when
they Zelt they were losing out or vere not sufficiently paid = would
aek for rores ani, being Cutans, right ba very indiserete; but that if
they had to deal with Miro they gould be obligated to go to hig with
their corplaints., He sald that Just as a bee seeking aweots will go to
any source, but if there is only cne source it will go to that ones and
that thus all grows .ust look to the Council, '

4gnin Dr, Miro returned to his thesis thet sooner’ or later there rust
be war to overthrow Custro, and that Cutans and Aroricans pust realize
this; that as 4 preliminary the Cubuna must carry out sabotage, atc.,
but just ua blockades didn't overthrow Franca or Musgolini, reither would
they cause the fall of Castros further that if suborage was conducted withe
out being a part of on vvera:l plan of rissions, the people inside Cuba
would come to react adversely to the subotace and align thersolves with

Castro.
fe then excressed his view that time is being sadly wasted in trying

to tring the Latin arericen countries into agreerent with the U.S. against
Castro, because, unfortunately, cary are ruled by dictators and they fear

‘Concerted action against therselves, but if the U.S, attackn and destroys

Castro they vill avplaud. drain he repeated thst the Punta del Este
agreerent night well cause rany countries to say, "Thank you Fidel, and

not, thank you Vr. Kennedy.”

Dr. Miro emphasized that he vanted to collaborate vith ue fully, Then
the conversation turned to the dissolution of the FRD by Varona, and Pr.
Miro declared that this steo ves difficult for-Varona, to take because he

wate . .


--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

apeccys
Vins

alse i

hat teen ita cheef and in @ kigh position and had thus subriltted to the
Council, He declared his esteer. for Varom, a vory Lrusquo tan but very
bemeat. Ho onid Vurona had declared with resnect to the Argentine
Gocieants thit, "They are in Miami, I don’t fool like fending ther to
Aruentina bacause they don't telong to Arcentina. They telony tothe
U.lofsttiat ie Castro. Argentina has ciploratie rolotiona with Cuba and
1f it feels ike it, will send the docuents to Cuba." VYurona declared
in the SIP that the Ar;entin military ren had deceived him because,
having stated that they didn't trust the Arcentine Foretyn O:fice, they
Revertheless took to «ryventine the throe docurents thit vero rivea to .
ther an uson arrival turned ther over to. the Foreign Office, ¥iro
edded that Varona atuted t' ta clenrly in the SIP reeting where two
Argentine delerates vere vrerent. ‘they said, "y ithout rentioniny na: ee,
Tectur, Go you declare t!4a Lefore the 3IP7*" "Yes, ‘I declure 1t,” to
replied, "ent they skut up. :

Kino added that Varons had declared inst niyhl, “Let ther give us
ars t finish off with Castro, hut give ther. to un} Whoever has them,
give ther. to ust Dr, Miro then ceolarad, “Vo «re willing to diserburk,
but here vo ara Just vlaying: }.ide end see’. 1

be. ¥iro then referre: to his view that ierto Ue les Averiens
Should receive 4 spall subsidy; thet sovetines it nublished articles
unfavorabls tothe U,3, but thet usually, ond ir subsidized, vould elizinate
advarce iters, . i .

Then I returned to the aubjfact of the bwize% end concern hat gore on
the Cowes) nayrojl right also te on HEY. payroll. io Teplind that tor
Octorer he would have thor swoar that they vere receiving no other tonoy
ané rerorked that rary ara on the ~syrcll, He enwerated the different
sections ~ delegations in Latin Acertean countries, ‘cach persun (tvo oF
tarce et rost in each country) raceived only erough tu Live cry without
oversting funda, Ile said enci chfef of organization:iin tha Council received

8450, "which ‘s very little,® :
. . t .

He addes that during tle naat jonth with funds lett ovor,, be had ser.t
te Fexien $3,509 because 3076 245 neorle hed arrived jthere in need and
hungrye He ssid C.I.A, aided with $5,000 unt ho had ‘sent $2,005 tecause
trey were Cutara. Further, that re had crovide.! euch organization with $700
for ite expenses cf 1ailiny, offic a, cur, etc., tut thst tals wasn't a
flaed mr, He added thet whatever wea lect over he wuited to send ty Cuba
& those vho re fitting there. .

He coclared , "As fore they cur reduce tha tuizet to the rininum
crovided that thay send funds to Cubes but ry «roblers ruzt be resolved.
Thig cayroll waa -rorised to re when i was rave vresiiert of the Council,
and I didn't create it.® : Do

+


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

 tranwortation, tit seers tarial beln, As?

cand thst if testre vse rot co:si¢erac to te ft

/ Vascms reniiea,

‘ f quarries “ete the exnenses of tis recrultzert avctlon, unc he sald
be Mad tol Pauls to eliminnte that iter sizce recrulting is now dene elsce

\bere, tut the rilitory rereonne)] in recruiting should |

Rroured in the

rilitary ao tist sore form of intelligence sgoney coul | be paintained to

vrovice information.

Ke affirree that his rilitery stat mally cmatetba of three officors
(Varele, Lornigra, Vontenrwio) tut thet they tad exrenbon of of fieo,

be said this tat teen established y

for “is ‘Social holfure aoction,
Sy leae ard baa necessity for disranse

ing redicings, atte, for Ouran retuzoes bere. |

fa declared Uut he nadn't touched ary of the exeraen (inter ited
woo FAD) oxtest overeating exnanser, In omic? to give hie. a rargin of

Aas bo nwet -a.fcreneon urgent expensed. —_ |

We said, "2 t2lt reuda to elicinate 21) that could
saturally he wale have to coreult with pou.® (Agency) !

Nelative t the Kaval cecticn he sate
expease alloverce Uit ot the seeticn itss?
fer ratters suet, as sending sta to Cua, since they
air; an! that an office is neceasary for then
ot ott slowly.

te alizinuteds

te clanned b elinlaate their
lt, decsuse he due: » it essential
cakiot te: gant by

hat their expenses rust be

"As for ths YedionL section Wideh bad teer created betors, tq said
sely two “rubticdes” (casualties) reraires ami that the;soctlon waa to be

eiizinated. He celterntod that thera se ons hud been

(Agercy) and that they could only be e2

. He aff trret thet thers wa left Sor his use only 36
tee lte thousurd dollars for cattery suc’ zs atterlerice

js a¢rsirs, but

lacenis affaira, oni such rinor cropiser.
Jor sropaganda

be should have restored to bir the Suns
Scing through | vastre).

created by us

Suinsted gradually,

4 wleven or
t tho SIP and
that he felt
(that hed Leen

I aasured his that it was certainly i:tended that the Propayenda

keeisastun :ow Punetion uncer hin as the

designate avecra clae. He seciared thst *
talae! to Varcrn: sedtemiay, anc caked Vx
"hesstpme”

wo what he ahgult de,

ticn of the Council
thet te stould

ikew York, hed
to which

1

Niro ther si¢ he would like to mat conte A-uero im as head of

rrsagund, Let that Conte would cot agree wiless .¢ tol
mectioned that the staff whieh Mestre bac -3s vory food

“was md good tecause he wanted to anenc whe wrote cay. +

Be weatiosed arre? del Cerro, ferrin Teinacs, “ures cat
aatd drg=l del Cerro wouli te a good ebief 2 ~ropega:

tis *e would also like a geod acviser Raed asa Conte, wei
SON excert to talk, tut would like to

+ nery “
ad * ‘
eae

¢

itis to. ¥iro

ut that bestre
sVireing pool.
fhurdaud. Ke

» tut that for
really is no

be rrealcent. iro said

!
j
Hy
:
H


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

war,

Huxborte Medruno, @ resortar, aloo Would lo pood to direct cropsganda
efforts. He added tat bestro, chic f of rropagania for ‘the Fk, wich no |
longer exists, 1a the one v1.0 continues receivin,: the propapenda funds Tag
froe. Paula, fie declared that he (Miro) didn't control these fuds; that t
he didn't have anything excent a bureaucracy. ton, So,

so ° I told idm that I eceidered this probler of propagatda se-ticn and

: {ts ocsrators ohould le eorreeted right avay. He added that he felt that

: Rate Swan nhould be cif unier the sropayarda section of tho Councils

' furtrer, that the propaga: section tad to quit cucding printed ratter
t we Lotin arerican euuntries and Instead vend a Comat to ave? country
85 tt they could te printed thera with the terms uned in each countrys
in Acyvotipaly In Argontire style, in Grucil, in rortuguesss in .
Parura, in the rannor of eeuking in Faruras that such scopersece rust

1 te ald fur. He affirred. thet liunterto Kedrano waa a yroat reporter and

: hard worker and could hamle thin well; that Pertin Peinado wie & fine

worker vho now is having « struggle to Live, but worka well et sropagands

ratwrs. : . . .
‘

nzain ats that the propaganda funds should pass througs his
contrel, and that I-weghe take this up uson ry ret. to heahington.

Again he declared that he felt vlana ruat te rade for tim and the Counell ©
return to Cuba. I sald this wus a ratter Jor the futuro.

we tereinated our raeting with my steterent that 1t would protably
not te till the followiny week whon I woul return to Mian, after
getting ratters resolved in ‘eshington, ile suid that he would probsbly
_ le returning, to Miant on sednesday efter the Presa luncheon... : .

. I added that if 1t seered desirable for bir to cone to kest.ingtor:
i on route to Miari, I wouls coll bins that othervise I would look Sorverd
i to aseing him in Miami, I seid I felt we had covered a lot of yround,
i and thanked him for giving re so much of cio time to our neeting.

: Again he reiterated that he desired responsibility for all grows: _ Jo
: ard that if he wasn't coraidered to be the right one, that he wes ready ‘
: ard willing to resign. tron this, ve finished and J excorted hi. to the

! elavater of the hotel,


