
--- Page 1 ---
Toa-t0070-10079 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 ]

pa ou And a
Action Required:

. Lode Traces on AMFAUNAS 2 through 23, ident
POAS” n AMFAUNAS 2, 2 4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, v7, 18, 19.

.

2. Ascertain whether AMFAUNA=3 is of operational interest to

ODIBEX (see paragraph 15b). | 6
3. Forward evaluations of documentary intelligence provided by. i j
 AMFAUNA-4 (see paragraph 56). . - , “i
on . N .
Summary ; . 0 -
a 4, " AMFAUNA-2 is a Cuban national who was recruited and trained in. H :
the United States and returned legally to Cuba(in March 1961 to serve as yy 3

resident agent in.Havana. Since then he has built a net f over twenty fly

sub-agents and“*has*sent back 140 S/W messages, from which upwards of

- fifty intelligence disseminations have been made. He is highly .

‘. motivated for his work and under effective control by JMWAVE. The
quality of his production is, for-the most part, very good and improving

although‘he is at times distracted by an understandable interest in

para-military operations. Operationally he is very skillful; however, .

he has been known to. take unnecessary risks. There is no reason to

think that he is under hostile control nor that the operation is likely’

in the future to be turned against us. There De however, the real.

oe

risk that he may one day fa}1 into a G-2 trap baited with the Escambray
guerrillas. If so, this Will be due to the fact that contact with the
guerrill was his first assignment and, although he has been re-

: directed "to intelligence collection, he sometimes seems to feel that

e has led in his primary mission. This, plus the fact that he a
evident. believes that the end is now very close, is apt to make him.

f.
: oe A to an appeal from the “heroes of the mi ry
et

: s
@Present Status of the 0 eration. - Modus 0 erandi:

S$, There is considerable evidence that AMFAUNA-1 is extracrdinarily

ttachnents: A-D;: Inc1 Y>. Se . Dare
Charts A,B,C,D h/we A, =" ‘Fig mh) c0rY il July 196}
Attch. E'- Identities: BEAT ANAS 229). - -

Jeattch. F - Identities, ~~ . ~ | t
ama ki UFGA-4703 23

re
FG b — Sf
201- 291986 :

sot
a


--- Page 2 ---
7

: skillful “in tha practice of security. He has built a false identity |

: takes pains to check on the security. of his sub-agents, and he uses

H- ROJO )to such an exte

. legally, and all his f
‘that she should not reve

' KUBARK, hoping to collaborate.with him; AMFAUNA-1 treated them both ot |

‘whom he recruited without prior checking because time did not permit

“he -has reported that one of his subeagents is under G-2 surveillance,

i unreported cutout between AMFAUNA-1 and AMFAUNA-4,

“women. AMFAUNA=1 has’ not been explicit on this point, but it is ,...-;'
. believed that he shares his favors between them. “If 80, he has the’ |

| different bed edch night. This practice must certainly reduce the © of

. i
Communications:

Bs Cc _ Tae OTE = a
UFGA=4703 *

SECRET |

which he uses wherever posaible in his opsrational contacts, he is
usually selective and cautious in his choice of collaborators, he

a syotem of cutouts for much of his work.

6. Someiof AMFAUNA=1's older collaborators know him by true name, |
but wher ver, pagoible he introduces himself to new contacts by the - ;
name of (Fyulsd MROJON\o Evidently he is now living the part-of (Julio ?7

that he has in effect a double identity. In
one of his S/W measages he asked that the widow of AMCUSP-] be warned
not to reveal that ("Ju oN is in Cuba. Since AMFAUNA-1 is in Cuba :
i Yiland friends know it, this can only mean
that AMFAUNA-1 and ("Julio ROJO" )areo7
2ol- 241930 pseud@Nymn used bq Shb, Jol |
/ Fe In: recruiting sub-agents, AMFAUNA-1 relies primarily on his f
own judgment and intuition. If he approves of a person, he will
recruit him. “However, he has shown himself to be very cautious in
granting his approval. He has reported two persons whom he does not. -.
completely trust because, while otherwise well qualified, they drink.
too much and are indiscreet. For two other examples, AMBOAel and
LITAUe& approached him separately and revealed their relationship with

identical.

with reserve while he checked them out with JMWAVE. He has submitted,
the names of other contacts for checking. In the case of AMFAUNA-4, (

it, he put his misgivings in-writing: "Right away AMFAUNA-1 arranged
for a personal interview, taking utmost precautions» since we have
had sad previous experiences with members of CASTRO's armed forces."

8.. Once he has recruited a sub-agent, AMFAUNA=1 manages to keep i
an independent eye on the former's security. On more than one occasion

and that for the time being he is staying away from him.

ite ta kas Be a

_ 9. In general AMFAUNA-1 seems to trust in the efficiency of his
security precautions. On 25 February 1962 he reported that Identity
1 had been caught, but that he was in no danger because he had been

compartmented from her. °Thisycomp. etmentati is ,achieved by the use ~*}
of (five, cutouts: "AMA FAUNAS 3, ARPA AMBOA=1, and
A=5, who maintain contact for AMFAUNA-1 with most if not all of
his subeagents. Chart A, which shows AMFAUNA-1 in. direct contact with
AMFAUNAS 7: through 13, may be in error on this point. It would be
more in keeping with AMFAUNA-1's known modus operandi for him to have .
cutouts between himself and these sub-agents, ‘If there is a cutout or
cutouts here, their identity is not yet known. There may also be an

10. Except for AMFAUNAs# , all the above-mentioned cutouts are
women, Two of his support agents, including his mail drop, are also

|

best. of cover for his relations with them, It also clarifies the
otherwise puzzling picture of a legal resident of Cuba sleeping in a

possibility that the €~2 will pick him up for routine questioning.

‘11. The bulk Of AMFAUNA-1's communications come via S/W. His
méssages to JMWAVE are sent to accommodation addresses serviced by
AMPAN-2 and AMCUTLER-1, JMWAVE's,messages to him are addressed to
AMFAUNA-14. AMFAUNA-1 can also use(diplomatic couriers) for sending
documents and other material unsuitable for S/W. He has‘a personal
contact with two of the officers (of the Spanish Embassy\ yho either
bring it to the JMWAVE area and ‘mail it to AMCUTILER-1, or ‘carry it

eon Me aand a Vote ann fe fn sen e eee A fee aba Janna nl ee

\5-.

PAK Te tems.



--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

conmmuationce = |

=

; ara
-eccond via

meen Tho courier 8

of the {Spanis
way of (Argentine say) =

" " IGRATEM

AMPAUNA2 18 6

Embasay » aooyy SL the use of AHRIPE-1 and AMRAVEL

6

oo yoten can also work inthe other direction.’
| AMFAUNAs1 hagbeen suppiied with S/W materiale for his own use by way

ol by 4

18. A third commun aneionatbiannel’ tats jn the weekly tolophene

conversations (botweon) AMCUTLER-1

'. for pasein,

AHFAUNA]-1 is still at liberty.

‘and his wife

s —

AUNA=2$0/ It io useful’: 7

eignals already prearranged by S/W, and for confirming that

probably coze firat by this meangs

Finances:

“ nee

If he is ever arrested, the news will

_ 18, Expenses of the,operation ara $290 per month. The money is
given monthly to Identity-3 or Identity-4 in the JMWAVE area.
3, upgn receipt of the dollars, notifies identity-1 in Havana who in

- turn pays Cuban peses to AMFAUNA-1.
eedure with Identity-2.

by S/W.
Sub-agents:

i

woo

Identity-|

Identity-4 follows the same pro-
AMFAUNA-1 confirms receipt of this money

15. Following is a description of the sub-agents in the AMFAUNA
net, including AMCOG-2 and AMBOA-1 who, although they have their own
independent connections to JMWAVE, have to some extent joined forces.

‘ with AMFAUNA-1.

A Attachment

served asa

E, forwarded under separate cover, .

For the identities of AMFAUNAs 2 through 23, see

. °
a. ANFAUNA-2} AMFAUNAe1's sistersinslaw, she formesly

various enbassies) and now serves as his cutout to at leas
the foliowing: ,

0 Gi

(1) AMCOG-2: . She first appears in’AMFAUNA-1's
correspondence in his S/W message No. 14 dated
19 May 1961, where he mentions that she was his.
link to a radio station operated by the(Rescate) 27
organization. Nothing ever came of this proposed
communications channel, but’ AMCOG-2 remained in
contact with AMFAUNA=-1, helping him arrange asylum
for burned agents and passing some of his communica-
tions{ to diplomatic couriers AMFAUNA-1 reported 4
on 9 July 1961, in his S/W message No. 21, that
AHCOG-2 knew him only by his alias Qulio ROJO)O7In
his message No. 118, dated June 1962, he reported
that AMFAUNA>15 had accidentally blown his true
name to AMCOG=-2. For a further discussion of AMCOG-
and her relation to the security of AMFAUNA=1 see
paragraph 56 below.

-ol yore te: of
(2) auleAuNA-a4 She is the secretary of @NCOG-2}
with whom she has done clandestine work. She now

his contact to members of his net(in asylum in theg

t

&

25

serves AMFAUNA-1 as an accommodation addres and as

a source of information. Message No. 112 dated 18 .
April.1962 included the name of a Communist nurse |

who has allegedly come to the United States with

the mission of infiltrating a counter-revolutionary
group. AMfAUNA-14) Obtained. this information from a
doctor (in a Havana clinicS©? She also is AMFAUNA-1l's

link to~the Dutch diplomatic pouchyYzUY

(3) AMFAUNA-15;: She is a relative of AMPAUNA-1")
and.a friend oF AMCOG-2.° She is-also the wife of
AMPAUNA-17) 8hd a friend of AMFAUNA-16 who is now
imprisoned on the Isle of Pines) and sends her

ol.’

a
~~

|


--- Page 4 ---
= a ai 5 .

f rs een ae .
f° - CORTINVATION ; . . :
_ : BISPATCH . , . UFGA=4703 ~~
b. AMFAUNA=3: AMFAUNA-l'e first mention of her
is in his S7Wmesdage No. 127 dated 4 May 1962. She has
provided information on (military hospitala#‘and has a
trusted contact (Identity 7) Gn the G-2.),4She also was
AMFAUNA-1's cutout to Identity-12, who was a( Havana
contact) of the(guerriila leader Oswaldo RAMIREZ)24In
early June 1962 she waa approached by Identity-8 who
claimed to be the naw contact to the (RAMIREZ)organization. i
(See also paragraph 58 below.) On 15%March. 1962 AMFAUNA-3 .
was traced by ODIBEX who proposed to use her in their
Operation CASINO. A negative trace reply was given at that
time. Headquarters is requested to ascertain whether ODIBEX
has a valid prior claim on this agent.

° ”
c. ANFAUNA-4} He is a high-ranking Cuban Army officer
who has provide ‘AUNA-1 with documantary information which
ought to be of some value, although JMWAVE has not yet seen
it, it having gone to Headquarters via Madrid) through the *
channel described in paragraph 11 above\32He “also claims to tf
: be receiving information from Identity-9 and Identity-10.
| _ AMFAUNA-1 was introduced to AMFAUNA=4%) by AMCOG-2 who in turn
| was introduced to him by Identity-13.0l For a further
discussion of this matter, see paragraph 56 below.

_ d. AMBOA+1: The origin of AMFAUNA-l's contact with

this agent, who has also been recruited independently by
. JMWAVE, is uncertain. He first mentioned her in October 6

1961 as his cutout to Identity-14,(a Cubana Airlines pilot)
who had formerly been a contact of ‘AMCUSP-1 and who subsequent-
ly defected. AMFAUNA-1's last mention of her was on 15 .
November when he reported that she had given him a map show-
ing artillery installations on the south coast of Las Villas.
It is possible that AMFAUNA-1 has broken contact with her,
but since he has not reported having done so it is considered “a

_more likely that she remains hie cutout to(two Cubana Airlines?
pilote}who are known to be still reporting * ,

(1) AMFAUNA-18: He was recruited in March 1962,
and has provided AMFAUNA-1 with(passenger lists) 24
and the\location of artillery emplacements) which
he has (spotted from his aircraft). lt is rot tknown
how AMFAUNA~1 first met AMFAUNA-18, and it is
possible that AMFAUNA-1 meets directly with him.

| It is only surmised that AMBOA-1l, is his cutout to
| | him.

(2) AMFAUNA-19: He was recruited at the same
time as AMFAUNA-18. Althcugh AMFAUNA-1 did not
explicitly say so, it can be inferred that he and
AMFAUNA-18 are witting of each other's recruitment.

GARD _R

e. AMFAUNA-5: AMFAUNA-1 first reported her as an agent
in September -d@ She is the sister-in-law of AM AUNA-23, 4
former {naval officer) who had been an agent of AMFAUNA-1 as °
early as July 1961 but had been caught and imprisoned for try-
ing to leave Cuba illegally.2U4she has been the source of .
information on Cuban (airfields) and is the cutout to a group
of people. employed at{Rancho Boyeros Airport)24It is believed
-that the identities of all these people have not yet been
reported, but they seem to be effective. On 29 May 19621
AMFAUNA-1 reported the arrival of an undocumented Soviet ‘plane

3 at Rancho Boyeros,) and forwarded the passenger list which he
said one of his agents had obtained clandestinely. Following
are the persons with whom AMFAUNA-5 is known to be in contact.

UBE ¢

ane Ta

° a
(1) aM€AUNA-20) her husband. AMFAUNA-1 has written
that he has broken personal contact with this man,


--- Page 5 ---
14-00000

. oyna rE ne npn cine wera
cs BATION OF SCLARQIFICA Ora orasan, usin
napa SECRET <‘° °| UFGA-4703

° former €hier engineer of thed&

a) he was recruited by Havana
0, and has been corresponding with

‘

(2) AMPAN 12:
Of fica oF Kreport
Station in 19
JMWAVE by S/W.

(3) AMFAUNA-21: alchier inspector of mechanics?
for Cubana Airlines. He has stated hia willingness
to Gabotage air traffid, but his precise contribution
to AMFAUNA-1's operations’ is not known.

(4) AMFAUNA=221 A chief Gf electr-cal inatruments of
“ for Cubana Airiines’, Nothing more is known about this
v3 oman.

“ao

re)
(5) AMFAUNA-23: Brother-in-latu of (anrauna-s >

i f. AMFAUNA-6: A support agent. AMFAUNA-1 has written
Wort | «that she has no access to information of interest, but ia an
ri intelligent and brava female whom he uses for cover and to
secure overt information.

g- AMFAUNA-7: An ‘old friend of AMFAUNA-~1 and his
brother AM@UTLER-Tyo| He works closely with AMFAUNA~@ and@
formerly was AMFAUNA~l's cutout to CGhe Uruguayan Embassy D |

he. AMFAUNA-8:° An old friend of AMFAUNA-1 and nis 06
brother AM =Ijo| He has a contact in the (interior Ministry)
and works Closely with AMFAUNA-7. %

o& °

i. AMFAUNA-9: A former(sales manage for: aCcoffee firm)
he secures information of general interest from(coffee buyers
travelling throughout Cuba. . om

j. AMFAUNA-10:«0 A widow of a bank, employee, she has 4
contacts in(Santiago de Cuba) and in the (Cupan Navy and G-?.
She is also(related to the son of Fidel CASTRQ and has provided
information on (the sons whereabouts and indoctfination.
2!

k. AMFAUNA-i1: An employee of the(Hinistry of roveign®
Trade) and the wife of a Communist member of thef Central 96
Planning Board (JUCEPLAN)} she has reported political intelligence.
In March 1962 AMFAUNA-1 réported that she was under surveillance
and that he was therefore avoiding her. soe

?.

» |. 1. AMFAUNA-12: He obtains information from contacts
& within the(Cuban Petroleum tnstitute cice) Ja

;

: : ce) :

“ m. AMFAUNA~-13: AnCinsurance) company employee with
contacts in the Cuban Government, he has reported information
on G-2 activities in Cuba and the United States.

7 Background and Motivation: &
= TT o

41.16, AMFAUNA-1 is aGQ9-year-o1d)cuban male, born in Cuba of
Spanish parents. He has tried his hand at various kinds of work S
ne luding the Gmport business, journalism (he was once editor of@

fario de la Marina) and insurance) He has also ventured into politics,
faving Been a candidate (of the Autentico én in 1958) p ring the
panish Civil War he was a member of the (Falanje Espanolayva d during
World War II, until the entry of the United States, he was a agent24
'—~6fF ‘the German Intelligence Service.) The JMWAVE case officer who
trained AMFAUNA-1 in tradecraft in“March 1961 (see UFGA-1247 of 10
TApril 1961) observed that he already had a grounding in clandestine
hniques. The case officer also characterized AMFAUNA-l as "a
peasant, intelligent fellow" and "the most astute member of the team"

comprising himself, AMCUS@yl) and AMCUTLER-1 54
vey A ol”

!
i

EE RT U8 RET ATE EIN COATES STIG BAS th IEP AQ A STE ATED TO ERO

APBHAUHE £20  KEPROOUCTION



--- Page 6 ---
14-00000

GLAGSIPIGATION °° #

yp . “, _ . , &
f SECRET

- —— — : ST eT
CONTINUATION GF UFGA-470
| BISPATCH

o ;
children, all atill in Cubaf{as of ugcon 1961) However, it ia noted
that the two children hava different matronymics, that neither of them
is his wife's last name, and that all three dependents have different
addresses. It is ascumed that this is his third wife. Since AMFAUNA-1
has never mentioned her in any of his S/W correspondence, it is also
assumed that she has gone the way of her tyo predecessors.

i fo)
we 18, AMCUTLER-1 who was questioned on this point, said that his
f “Brother is living in(Guanabacoa) with his present wife, that he has been
‘ci cmarried only once beforej°and has only one child from the first marriage 4
is information ia not considered definitive, because the last point
ih directly contradicted by AMFAUNA-1's PRQ Part I which he wrote him-
if, but it is included here for what it aay be worth. CUTLER=1)9/
"added that his brother has no sexual relations with his sub-agents
except what ie conaidered normal and acceptable by Cuban standards.
re 19. The elements of AMFAUNA-~1's motivation, then, include an
adventurous spirit and a taste for clandestine work. Although "anti-
ommunism" may be an overworked expression, it w uldegeem te apply’ in
she case of AMFAUNA~1 ,,9i f his former membership lin t Falangé) and the
“(Garman Intelligence Service \can be taken as indicdators. Also included
should be the ioss of a(freight forwarding business)which started out
omisingly in 1959 but folded up after a yeaMof CASTRO's revolution-
y government. Finally, although these factors did not yet exist
“in January 1961 when he was recruited, AMFAUNA-1 is certainly affected
bw by the death of AMGUSP-1and the imprisonment @f his father)
1 it ° gf
te -Bontrol \ “

renee
3

20, %It is evident from his S/W messages that AMFAUNA-1 derives
great personal satisfaction from his work against the CASTRO regime.
His connection with KUBARK provides him with the means to do this work.
This is believed to be a strong element of control. There have heen
many opportunities to test this control, by ordering AMFAUNA-1 te do
something or to desist from doing something else, and the control is
believed to be effective.

Previous History of the Operation ~ January to May 1961:

21. AMFAUNA~1] was engaged in some form of clandestine work against
the CASTRO regime as early as(December 196304 As with so much else in
_L_this operation, detaiis are lacking, but it is known that he already
hed an understanding with Identity-29 whom he had known for twenty
ciccybars 6 In December 1960, Identity-29 introduced AMFAUNA-1 to Identity~
»°27,(an MAR coordinator from Matanzas) who had been introduced to,

dentity-29 by one of the members of her group, Identity-28,' ¢fdentity-
47,in turn brought in Identity-26,(@ fellow MAR coordinator.
y) r

mt 22. In January41961, AMEAUNA- lélcame legally to the United States
jAstogether with ANCUSP-}) and AMCUTLER-1)and looked up their old friend
AMJAG-4, who at that time was “heavily” engaged in work with the
resistance groups. AMJAG-4 introduced them to a JMWAVE case officer
who instructed them to return to Cuba, to form contacts with as many
resistance groups as possible, and to report their progress through
\MRUNG-1) who was JMWAVE's principal agent in the paramilitary field.
Also inmithe JMWAVE area at this time were Identity-19 and Identity-23
Whom they met and with whom they were later to work. |° o

ol oO .
0423, AMFAUNA-1, an€urL8r-9) and aMcusP-} returned toCuba in
nuary 1961\C_ They dispatched “Identity=-16 (to the Escambray,\ Identity-
fo Sancti’ Spiritual? Identity-18 to Trinidad),,and Identity-37 to ~
fanZanillo, Bayamo, and Santiago de Cuba.t0 An unidentified courier was
‘put into touch with the guerrilla leader Identity-15, and ANCUSP-1) 9}
~and ANCUTLERSI) went to Cienfuegos with Identity-19 to make contacts
‘with insurgéiit groups there. ue



--- Page 7 ---
cine LAT SIO ee = mane = RINNE NSIT ACE
CLABBIFICATION OSPATCH SFEE2ZOL AND MUKSER

SECRET ‘ UFGA=4703
>time, aa did ANRUNG-1) ©}

; of

ry, _25.9| To support the activities of AMFAUNA-1, ANCUTLER~1, and
NCUSP-D it was agreed that JMWAVE would deposit 81,000 monthly into
F loca

t 1 bank account of AMCUSP-) and the latter would provide the
“"adquivalant in Cuban pesos from hislown resources inaide Cuba.

=5) ol al os
a 26. AM€usP-} and AMCUTLER-J continued to busy themselves with
npteparations for supporting the April invasion. They contacted « f
entity-2r who, at their request, provided cover ag (travelling drug
salesmen\for Identity-19 and also for Identity--20 who was intended to
be a radio operator for Identity-23. -Although AMFAUNA-1 knew all
eae people, he was compartmented fron these, operations to some
tent, so that after the arrest of ArCusP-1) and the escape of
CUTLER-}) he had some difficulty in reestablishing contact with them,

ol °
27. ancurtes td) and AMFAUNAw1, working together, held naetings

ath Identity-33, a Cuban Army officer stacioned at the(San Antonio del” }
ns

es Banos \base, and discussed fee for aupporting the invagion.
/~AMFAUNA-l-also contacted Identity-35, the (commandin officer of thed
jan Julian base) and arranged fom its surrender, using Identity=3%,~
ead of the(OA in Pinar del RicPYas a cutout. He had another agent
‘on the base, Identity 36, and had already recruited AMFAUNA-11, an
—dmployee of the Ministry of Foreign Trade,o

: oO
26. Gn 18 Marcth 962) AMCUSP™1)and AMRUNG-}) were arrested by the

G-2 While Wolding a clandestine meeting. At first this was not
regarded as too serious a matter. The G-2 had broken into the meeting
only after having been alerted by the suspicious behavior of a woman 2
lockout, and it was believed that they had no real evidence. (CUTLER-})
ame to the JMWAVE area on (3 April 196}) and returnedlagain to Cuba on

0 Aprilstill optimistic that AMCUSP-l)Jand AMRUNG-J) would either be
réleased or could be helped to escape .°l However,,one, f the other of
prisoners apparentlyfconfessed and implicated AMCUSP-1) and AMRUNG-1) who
were executed en 20 Metly ‘With the wave of arrests accompanying the
April 17 invasion, AMeUTLeR- 9 took asylum in the Venezuelan Embassy and
AMFAUNA-1 went temporarilplinto hiding. ut

: 29. On 27 April 1961 AMFAUNA-1 resumed operations by sending
fdentities 24, 25, 26° and 27° to collect order of battle information

hn Matanzas. Identities 26 and 27 returned tu Havana to report.
‘dentity-25 remained in Matanzas, and I[dentity-24 was caught by the G-2.

30. In May 1961, Identity-30 informed AMFAUNA-1 that sohe kind of
conspiratorial activity was going on in the heme of AMCOG-2. He
~drranged to meet her through Identit,-30 whom he thereafter used aaa
cutout to her.

31. This phase of the AMFAUNA operation is diagrammed in Chart B.
e following people participating in this phase were separated from the
ration by known causes:
. . a. By arrest and execution:
' “ qi) ause-25 ot.
(2) AMBUNG-}) of
A NN
b. By arrest and detention:
(1) Identity-24
(2) Identity-28
c. By asylum or escape to the U.S.:

(1) aMCUTLER-1) Ol
(2) Identity-23

(PLN TOPE LAP IVET

ee TSS SERS aS

ad

1DUCTIO

Ohh REPRO

agate
:
= ahi

|


--- Page 8 ---
14-00000 : :

| SONTINUATION Ce cunanimearigy | ssanron erent aco neg
ml gisparen . uFcA-s703 ss

32. In the period beginning June 1961, AMFAUNA=1 firet began
‘gaking regular uee of AMFAUNA-2\ol He needed contact with his
with ANEAUNA lop were in asylum in various Western, embassies, and
°

with AMFPAUNA-Slopenly visiting her husband AMCUTLER- (he vas 8
-Patural choice for the job. With the departure of Identities 29

Gnd 30, AMFAUNA-1 began using AMFAUNA-2 as cutout to. AMCOG-2 who was
eful to him for her ability to obtaimlthe hel» of(diplomatic 2 4
uriera .) In August 1961 he used this channel ‘o senc out some order
se battlé information obtained by Idenvity-Z1. :

33. Identity-21 continued to hejp Identities 19 and 20.until they
k asylum intthe Argentine Embassy)0 He also “the ll as AMFAUNA-1'e
“eutout to Identity-50 Re was a close friend, ef the insurgent leadar06,06
waldo RAMIREZ.) For cutouts to Identity-21, AMFAUNA~1 first used i
@ntity-51 and~then AMFAUNA=8. AMFAUNA-8 t1lso0 served as cutout to

a entity-4%5§ about whom nothing more is known than his name o¢

ener, f

34. AMFAUNA-1 developed another contact to (swaido RAMLRED during
this period ingthe persgn of Identity-57, a(close relative of RAMIREZ. JOS
and a (former Yieutenant \in the Rebel Army. Identity~52 met AMFAUNA-1
and Idéntity-21 on 27 October 1961, and then remained in touch through
Identity-51. A few weeks later Identity-52 was arrested.

35. At some time during the period June to. November 1961, AMFAUNA~§
began collaborating with AMBOA~1. The origin of this collaboration is
not known, but it appears that the initiative was taken by AMBOA-1.
AMFAUNA-1 reported that she had revealed to him the fact that she has
a channel of $/W communication, to KUBARK, and that she had claimed to
be a friend of the widow of AMCUSP-1)?l AMFAUNA-1 asked JMWAVE to
confirm her bona fides, and this was done. AMBOA~Lethen began working

cy S 7 AMFAUNA~1's cutout to Identity-14, a(Cubana Airlines pilot} who in | §
" guen was receiving information from Idemtity 40, an employee Of Cubana)

% tity-40 was fired from her jo¢b

some time prior to November 1961, Iden
d held for interrogation by the G-2.

36. During the same period AMPAUNA-i addea the following new

a. AMPAUNA-23 (for descri;tion see paragraph 1565 above).

b. AMPAUNA-5 (for description see paragraph LSe above),
‘ .

One

\
c. Identity-41, a person who allegedly was collaborating z;
with several other clandestine g:oups. He had two sub-agents Ec
in the Ministry of Public Works\gldentities 42 and 43, No Gi
production has been attributable to these people. oS Bi
fe ls : e
d. Identity-46, a Gierk in the Ministry of Communications) j Et
who allegedly was able to obtain (the text of cables) between(“uba ly Pa
and Czechos ovakiay) Nothing ever came4of this contact. | a)
8 . £2:

e. Identity-47,(2 secretary to the Chief of the Revolution®
ary Armed Forces.\ AMFAUNA~1 obtained some order of battle
information from-her, apparently on an unwitting basis. In i h.
August 1961 he reported that he was dropping her because she |
was a strong Communist and had given him information which he s
considered of doubtful reliability.

f. Identity-48, ‘a foreman(on the Havana docks) who provided
some order of battle information.

A g- Identity-43,(Chier of Maritime Police in Cienfuegos? o&

“, Although his recruitment was reported, AMFAUNA~1 never mentioned :
/* “him again.


--- Page 9 ---
DISPATCH GYMBOL AMD IURRER

UFGA-4703

and AMFAUNA-1 hid him -in Havana until he wae able to get asylum for
El ice in(the Ecuadorian Embassy»

rm 38, This phase of the AMFAUNA operation is diagrammed in Chart C.
fhe following people participating in this phese were separated from
=| phe operation by known causes:

a. By arrest and detention:

(1) Identity AS ‘oubsaguently es ‘aped ind took asylum
in the @rgentina Embagsy))@

dS} . (2) Identity 20 (subsequently escaped and took aaylum
i in the @rgentine Embassy &

(2) Identity #0 (Cinterrogateo by Get, our the duration
of her detention is not known}, .

(u) Identity 52.
b, By asylum:
(1) Identity 72

(2) Identity 37.

Previous History of the Operation ~ December 1961 to April 1962:
i 39. ‘During the periodojfrom December 1961 to April 1962, AMFAUNA~1

i icontinued to use ANFAUNA-2)as a cutout to AMCOG-2. The latter was z4
Li jjgiven a lead in March 1962: from Identity-13, one of her Giplomatid con-
aci—itacts, to a disaffected Cuban Army officer, AMEAUNA Whol She turned
(5) this lead over to AMFAUNA-~1, and the latter held his first meeting
“with AM AUN) in AMPFAUNA-2's automobile. .
be)

iS “40. AMEAUNA~2 was also used as alegena te eutout to Identity-ll,
a woman with ecntacts(in the Cuban Navy)0GThe,other alternate sut-
w rrout was AMFAUNA-8. Identity-1l was arrested(in February 196944 Accord-
fidng to AMFAUNA-1‘s account of the incident in~his message No. 893 of
Wes 25 February 1962, Identity-11 had been meeting a member of Fidel®
2} CASTRO's bodyguard AMFAUNA-1 had warned her not to trust the man, but
= “jshe met him again ‘On the following day and was caught with him.
\ f<5 AMFAUNA~-1 commented that some of his other agents were not compartmente
15 from her, and he had ordered them to go into hiding. He did not
4G identify these other agents. Presumably they included A EAUNA? and
4)

AMFAUNA~8.
%

ul, AMFAUNA-3 was recruited during’ this périod and used as a
cutout. to Identity-1296 the (iavane representative)of the insurgent
= Leader(Oswalde RAMIRED. Acvording to an officiaL announcement by .the
Cuban Government, (RAMLR as Ji in action on (6 April) 1962. Other
sources have contra {ected this reportQand the matter still remains in
some doubt. However, according to information obtained by AMFAUNA-1,
Identity-12 was arrested in his home in Havana in late April. Fora
further discussion of the possible security implications of this
connection, see paragraph $9 below, :

42, Identity-51, who during the period sune’ te November 1961, had
been serving as a link to(the Ogwaldo RAMIREZ grou » now established a
contact with Identity-54, a res dent of (Cienfuegos who claimed to be a
disillusioned counter-revolutionary. -As a'¥cutout to Identity-54, she
used Identity-53: As far as the records, Show, no results were ever
—-.obtained from this connection. we, .
to . C643. Identity-14 defected during this period, as did Identity-57,
_1 7 (nother Cubana Airlines pilot whom AMFAUNA-1 had recruited and was

AAG AREAS

t
|

fms PS ROE A SR OT DA ECP ISIIO EE D SOER ICEN CORRIENTES SE ATT EEE ATI ELI EE YO AE ESA RONDE RUA NL TR TR

SN an a EN TS,



--- Page 10 ---
. Security Analysis:

. a ae _ -_ ; . “ x
CONTINUATION OF CLAGGIFICAT:ON,  DGQSAYCN SYRESOL ARD NURAOER 4
GISPATCH

SECRET UFGA=4703 .

paragraph 1Se above, FAUNA-1 seems to have an excellent network
within Cuban @viation but how it works remains a matter forcgonjecture.
It ie supposed that AMBOA-1 is handling the two(new pilots) o .

: 44, AMFPAUNA-21 and AMFAUNA=22, both «mployees at (Rancho Boyeroat
Airport, firet made their appearance durin; this period, and AMPAN-12
(who haé and continues to use his own S/W vommunications to JMWAVE)
found his way into the AMFAUNA operation. All three are known to
AMFAUNA-5, and it is believed that sh. is nrobably the cutout to them,

4&5, Identity-55 and Identity-56 were mentioned briefly as active
during the period from December 1961 to Ap:i1 1962. The former had
been a contact of ANRUNG-)pl and seeme to have gone into hiding; in any
case, nothing more has beén reported on him. The latter was an agent
of AMFAUNA-1 in (Santiago de Cubajpin January 1962 he was in niding and
awaiting a chancé to go into asylum.

46. AMPAUNA-11 remained active durin; this period, and AMFAUNA-9,
10, and 12 ware added to the operation. Four descriptions of there
agents, see paragraph 15 above.

uy. This phase of ‘the -AMFAUNA operation is diagrammed in. Chart
D. The following people participating in this phase were separated
from the operation by known causes: .

a. By arrest and detention:

(1) Identity-11 i
(2) Identity-1L2. , :
b. By asylum or defection: !
(1) Identity-14 ° :
(2) Identity-55
(3) Identity-56 i

(4) Identity-57.
Production:

48. JMWAVE records do not show thé tocal number of AMFAUNA
reports disseminated since January 1561. The figure is at least fifty,
and is believed to be nearer cne hunired, if the present frequency. of
dissemination can be a criterion. I: content they have leaned ,
heavily toward the activities of insurgent groups, militia movemants,
location of artillery, and aviation matters. There has been a more
recent tendency toward political and economic information, which is
being encouraged by JMWAVE, Evaluations of his production are lacking.

49, The possibility that AMFAUNA-1 is a double agent is consider-
ed remote. His successful LCFLUTTER, the fact (or what is believed to
be the fact) that his close friend and fellow agent cusP>i) was
executed, and AMFAUNA-l's owi character and background, alljargue
against the proposition that he was originally dispatched by the G-2.
However, it must be admitted that the LCFLUTTER carilbe beaten.; Also
that there is no proof, other. than the fact that AMCU poate is
in the JMWAVE area and behaving like a widow, that ANCUSP-1)was really
executed. There is documentary evidence plin the formolof a letter
written by a fellow prisoner to AMCUSP-1's) widow, that he was held
in prison in March and April 1961. However, the person who identified
and<=buried the body was AMFAUNA-l's father, who was subsqquently 5)

4 : renee 6 Dinas

aA Ae

aPrnLttaste Pastas t

ce en CRE RR NET OH RS nae LAS Ae ep pm

STIONS,

pein

GARD:REPRODU

:
Ps

se



--- Page 11 ---
14-00000

— rots econ gc
CLAGBIMCA? ON

CONTINUATION OF a
DISPATCH SECRE?
50. Similarly, all that is known about AMFAUNA-1's background
comes from AMFAUNA-1's own statemants embodied in his PRQ Part I, No.
confirmation of this information has aver been obtained. From this
point of view there is no guarantee that AMFAUNA-1 ie what he claims
to be. For all the proof to the contrary available to JMWAVE, he
could as easily have been al Spanish) Communist as a member of the
(Spanish FalangeS 24 q

; $1. These points are listed for the sake of ccmpletengga, but ©
littl@limportance is attached to them. Tht known fact that (QUANTUM=82
and (QUANTUM-52 fonsider AMFAUNA-1 reliable suggests that he at least
was not a(Spanish)Communist. And an unusually extensive independent
view haa'!been obtained. of AMFAUNA-1's operations through the reports
and debriefings of eight of his egents who have either escaped to or
are in communication with the United States. The defection

fl gf we
I: Identity-14, and the escape and debriefing» of Identity-19, Faontity-23,

Identity-26, and Identity-29, have all cor.tirmed parte of AMFAUNA=1'8

|, story. Finally, AMCOG-3 has reported by $,/W that AMCOG-2 is in contact

~

with AMFAUNA-1, and AMFAUNA-2's telephone conversations with AMCUTLER-1}
provide a continuing check on the safety ¢ud whereabouts of AMFAUNA~1.9/

52. For the same reasons, the possibility is heavily discounted
that AMFAUNA-1 has been caught and doubled by the G-2 since his arrival
in Cuba, Additional indications that all is still well are the fact
that he never omits the safety signal that was given him for use in his
S/W, that his operational activities are consistent with his character
and background, and that the reporting of his agents is consistent with
thejr access to information.

53. Whether AMFAUNA-1 is now in danger of being detected, and
whether the G-2 could double him if they do catch him, are two
questions remaining to be considered. Taking the second question first,
it is believed that the chances of the G-2 running a successful CI
operation against KUBARK through AMFAUNA-1 are extremely slim. To be
sure, the G-2 has certain weapons that¢they could use against AMPAUNA-1. |
His father is already lin prison, serving a fifteen-year sentence, and
his mother and two children(are atill in Cuba ac potential hostages.)
It is also conceivable that the G-2? could use AMFAUNA-1's own interest
in paramilitary operations as a lever by persuading him that KUBARK,
by neglecting to support the insurgent leader Oswaldo RAMIREZ, was
responsible for the latter's death and has demonstrated its indifference
to the fate of the Cuban people. This would all take time, however,
because AMFAUNA-1's reaction to arrest, at Least initially, would of,
probably be an attempt tojgmulate his two heroes, AMCUSP-) and AMRUNG-D.
In the time that it woul@/take the G-2 to break dowm\this resistance,
At UTLER-1) would almosttéertainly have learned, either through his
phone‘leonversations with AMFAUNA-2 0: ‘by the interruption of the same,
«hat something is wrong with AMFAUNA-1. “

: ' $4, The risks that AMFAUNA-1 is now running are believed to be
considerable. for one thing, at least ten persons with varying degrees
of knowledge of his clandeetine operations, have been held temporarily
or permanently by the G-Z, which is believed to be increasing in
competence as a security force. For another, AMFAUNA-1 takes unnecessar
chances, as by interrogating a new and untested agent (AMFAUNA-4) in

the personal automobile of his sister-in-law, or by personally trying

to penetrate a restricted area. And for a third, he has some contacts
which can be dangerous. to him.

55. AMCOG-2 knows too much about AMFAUNA-1 for the latter's good.
It is believed that AMFAUNA-1 himself is aware that this is a potential-
ly serious security weakness, because he ‘took the trouble to report it
(see paragraph 15al above). TMe AMCOG operation is itself a fairly
complex one, and will be analyzed in a separate dispatch. The, aspects
of it which, bear,on the AMFAUNA operation are that AMCOG-2 and(her Q c
brother aMéoc-3 dre (close relatives of a very prominent anti-Communistod
Cuban politician, and that they are widely known, both in Cuba and in

ce Ne etter ASE SANRIO EE NG! TP

Lemar

LOARD me

PRODUOTIONS



--- Page 12 ---
14-00000

HO,

|b

a ee ~ . ay ety . be “Non!
— : . 2 See ern
UFGA~4703

Ce et

CONTINUATION OF |

BISPATCH

prosecution for actspagainst it, is a matter for wonder. It has been
rumorad that (the old’politician\has a blackmail hold over Fidel CASTRO
by virtue of ‘nie possession of very damaging information about CASTRO.
There may be some substance to this rumor. As a young student ett
is believed to have committed criminal acts, and the (old politician
would have been in the best possible position at the time to obtain
proof of them. This might well explain wry the family enjove immunity
today.

56. It would seem, though, that an aler* and competent security
service, which the G-2 shows signs of becominy, if it 18 enjoined from
arresting and prosecuting an espionage suspect, would at least try to
control and moniter his operations by penctrating them. It is there-
fore a cause for speculation that, in February 1962, an important
officer of the Cuban Army CAHEAUNA- 44 allegedly desirous of defecting,
was introduced by Identity-13 to AMCOG-2, and a matter for Jeep concern
that AMCOG-2 passed the lead along to AMFAUNA-1 who accepted it with-
out any prior checking and actually held his first meeting with the
would-be defector in an automobile tracea"le to AMFAUNA-2. Since
then, it has been observed that reports avd sub-sources offared by
AMFAUNA-4 are absorbing an increasing amount of AMFAUNA-1's time. The
military manuals andjcocuments turned over by AMFAUNA-4, and sent ‘to
Headquarters via the (QUANTUNs and the (adrid, Station have not yet been
geen by JMWAVE, so it is not ‘yet known whether AMFAUNA-4's production
can be given a sufficiently high evaluation to allay the doubts raised
by the manner of his recruitment. Headquarters is asked to advise on
this as soon as pogsible, and to provide traces on AMFAUNA-4, Lot

57. The other potentially dangerous contacts are, as might be
expected, in the field of para-military activities. In November 1961 «,
AMFAUNA-1 was in touch with Identity-52, a(hephew of Oswaldo RAMIREZ,
through Identity-$1, a resident of (Cienfuegos to Identity-52 was
arrested) late in the year 24 AMFAUNA=1 then developed another contact
to the(Gswaldo RAMIREZ group) through Identity-12, QRAMIREZ's Havana )
representative, whose cutout to AMFAUNA-1. was AMFAUNA-=2, a woman from
Sancti Spiritus)now resident in Havana, Identity-12 was arrested in

je@pr presumably as an aftermath of the 16 April battle in which

AMIREZ was reportedly killec.

58. in late May or early June 1967?, Identity~8, a person from
Sancti, Spiritus known to AMFAUNA-3, called om her in the company of
a certain Ricardo *r2qurERDe) o claimed tcfpave had a meeting on 28
May near Tceinidad with one Comandante Fide: *HERNANDEZ Perez who gave
TZQUIERDO) a letter for delivery to Identity, 32. Unable to find

26( 2 uteR50)approacheu

dentity*i2 because of the latter's arrest
identity-8 who introduced him to AMFAUNA-3 t
letter. The letter reads as follows;

Q
whom he handed over the

“Dear Brother-in-Arms:

®Y preet you and officially report to you, as our
representative to the Military Junta of the FND, the sad
news of the death of our commander-~in-chief, Oswaldo
RAMIREZ, cn 16 April last at 9 a.m, He fell in bat¢le
together with other brothers. The certificate to this
effect, containing the testimony of Captain BORGE, chief
of the personal guard, and of other members of his escort,
is in my possession, and { will hand it over to you or to
anyone designated by the Military Junta of the FND.

"The disorganization caused by the above-mentioned
events prevented our reporting this news to you right away,
and only now have we been able to make contact with the

. 4 bearer, a man who has been working for some time as messenger -

;and enjoying the complete confidenge of Oswaldo RAMIREZ and
| of ourselves in particular,

AREOLA PY TOF ST

et

wen ss er ESTE ETS BE ESD EE MSS EY EI ANE TERE SEE STH SE AIS OTT

”

APERTURE GARD REP ODYSTIONS)


--- Page 13 ---
1 L . .

Conn UFGA-4703

BISPALEN
who will ecoupy the position of supreme commander of our’ . i

liberation ammy. Whether it be one. supreme ehief or a
joint command must be decided by you. : ;

* “Although the National Liberation Army has continued
- working and acting according to the orms laid down by
you and by our lata chief, you will underetand the urgency
of this interview which the bearer 711 tell you how to
arrange. In anticipation of your denisions I sign myself Ww
respectfully, ob

(cart. Julio E. ecaRRETERO® )

59, As mentioned in paragraph 15b shove, ODIBEX has some kind of
interest in AMFAUNA-3, and it may be that their files contain
C) gible anawers to some of the questions raised by this develop-
ment. For instance:

a. Why did the RAMIREZ organization not know ox the ’
arrest of Identity-12, one of its own members, which nad
occurred at least a month previously?

about Identity-12, how did they know about AMFAUNA-3, and

|
b. If the RAMIREZ organization was so poorly informed |
why did they think she would be the appropriate person to “

writer of the letter, and the fact that all meetings must
have been arranged and held under clan stine conditions,
how to account for the fact that in the maximum of six
days between 28 May and 3 June when AMFAUNA-1 reported
the developments by S/W, something like the following
sequence of events must,have taken place:

cl :
QQ) f2qurERDd) meets(HERNANDE®near Trinidad
in Las Villas Province, and receives the letter.

ol .
(2) Gzqurerbo}traveis to Havana and tries
to locate Identity-I2.

(3) (taqui8kpo) is informed that Identity-12
has been arrested.

(4) (xqurifo) rearne tc Las Villas, reports
that the letter cannot be delivered to Identity-12,
and is told that AMFAUNA-3 should be given the letter.

|
° |
(5) TZQUIERDO) goes to Sancti Spiritus and © i
locates Ideftity-8 who is a personal friend of :
AMFAUNA-3 and can introduce him to her, and who
providentially is able to vouch for the authenticity
of (C RETERO's) signature on the letter. -

ra)
(6) (t2qQUIERDO) and Identity-8 go to Havana and
give the letter to AMFAUNA-3.

Future Plans

60. It is difficult if not impossible to give an operation of
this complexity the support and direction it needs, when the only
communication with theMrincipal agent is by secret writing. There
is never@tenough room in an S/W message for both the positive intelligen
reporting and the supporting operational details, and it is the latter
that suffer. S/W communication algo inevitably involves a time lag .
which, in the case of this operation, has sometimes run as high as
dhaas wake hacanae nf the freaient abaences from town of AMCUTLER-1

give the letter to?
. ce. Given the disorganization complained of by the



--- Page 14 ---
6i.

AMGLEN-9
who will
planned.

62.
AHCO0G-2,

beach.

63.

CONTINUATION CF _ Susanincanon
BigParcn SECRET
Planned to find another accoamodat
AMPAUNA-1's use which can be expected to function without the delays
that have been experienced recently. Because of the importance and
urgency of some of AMFAUNA-1'3s intelligence veports, consideration

ia also being given to assigning a rad

Escambray
680 deeply involved with him that, if he war not a bona fide 4efector,
the damage has already been done. Neverth.less, AMFAUNA-1 will be
warned of the potentialities of this situa.ton so that he ca. be

prepared

military requirements will be sent to AMFAI'NA-1 for AMFAUNA-4 to

help in establishing his value as a source. Also for the improvement
of the security of the operation, AMFAUNA-1 will be told to stop taking
porsonal and unnecessary risks such as his penetration of a restricted

economic requirements will te sent to him. AMFAUNA~1 is very
responsive to requirements, and has already developed sources and
informants in the political and economic areas in response to
instructions from JMWAVE, It is believed that an increased output
of higher-priority intelligence can be expected from this operation.

bo 8, a tye ot . ‘wd

UFGA=4703

As a firet step toward eposding up communications, it is
on address in the JMWAVE area for

© oparator to him, probably
who is awaiting only his signal plan to become activa and
probably not be needed in the AMWPEN net as originally

AMFAUNA-1 will be instructed to break off contact with
and to cease interesting himself in the affairs of the
As for AMFAUNA-4, it is feared that AMFAUNA-1 is already

to go into hiding if it should devalop badly. Specafic

For the continued improvement of production, political and

END OF DISPATCH

Oo:


--- Page 15 ---
a, i ene Sues pa"
193 Chambas, Cpmaguey. Cuba

| Resides 54 7 rro, davana, Cuba_
* Ofeliak@PEREZ Arce “Ekif
6 Eeperanza Y8MANRESA Duarte
ppe/Borm 27 Fabruary_ 1939
ResidesfAL$$ Encarnacion St., Apt-_1) 5:

%

7, Raul’ *GRANADOS

“a, Conrado WSALMC del Castillo aka Nene”
gu Pepe EMBAS

' former sales manage vr for Regil Coffee
10. Yolandal# PRADA Gutierrez

oy or eptember 1935, Santiago Cuba
Residag wlst St.; Apt, 4. Alturas del Vedado, Havana, Cuba

A

hl.) roraidaP@MARTINEZ Cabal

orn 1938, Havana, Cuba
Reside wow, Casino Deportivo, Havana, Cuba
42. indino "BCARRERA Sanchez
1925
Santos Suarez, Havana, Cuba
13.

14.) Beatriz Yerez a Betty". SEALE
A Nenides Calle @ #12

ety a vedados Havana
1S, Elvira tarosca SPaALE

16. Mi guel orroun

17. da ricio AMARTINEZ Lipez aka Gustavo"
de® Jorn 4 September 1935 . ‘

18. Camilo RTINEZ Bazuero aka aM Anselmo"
DCE 26 f orn] 28 April 1928, Havaga

19, Jorge RTINEZ Cabo aka Nbaversor %

poes Dorn 13.6 ARE *Z2 1939 :
Akesides $ 10th h St., Apt. 7, Vedado, Havané _

20 Franclece

YPEREZ Arce.

21, Jesus Braz wor Awe
224 Jose Antonio ¥oraz . oe ees
23. ( capt.) Manuel Mperez arce

lo AbvIREE CHO Pecles
ve Jat oa SAAN WE oh
en

nat \ rach LY day 32.

sw as 6 Apr t, aa
a bey (a = He dere

f
f



--- Page 16 ---
¢ ‘ A 7 * Separate Cover

i > Cr CUe Attachment E to UFGA-4703
Tact Sub. fe ehaetd ) \to Chief, TFW
Can \- : ;

2. Harie mS Carmen’ TRUEBA 99 ig Campa
ws 1928 TNAHACea. UA VADA

- we

- a | a Agudin aka So

Dre) wary 193) Chambas, Camaaueys Cuba
Resides A364 Cherruca St.. Cerro, Havana, Cuba

8. lofeliel*perez Arce S€iiF

6 { Eaperanza MANRESA Duarte
beg/bOrmM 27 February 1933
[Reeides4is§ Pncarnacio! Ton Stay Apts i, 3
y 7, (Rau **GRANADOS

a. |conrado eS ALMO gal Castillo aka "Nene®

9. "Pape teEMBAS

_Cermer eat sales manager fol

10.

Cuba
ag del Vedado, Havana, Cuba

Cuba

_ Havana ,
“WrCasino Depertivo, Havana, Cuba

_Santos Suarez, Havana, Cuba

13. jJose Diego##TATO Rey aka “Yuanito"
DPS {bor 1923, Havana, Cuba
f f
14. Beatriz SpEREZ a *Betty” SEALE ‘

Havane
15. | Elvira erosca Sear Sex: Fr

fp 16. Miguel tortouL ,
17. |  iaurtcio MuanriNez Loves aka freustavo"

' ; 2o® jborn 4 September 1933 =

18. Le Camilo VeuartINeZ Bazuero aka Anselmo"

?


--- Page 17 ---
14-00000 : ,
; ; Identity 2 Fatheg OF Derta onncuwnny . Le om: :
I

Identity 3 | Ramon AVIN AQOA Ea FRAG
tdentity 4 | sera ManreDRo si HE Och 88s, Anke 2084 ent

Identity § Frank

2 (pdn[y bor 2010. Havana)
Akosides 742 SW 1st AVe., Miamt, Fla. ;

©

Bye
Identity 6 | MargaFita “ga WERE torn 7 December 1908, Havana eo
h Roakde ava Ary Coral Gables, Fla, (rae dana

Identity 7
Ruben MBEZAZ ASaneti Spinitoi, Cuba

ae
Tomas YeqnorssiS femptoyes ot Miniatr y of _Edveatsn, Havana |

Identity §
Identity 9
{ Lt.) Rolando P. *pOBOUE vidaud (born| 30 September 1929,

“or riente, Cuba}
Maria Luisa ‘nen weatre (born[ 21 Jone 1931, Sahia
Honda, Pinar Gel Rio Cuve Resides rth Ave., Apt. 8,
‘Vadado, Havana, Cuba.” — ; a
Luis ‘Mgoparaurz Rodrigue aka andvas *RFUENTE

\
{Dr ) Tomas Mquesana, iiber i ian Consul, Havana.
Electo WREYES da Leon (be ae. Lu May_ igh. Sant
Former Flight Captain of Cubana f@iriines who
~Waseau, March LOZ.” wes

{ Comandante) Evelie Mpuous a

Idantity it

Identity 22

i o

Identity 12
Identity 43
Identity 14 Ey

ote

Identity 15
Identity li Sergica MIL LAW

Antonie io Aonncas

Identity 17

identity 18 avalio PEREZ

. %
Tdenticty 19 Migpel Serwrox Alfomnes

identity 20] £ frsyREYeES tee REE

Identity 23

1
a
S

Idantity ¥4

identicy es

LGentity
identity 4b
Jeferntaiv

identi cy

“pancho” VILLA
i ”



--- Page 18 ---
14-00000

oc SB CPEB Ys
en ae : a DL 7 os 7 . ,

Page of Separate Cover
Attachment F to UFGA~47.03
. to Chief, TFW

Elea dé Xeornoso Sexe
Luia da armas tpormlil July igie)

Set ee
hos ster-in-law of luis de £RMAS), restdac
Calle 2 een Miramar» Havana ea. ,

| Capt » Oroar “Gr Del.ade

Identity 36
Identity 91

Identity 42

Idantiry 23

Identity 3¢ | taui Pagers

roe

identity 3°

yUapt. Reger PRE}

Tdentivy 2:

identity 4.

Tjentity i,

identi t

idenmtiuy

ident
tdeniity
fdenwive
ldentaiiy
[danti

iden

Tdentity
sTdentity

moiiy

ae
.Ce8n


