
--- Page 1 ---
Thioa~10088-10070 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

tae

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994 -

coVGaiURL HEMEN 2S

. ac ATi)
aera: on ion CSI NO. JO-5

CLANDESTINE SER ee SECURITY
INSTRUCTION NO. 1 A) Revised 17 July 1958

re)

f
COVERT arenoh AND RELATED MATTERS ©” ””

Sane eae gr ret

Reference: CSI-F No. 10-8, 17 July 1958
Rescission: CSI No. 10-5, 31 January 1955
, CONTENTS
Page Page
. PURPOSE .......... eee wees 1 EMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS .
GENERAL. ww eee ee eee eee eee Ll OF FOREIGN SERVICES.....5
INVESTIGATIONS. ........... 2 NOTIFICATION OF TERMINA-
OPERATIONAL APPROVALS..... 2 TION OR DISCONTINUANCE
COVERT SECURITY APPROVALS - © OF COVERT SECURITY AP- - .
AND PROPRIETARY © "|, PROVALS OR PROPRIETARY
APPROVALS, ........-+-++5 93° APPROVALS. 3.0... 005)
COVERT SECURITY APPROVALS : SPECIAL § R
y ‘ o

FOR LIAISON WITH UNITED - UBLE” ae .
TCIALS . arap (TRerecrioN OM
SERVANTS OF AGEN © { ae MENT IN’ PLACE
EMPLOYEES......| Las\d rn .

STATES OFFICIALS .
Lee)
‘1. PURPOSE \ o a wr
puede
This instruction describes c

Ay

: tidts of headquarters components with
regard to covert approvals and related matters which are the subject of
CSI-F No. 10-5.

2. GENERAL

a. The Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff, is delegated authority to act for the
Deputy Director (Plans) in the exercise of a!l functions which are the lat-
ter’s responsibility with regard to the granting of Operational Approvals
and Provisional Operational Approvals, ele

b.. Tha Director of Security has designated the Deputy Director for Investiga-
ions and Operational Support, Office of Security, to represent him in dis-
charging the functions which are reserved to him with regard to the granting
.. of Covert Security Approvals, Provisional Covert Security Approvals, .
Proprietary Approvals, and Provisional Proprietary A, prevais. _

c. it is the basic intent of both components ‘that sensitive operational data
_snall remain within the custody and xnowledge of the Clandestine Services,
and that sensitive security investigative data shall remain in'the custody
and knowledge of the Office of Sécurity:: ‘recognized, however, that
such data may be necessary for proper performance by either component
end, consequently, where necessary, it shall be made available or shall be.
discussed to the extent necessary.

ageneTton



--- Page 2 ---
14-00000

c

CSI NO. 10-5 —

CLANDESTINE SERVICES as) SECURITY
INSTRUCTION NO. 10-5 We salyy PRersed 17 July 1958

3. INVESTIGATIONS \ yr

The function of performing all investigations in the United States in connec-
tion with approval matters, except for the check of certain Agency records,
is reserved to the Office of Security: 74 airy .

4, OPERATIONAL APPROVALS . : . i

ghee”

a: The assembly - -and analysis. ot ‘all file material (including the files of the . 2) {
Recorées Integration Division) in the Clandestine Services will be accom- . . ww
plished by professional personnel of the interested operating divisions i
under the iachnical supervision of the Counter Intelligence Staif and sub-
ject to spot check by the Counter Intelligence Staff. Certification will be : : : i
made in each case by a responsible official of the requesting division that — : F i
the material furnished is complete and accurate. 2)

.b. The requesting division will assemble any biographical data; information
‘of investigative or security significance (such as additional names the
subject may have used); information relating to-character, reputation, ...
politics, or other activities, favorable and tt information or.
comments; background information: PRQ at quivalent (in du="

. plicate); and freld traces. Any. informa nished by the. _
--' . .Bubject concerning himself (s ce a ory statement, records’
G)

of activities or emplo tions, etc.} will Lee
rmatio fina produced--includ~ _

be furnished verbat:
ing that resulting fro cal interrogations, personal observation,
field investigations, e -.--Will be fornish ed to the Counter Intelligence

Sta& for necessary trait acl: to nee ‘Ofliée of Security. It is alsonec- _ . i
if

essary to forward PRQ the’Counter Intelligence Staff before
‘an Operational Apprewnt will issued, The Counter Intelligence Staif . H
will not forward PRQ Part I to the Office of Security. In rare, compli- H
cated, or sensitive cases the Office of Security, in coordination with the
Counter Intelligence Staff, may wish actually to review the material of oe
the Records Integration Division. A brief practical statement of the scope, Sf
nature, and geographical area of the proposed usage of the subject will “ oe :
be furnished to the Office of Security along with the other data.

of
et

‘

. The requester should also furnish to the Counter Intelligence Staff for ;
transmission to the Office of Security any suggestions regarding the in-
vestigation to be conducted and any particular points to be emphasized in
the investigation, such as special skills, abilities, and weaxnesses of the
subject. The requester should also indicate what would be the most) |...
plausible type of cover (i. e., general Government or commercial) to be
employed in-the conduct of the investigation and whether the subjecthas
been briefed as to the fact of a pending investigation and, ifnot, why this ~
is not feasible. , .

ar. oo Following appropriate investigation and analysis 6t:a'case;- the Ottics of
Security will forward {ts recommendation to the Counter Intelligence
Staff, with the investigative data enclosed. Upon receipt of this material



--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

CSI NO. 10-5

CLANDESTINE SERVICES en SECURITY

INSTRUCTION NO. 10-5 oar _ Revised 17 July 1958
oe _

the Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff, or his designee, will, if the Office of
Security does not recommend against the use of the individual, determine
whether an Operational Approval should be granted and will notify the Of-
fice of Security of its decision. However, in the event the Office of Secu-
rity recommends against the use of an individual and the Clandestine
Services still desires, on a-calculated risk basis, to use the dndividual, |
. the Counter Intelligence Staff will inform the Office of Security of this’
fie . fact, .In this event, the Counter Intelligence Staff and the Security Support
ae : so. . . Division will endeavor to arrive at an agreed pesition and, to this end, .
the former will hold the granting of the Operational Approval in abeyance
until five days have elapSed after-the Office of Security has been advised
of this Intention, The Counter een Ss “ UN the Office of

son debiara hhh: skeradln>ens Diaeaniemeneniareehbehimaeee

IEE

7

= . Security whenever it has:

'
SRE PATE UIT Pa

XQ .- (1) Granted an Operatig oe sa perational Approval,

(2) Cancelled an Opera ve

e. Ih Operational Approval asd ‘Qitige ‘of Security will forward investi-
gative reports, name check r Se to the Counter Intelligence Staff.

. In extremely sensitive cases, Newevers particularly those in which the -  .
ts security or good of the Agency as a whole is involved, the Office of Secu-
. : _” “rity will not be obliged to furnish all investigative material. In such cases
hin, we ce the Office of Security will inform the Couhter Intelligence Staff that such

fs material has been withheld and will, upon request, discuss the matter with
Soe : "the Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff, or other appropriate official of the —
eo, Clandestine Services.

: {. A Provisional Operational Approval may also be requested where clrcum- |

stances warrant. A search of the indices of the Agency, including those
ns of the Office of Security, is a minimum requirement for issuance of a Pro-
ye visional Operational Approval.

g. Whenever interest in an individual under consideration for elther an Oper-
ational Approval or a Provisional Operational Approval {s terminated for
any reason, the requester, in order to prevent needless processing, will

a notify the Counter Intelligence Staff promptly so that the latter may in turo

pe advise the Office of Security.

8. COVERT SECURITY APPROVALS AND PROPRIETARY APPROVALS

a, All background material will be assembled by ihe interested divisions and
will include any biogrephic data; Information of an investigative or secu- ~~
rity significance; tnformation-relating to character, reputation, poiliics,

: . 7 mors past employment, residences, and other activitles; favorable and unfavor=
yee moe “" able information; PRQ Part I or its equivaieni (in ‘duplicate); and field

: traces, This material is forwarded direcily to the Office of Security !n
its original form. (Traces need not be obtained from the Records Late-
gration Division; see paragraph.5. , below.) A brief practical statement.
of the’ scope, nature, and geograp al area of use of the subject will also

ay :
C a ha vette

\y

HS NRE hare HEE ge gt ee ce ney a .



--- Page 4 ---
( (
. : Wt Vor : ey
qr» ee SHEHO. 0
CLANDESTINE SERVICES \W. . * SECURITY
. Se

INSTRUCTION NO. 10-5 , Ww” . Revised 17 July 1958

be furnished to the Office of Security. The requester should also furnish

} conducted and any particular points to be emphasized in the investigation,

: such as, special skills, abilities, and weaknesses of the subject, The re-
quester should also indicate what would be the most plausible type-of cover
(i. e., Government or commercial) to be employed in the conduct of the

: investigation and whether the subject has been briefed as to the fact of a

. on Pending ‘nv getigation and, # not, why this is not feasible,

b. In Covert Security Approval or Proprietary Approval cages, the files of the’

J Records Integration Division will be searched by representatives of the
Office of Security. All files of the Records Integration Division, except
those portions containing specific sensitive operational data, will be made
available to the representatives of the Office of Security. In those in-
stances where a document of interest contains sensitive operational data,
designated professional personnel within the operating division will re-
view that portion of the information and furnigh therefrom to the repre-
. : sentatives of the Office of Security all information of the nature described
nA —_ in'’paragraph 5.a., above, The Office of Security will conduct appropriate .
nn investigation in each case and will issue or deny Covert Security Approvala
: ve and Proprietary Approvals, and Provisional ‘Covert Security Approvals and
Provisional Proprietary Approvals, oe

me ne Approval cases or Proprietary Appr wills

(1) Make available to the AIG: ecugence Staif any » ificant infor-
mation in cases wher Ng Security Approval ¢ roprietary Ap-
provals are granted, am ye

. ; WA\Ayd
(2) Immediately call to the aT! RAW ‘ounter Intelligence Staff any
new evidence in Covert Securi: Approval or Proprietary Approval
cases that reflects the subject’s connection with a foreign government,

the Communist Party, or any front organization of the Communist
Party. :

d. Where the Office of Security issues or denies a Covert Security Approval
or a Proprietary Approval, formal notification Will be directed to the re-
quester, In the case of disapproval one copy of the security disapproval
will be forwarded to the Counter Intelligence Staff, Where a Covert Se-
curity Approval or Proprietary Approval is denied and the Clandestine
Services stilt desires to use the subject on a calculated risk basis, the Of-

. e< WM
"re. The Office of Security will retain the mee yy Covert Security :

flee of Security will, upon request, furnisa to the Counter Inteliigence Staff a aa

.. Summary of the investigative data, Thereafter, the Counter Intelligence
Staff, the requester, and the Security Supoort Division will attempt to reach
an agreed position. : .

_ e@..A Covert Security Approval or a Proprietary Approval may be preceded
. by a Provisional Covert Security Approval or a Provisional Proprietary
Approval,

RT REN | | CAMEL ae AIRE! SANRE ONE an h astams oeourbne RAM aie \

PT a ilaayind

a

NE RS ta ete i a : nr Td

o

rere

iS)

}
a

|
|

em EN tt te ERE TEI



--- Page 5 ---
14-00000.

‘

CSI NO, 10-5

Ne ce
CLANDESTINE SERVICES (@\\S ¢ SECURITY
INSTRUCTION NO. 10-5 \t Mb “3UI9 September 1963

Bas.

f. Unless otherwise designated, by the Office of Security, investigative data -
in either Operational Approval or Covert Security Approval cases involving
aliens may be shown to proper offices of the division and may, if deemed
necessary by the division, be forwarded to the field. The dispatch or cable
in such cases will be coordinated with the Counter Intelligence Staff and
the Office of Security. No investigative data will be transmitted or dis-
closed to other than Agency staff officials without the specific prior ap-
proval of the Office of Security. The need-to-know principle will be applied —
Strictly in such cases. No investigative data regarding United States cit~-

o fe izens will be transmitted to.the field without the specific prior approval of
. sae the Counter Intelligence Staff and the Director of Security and subsequent
. ~ % '. to such approval without coordination with the Office of Security on the dis-
. patch or cable involved. .
~
a 3, COVERT SECURITY APPROVALS FOR LIAISON WITH UNITED STATES

OFFICIALS

Requests for Covert Security Approvals for sana oaty \§\\officials, wheth-
_, er such officials are in the United States or abroad) MA be smitted directly
“to the Office of Security. Each request MADE Specifivs icated as a re-
quest for a Covert Security’ ‘Oval for Liaison, <The request shall be accom-

. “panied by all available biog: phic information, to include.wh rever possible in

oo, . . cases of civilian employees of United States Government agéncies the name,

date and place of birth, the employing agency, and the position and assignment |

of the persén involved, In casés involving-militaiy personnel -the minimum bio-
graphic Information required shall consist of the name, date and place of birth,

. Yank and serial number, and the parent service. In each case the details ofthe...
liaison with the individual must be set forth. sO , a

7. SERVANTS OF AGENCY EMPLOYEES

— Requests to headquarters for appropriate checks on domestic personnel em-

ot . ployed in the homes of Agency employees overseas shall be forwarded by the

/ requester to the Office of Security accompanied by all available biographical
information and the results of overseas investigations.

‘ . .8. EMPLOYEES OF OTHER U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

/ Proper clearance of staff or contract employees (including indigenous em-
ployees) of other U.S. Government agencies for operational use includes
notification to and approval by the employee’s parent agency in Washington.

| Requests for clearance will be forwarded to the Chief, Counter Intelligence

Z Staff, Attention: CI/Liaison. Clearance will not be given until thé aoproval

j

}

'

C)

oi the parent agency has been obtained. If, after such approval ia obtained, ,
it is decided that the employee will rot be used as requested, or upon termi-
nation of use, CI/ Liatson will be notified so that the amployee’s pa

: rent agency
{may be advised. a . :
4

a. SMPLOYEES AND OFFICIALS OF FOREIGN SERVICES

ei, - Requests for-searches of the- indices of other United sites agencies or the
en : Otfice of Security, or investigation of emp! aN icials of foreign
5

(ss

eae tintin ieee eames ae untied ner cnd ca

preter rey LoS 7 So ‘ hs err? . wy rem, Sr Oe



--- Page 6 ---
CLANDESTINE SERVICES ® Ne es
INSTRUCTION NO. 10-5 “a i827 19 September 1963

M1. SPECIAL SERVICES -

“+ tte information concerning the subject. i

12. DOUBLE AGENTS

13. DEFECTION AND RECRUITMENT IN PLACE

". which will immediately inforrn the Director of Security and sucn oiher United |

SECURITY

,

intelligence services with whom Agency employees maintain liaison, shall be :
forwarded by the requester to the Counter Intelligence Staff for processing to ‘ :
the Office of Security. Such requests shall be transmitted with complete :
results cf tleld traces, all available biographical information, and a state -
ment as to the service which the subject represents. wo . 7 {

10. NOTIFICATION OF TERMINATION OR DISCONTINUANCE OF COVERT

SECURITY APPROVALS OR PROPRIETARY: APPROVALS’ = : ¢

og

continuance of interest in or termination of emplo: use of a person
on whom a Covert Security Approval or Eeporistas y “Apprgyal has been re-
quested or granted, | wok

The Office of Security shall be promptly’ advised by aren of the-dis-

A) av tat oo

a, Requests for Covert Yiecks: and Special ‘Inguiries will be transmitted
to the Office of Security thr re Counter. Intelligence Staff, Each re- an
quest shall indicate the rea. ingtiry, shall specify the exact ac- ee . : Lae
tion required, and shall contd ‘available background and/or biographical :

b,” In the ¢ case t's
be the most ‘plausible type. “of ‘cover (i. @, , general “Government ‘ or com-

“. mercial) to bé ‘employed during the inguiry and any other information which’
would provide guidance as to the conduct of the investigation.

The operational decision authorizing the doubling of an agent of a foreign
power will be coordinated with the Counter Intelligence Staff even though no
Operational Approval or Provisional Operational Approval is required, . fe)

No attempt to defect or recruit in place (a) a member of the Communist Party a cos
or (b) a government official of a denied area country shall be made in the were . an ocbet:
United States without prior coordination ‘with the Counter Intelligence Staff © : ) .

States agencies as | may be appropriate. oo -

Richard. Helms -
uty Director (Dlans}

a s . whee wee Cw ta


--- Page 7 ---
DDO INSTRUCTION Ww
‘NO, 50-10

“ Rescission: CSI 50-10, 13 July 1970.

pr propriate, reference h

ited

Ta

DOI 50-16

oe

OPERATIONS-GENERAL »
4 September 1973

.. RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONAL USE OF CERTAIN .
CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS ;

1. GENERAL

a. Elemental in the conduct of clandestine operations is the use of of human
gents to accomplish the missions of the Operations Directorate. In gen-
eral, it it is DDO policy to select agent assets with primary regard to the
agents’ abilities, target access, and secur security, and with few restrictions as
to their origins, professions or status’ as members of particular groups. The
basic rule is that any consenting adult may be used by. the Operations
Directorate. There. are, however, certain ‘sensitive categories of individuals

. or groups whose operational use by the Operations. Directorate is prohibited ©”

- or, in some. way: restricted for reasons not necessarily. ‘elated. to security.

considerations. - en vee fe eee a

b. These prohibitions or restrictions stem from one of the following:

(1) The Agency has been directed by .U.S. Governtiéata authority to
restrict or avoid the operational use of a parti ilar category, of in-
dividuals. :

(2) The Agency has entered into a sp
organization, government, co:
category of individuals:

(3) The Director or the Depi
restrictions on ‘the operational 1

"due to the extreme tisk or sens

ial éstrictive agreement with an
> OF _ official | responsible for a

rector for Operations has imposed
‘certain category of individuais .
SOF such exploitation.

2. PURPOSE

The purpose of this instruction is to set forth the 1 proh hibitions ‘and policy
restrictions (as distinguished from security restrictions) which currently per-""
tain to the operational ns i

he special approva

RAE NEL IIT OL REE I NTE PE APR

J o
in cases. Whe

ation: which provid
more: detailed guidance than has been icempted in this instruction. The
special approval procedures set forth in this instruct on donot supersede or
alter in any way the requirements for covert a & contained in DO!
and DOI-F 10-5. : ;

a



--- Page 8 ---
DOI 50-10 &

DDO INSTRUCTION.

 OBERATIONS-CENERAL : ON
NO. 50-10 .

4 ‘September 1973

3. DEFINITIONS

Within the context of this instruction, the definitions listed below. will apply.
Special note must be taken of the fact that the key term- “operationad use” _
employed throughout this instruction has been defined in the most succinct ——
manner consistent with clarity. It has not.been ‘feasible, However, to. cover in : :
a definition the entire scope of possible variations in operational circumstances .
which may be encountered in DDO activities. The definition of “operational

~ use” is intended to provide guidance for the majority of cases, and must be
employed with responsible operational judgment. Issues involving a deter-
mination of “operational use” which cannot -be resolved with reasonable as-
surance by the responsible operating components will be referred to. the 2

“ Deputy Director for Operations for decision. oo

a. Operational Use :
Operational use is interpreted to mean the recruitment, utilization, or traine2.s-- :
ing of any individual or. group for DDO. purposes on either a witting or -..
unwitting basis by or on the'behalf-of an element of the Operations Direc- coe
toraté, Utilization’ is made of an individual or’ group whenever ‘that”in- - .-
dividual or group, responding ‘to the direction ox.golicitation” of a DDO
element, provides information, performs services, ides cover, or supplies
financial, material, or other support necessary forthe accomplishment’ of
DDO operational objectives either itectly, or indirectly, to or for an ele-
thent of the Operations Directoraté .

b. DDO Element at
Any person or groupwho or which is responsible to, owned or controlled =
either directly or indirectly by the Operations Directorate. Included under i
this definition are employets, members of Agency proprietary mech-

rom Operational Contact -
Any association having as its purpose the initiation or furtherance of DDO
operations,

4 RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONAL USE

a. Restrictions on the operational use of individuals or groups are of four types
and cover twenty five separate catevories a8 outlined below and.as described ;
in greater detail in paragr: aphs 5 through 8 of this instruction: _

(1) Operational Use is Prohibited see paragraph 5):
(2) Members and trainees of ériox CF
(>) Fulbright grantees; |

74



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000!

_,
%

DOI 50-10

” . OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973

DDO INSTRUCTION.
NO. 50-10
N
(c) Officials or employees of the Koteratina Association for Cultural
Freedom;
(d) Officials, employees, or fgrantees of the Ford, Rockefeller and 7 2
; > : Camegie Foundations;
i : . (e) Employees offU.S. private detéctive investigative agencies. € ?
ee (2). Operational Use equires “Special Extra-Agency Concurrence (see _—
_ ‘paragraph 6): - RPLOVIAE  OF- SALADDO . ee ee.
(a) Employees af other U.S. Government agencies; .
(b) DDO agents or assets in. the United States; -
, co (c) Agents and human. sources of foreign intelligence registered by
other U.S. agencies; @ 9
(d) Citizens (or persons documented as citizens) of Australia, Canada,
the United Kingdom ° (including its overseas dependent territories )
‘and New. Zealand; .
* (e): Citizens of Norway, ‘West Ge
. (f) Merchant seamen om ships of
. (3) Operational Use. Requires g

nany ‘and “The Netherlands ,

“(b) CARE ‘employees : .
(c) Individuals engaged in“public relations ‘activities;
(d) Officials, representatives; or employees of Communist countries

in the United States;
(e) Foreign delegates or employees ‘of the United Nations assigned *
= . ' in the U.S. and USS. citizen delegates or employees wherever

_ assigned;

(£). Staff members or officials of Red Cross societies;

(g) Officials of the Vatican State; :

(h) U.S. Government-funded professors, lecturers, students or grantees; -
i)’ Members of ‘educational or “private. voluntary ' organizations;

-(j)- Officials or employees of ‘the African-American ‘Institute:
(k).Volunteers’ to America. :

- (4) Operational’ Use Requires Approval by Chies of Aree Division ies”

. paragraph 8) woe :

pe

mntrolled by the highest | type of
‘in his particular case.



--- Page 10 ---
14-00000

por 50-10 , )

OPERATIONS-GENERAL ..- .
4 September 1973

DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10

5. OPERATIONAL USE PRON ED

a. Members and Trainees of scrion, _ Ff 9 _ : .
(1) It is Agency policy that members and trainees of ACTION will not: be )

used in any capacity, with or without remuneration,. by the Agency

~ or by organizations under its jurisdiction. (The term “members offAC- 9
\ TIONS will be understood to mean anyone employed by OF assocral ed

: ‘with [ACTION except trainees.) GF oa qa.

(2) It is Agéncy policy that former frembers_ of ACTIO may be em- ~\
ployed.or used by the Agency or by organizations under its jurisdiction . )
only in accordance with the following: . oo EE
(a) Except as stated in (b) below, a forme: “Yngmber of ACTION)
...may be employed or. used operationally‘ an

_Agency only if a_period. of five full” year :
separation from ACTION. (° G4 ;

: (e) An Ageaey conte éd orga

. o \.
censuses bans oem oe a et AN SS SEP NORAD

Et,

j “elapsed. since his.

y may hive a former, member of.

the provisions of subparagraph (ay or (b) above’ must have’ the
specific prior approval ‘of the Deputy Director for Operations.

(3) Former frainees whose ACTIONservice included dutyfor training] lover-
. Seas ere ‘subject to the rules governing employment oF use of er
G G.. members of f ACTIONK of mene se) above), Former traines Wh .
id not serve at any time $s memberg df ACTIONand whose ACTION 27 )
service did not include ilo traliding} {overseas may be employed or
used operationally by DDO ‘lements“provided the specific prior ap-
proval of the Deputy Director for Operations is obtained. -

(4) A former fnember or trainee of AcrIoN whose employment oruse 2.0 0 8 fey
is permitted by subparagraph (2) or (3) above may ngt be assigned - mo)
. to or used in a country for Which he. had been soe r to which —_
not he had’ been. assigned while with ACTION 92 BFE Ss

apshenen wre

vate. corporation:
ON SJpenoonel na
Vv)

}: The specifi c prior-approval af the # Depa
must be obtained.’ _ .

COOLI43



--- Page 11 ---
_ DOL 50-10

ao - DDO INSTRUCTION ©

_ OPERATIONS-GENERAL
NO. 50-10 :

4 September 1973

(b) Lf the individual Ce -formexymember of ACTION or a former
7 lrainee whose ACTION servité included duty or training over-
seas,. five years must have elapsed since his separation from
45 ACTION 99 9
(Oo ‘ : : If contact with a former) A ACTION member $r. a formey ‘trainee Wwhose
; U9 “ACTION service include duty (or trating overseas shouldbe un-
--avoidable during’ the required ‘five year. waiting period, the Deputy
Director for Operations may request an excep! ‘om the Director
a of Central Intelligence. Among the possible’ ‘such. unavoid-
C ‘able contact would be the designation’ of a forme tember or trainee: Fy o
@ 4 as the liaison officer to. the Domestic Collection Division. se
. Fulbright Grantees ;
DDO policy prohil its the-operational: use of individuals who ¢ are receiving
G4 U.S. Government suppor} “under. certain provisions (see’ below) of the |
“Mutual Educational. and. Cultural: ‘Exchange Act. of .1961,. as. amended,
o commonly known‘as the’ Fulbright:Hays* Act [Falling ander: this prohibi-
__tion. arefteachers, scholars," lecturers a ‘Students ineludin fstu--
.. «Gent artists and student “musicians who"
Q4 75 Scholarships..or grants -by’.the. Beard -of Foreign Scholarships [appointed -
E y the President. of the- United States.” Operational use of such individuals
: is prohibited only, during the period when they are participating in the
x) educational and cultural exchange program This prohibition specifically
oes not apply to the several other, categories o! ‘grantées Jsupported by
other provisions of thef{Fulbright- Hays Act such af artists, athletes, leaders, @
: specialists or participants at international trade fairs or expositions who :
: oO . do not come under ‘the aégis of thef President's Board of ae Scholar- 7
. ‘ships (see 7,j., below).
J _ . @ Officials or Employees of theffaternational Association for Culbeta F reedom\
io - -* ---'+" DDO policy, prohibits: the operational ugg, | of the: officials or. employees -.
I: . . of the) International ASsociation for Cultufal Freedom Contacts with. such’
1 © 2 indivi tals which DDO officers are obliged to make in- their cover ca-
: ci pacities must be -limited to their: cover assignments. oes bee
_d. Officials, Employees, orfGrantees. of the Ford, Rockefeller | and Carnegie.
_ Foundations | oo .

seh 8 52 OE TIE UR

bite tere eartoneamncaeamt en tate

POOL144



--- Page 12 ---
C

“DOL 50-10

© OPERATIONS-GENERAL
7 4 September 1973 .

y :

~

DDO INSTRUCTIOND
NO. 50-10

e. Employees. of/U.S. Private Detective Investigative Agencies
DDO policy prohibits the operational use either in the United States
or overseas of the employees of any U.S.-owned or -controlled. éprivate G4
detective investigative agency] This policy does not apply to operational .
use 6f employees of organizations which are engaged strictly in commercial
Yor credit investigations. a. ee ;
6. EXTRA-AGENCY CONCURRENCE REQUIRED

a. Employees of Other U.S. Government Agencies
_ Approval for the operational use of taff or contract: (including foreign)
emiplovees fof other U.S. Government ‘agencies( will be granted only in’
cases where theJemployee’s parent agency in Washingtod has been notified
of and has approved of theintended' operational use in accordance with
; _. the provisions of DOI 10-5.” gg ot
as ‘b:[DDO Agents or Assets in the United state” Vee i TF
: . Jn ‘accordaneé with ‘the agreement’ éxisting ‘between the [Federal ‘Bureau.
~. of: Investigation and. this’ Agency} the restrictions listed ‘below apply to. op
the operational activity of the Operations’ Directorate, conducted. in’ the - 4. a
‘nited States. Coordination. with the FBI:of ‘appropri mo . oo
DDO operational activities in the Usifed. Statespi ‘the responsibility of : : my
the Chief, Liaison Group, Opérations Staff. toes oo ;
(1) All invéstigations by-this, Agency. of fforeign officials in the United ¢4
Stated require the priox concurrence of the_FBIS In this context, the
term J"investigation” means, systematic. and direct inquiries or pro- GF
cedurés (such as physical on technical surveillances or neighborhood .
inquiries} aimed at oun inforpation concerning an individual's : 5)

. ee

sae we i :
activities’ or background; “investigation” | does not include the ac-

ceptance or the develop t of information through social contacts
or contacts normally made by Agency officials in discharging their. .. -
| cover functions: ~ -: to, . ; oT oo,
(2). Any approach. in the. United State{by a ‘DDO element for’ recruit- So. ; i) :
: ment of any foreign official or of any visitor from a Communist-country we
requires the prior concurrence of the FBI on
Any. planned meeting in the United. StateSTor assessment and.social
development. betweerfa DDO élément and 2 foreign official:of known 5 aan
or presumed: interest to the FBI. or between a.DDO element anit an q
official or visitor from @ Communist country requires that prior noti-
fication be provided to the Fst] : ee TT Be
(4) Whenever domestic DDO 79 rations. involve’ matters ‘pertaining. to
thefmational security of the Tniced Statest appropriate identification
of persons “engaged in the operations in the United States will be

~~

2G

6 ‘ . .
SECRET



--- Page 13 ---
_ DOT 50-10

OPERATIONS-GENERAL

NO. 50-10 4 September 1973

provided /to the 83) In accordance with this policy, the following _
categories-6f DDO assets will. be identified [to the FBI: DDO per- $9
sonnel, agents of the Operations Directorate who are either U.S. citizens
or alien residents; and foreign agents of the Operations Directorate
recruited | abroad, who -come to the’ Ursted States -for’ operational
Oe re
- g. ABents and Human Sources of Foreign Intelligence WRegistered by Other GT
US, Agencies) ; 0 Soe
~ _ . ,WhefInteragency Source Register. (ISR) has. been. established. at head-.
CC - _. ° guarters to provide for United States Intelligence Board (USIB) agencies .
' t centralized record of agents and human sources of. foreign intelligence]® ?
4 principal purpose. of the {ISR is to register primacy. of interest and
prevent.multiple recruitmentor unintentional. duplicate. operational use “9 ;
- of such agents and. human ‘sources}-It is USIB policy that no individual
“os ee) (Zegistered in the IsRlby ‘ong: USIB “agency will be used for operational pur-..*.-
eee poses by. any other: USIB hee a the specifj¢: prior approval of the
: Lagency-having primacy of interest Ifa BDO el desires to arrange the
"+ GG Etranster or joint operational use of a resistg 1 individual, the ISRwill con-. ”
“+z, tact the @gency having primacy of interest'toJdetermine whether there is a. ”
willingness. to ‘discuss: this" é1 Te
d. {Citizens (or Persons Documented .as Citizens) of. Australia, Canada, the 74
United Kingdown (iriéliding, its Overseas Dependent Territories) and
New Zealand see ; ¢
~ (1) The operational use of fai ti Ag) of the above-named{countries (includ-
~ . ing the overseas dependencies of the United Kingdom) is restricted
CE by agreements with the Tateligence or security authorities of such @ 7
“ countried, which require the prior approval of the Eepropriate liaison? 3]
authority. Such approval will be obtained at the eatliést feasible stage
of development through the/European Division (in the case of citizens A
of Canada or the United Kingdom), or through the East Asia Division a @
(in the case of Australian or New Zealand citizens) J —
(2) The above restriction also governs the Ge of false documentation ar
- representing DDO staf or agent personnel as citizens of the above-
' named: countries.{Approval for thefuse-of such -documeéntation{ will - .
be sought through the sume channels as stated in subparagraph (1) .

q

above. Cos ; .

(3) Authority to inake operational use of the persons be documentation] ”
‘described in the above subparagraphs without obtaining the prior”.
approval ff the Liaison authority} concemed may be granted only
by. the Deputy Director for Operations ony the Director.



--- Page 14 ---
e. ~ 7
( C
DOI 50-10. oF
DDO INSTRUCTION OPERATIONS- GENERAL oof
NO. 50-10 , 4 September 1973 ; i
_ i

e{itcens of Norway, Wek Germany and The Netherlandsh

e operational use PE any citizer of Norway, West Germany” or The” 29 ,

Netherlands{ is, under™ certain: conditions, contingent on prior approval . : |
of the Gational intelligence service concerned? These Scountfies} are par-. ses !
ticularly Sensitive in cases involving the operational use of their citizens ¢ CT.

’ whe. areyitierchant Sdamenfand who’ are (Serving .on ships | ing their ee
flags}. Each case i yy olvint the proposed operational. use ta a citizen’ Jot - :
one’ of these’ Fowles will be reviewed by the Chief of the [Evropean? z :

Division in the light of the agreements existing between this Ewe and _ |
the national intelligence eens concerned. After weighing all of. the. — a OD
equities, the Chief of thefEuro; an) Division will decide whether approval : :

is required)from the hefEuro intelligence ? aorvica as cerned. ‘When re-
--quired,: approvals for the operational : use ch.

‘obtained from the appropriate Fiational
, peal} Division. .

f

ividuals -will_ be

ea by ‘the EEuro- 99.
Merchant Seamen on’ Sh s..0f Certain’ Countri
2° operational yse “off ‘fm rohan seamen, regardless . -off:
ps) « theJflags “of VAG ali

m who are Ferving ‘0
ependencies ), New. Zealand, Norway,.-
dg is, under certain conditions, subject’ ~
to provisions of the. agreerggpts existing between this Agency. and- the ~
Bational intelligence service’ pgcered Each case involving the proposed.
operational use of such(a meréRant seaman awit be sgigwed by the Chief

“sue

of the Eurd sean Division or the Chief o the fast” As Division, as ap- °
propriate light of the fpertinent interservic Tagreement After

weighing ‘all of the equities, the Chief of the Europe 4 [Division or the
Chief of the fEast sial Division will deteymine the course of action to
be taken wi regard to fe national intelligence service concerned.

7. APPROVAL BY THE DDO REQUIRED -

.
Approval by the Deputy Director for Operations for the operational use Sore a) .
of any individual who falls into. one ct the categories described in this-para- 0°. S ios
graph will be requested by memorandum. The individual's covert approval me
status will be described in. the memorandum to the Deputy: Director.,for .-
Operations, together with a concise expianation of the intended. operational -
use. (in connection with this paragragh,-contacts by the Domestic Collection
Division with individuals ov firms do not require approval. by -th Deputy*:
‘Director for - - Operations ‘provided. they constitute “merely” briefing. or: ‘de- -
_ btiefing for the purpose of obtaining information acquired by an individval
or representative of a firm in the course of his normal activities. If, however,
in any case the contact is on behalf of another element of the Operations

fe)
SECRET



--- Page 15 ---
14-00000

NO. 50-10

DOI 50-10

DDO INSTRUCTION 7 _ ~OPERATIONS-GENERAL
~ wee 4 September 1973

Directorate or another agency; or if an individual or firm will be requested
_ to perform an operational task or to deviate from his or its normal pattern
of activity; or if the activity, even though consistent. with the individual's
or firm’s normal pattern of activity, will take place ‘because requested or _
funded by the Démestic ‘Collection Division; that case- will-be-subject_to-
the requirement for approval by. the Deputy. Director for Operatjons..).”
a, Publishers, Producers, ‘Journalists, or Employees” of Public: Information ‘ oo
' Media) (see DOI 240-6) g
(1) Operational use of, jublishers or. producers. of public information. aay
requires prior approval by the Deputy Director for Operations whenever
' there is danger that such activity might serve in any way(to influence
USS. public opinion Such activities include but are not limited to the -

Epeblishing: of books, newspapers, or magazines,. the: making of films, qt ne

e production of TV or radio: programs or the issuance in the. United.

“erational use abroad of fpublishers or producers of public ‘information g
“media for ‘non-U. §.. audience does not require approval. by. the Deputy |
Director for’ Operatiotis’ evén_though such activities. ma have some
» »_ anintended and unsolicited [fallout in the United- States
(2): ‘Approval by the Deputy-Director for Operatior s is also required prior
to the operational .use of journalists,’ news _
‘service correspondents ‘or stringers, _ and’ yes of news’ media
including TV and radio stations whenev i the individual is'a US.
citizen or when fthe news - edfum involved is under’ U.S. ownership
x control. a
ofca Employees <3 7
is DDO policy to: avoid operational use of “employees of tnéCCARE
organization including indigenots employees. Exceptional individual casé
involving priority operational, objectives will be considered on their merits. _
” Prior approval- by the Deputy Director for Operations will be. required
in all cases. 9 q. .
¢. Individuals] Engaged ‘in ‘Public Relations “Activities (see DOT 50-. 18):
* Individuals, engaged in public #4 tations activitied which in any way have
or seek to have anfinfluence on public opinions in te Unit ed States
~ considered to be ima separa te sensitive category: In view of the pecu
aspects of Gblic relations tivity’ including the special rectuirements of :
the foreign Agents Redistrationl Act, approval by the Deputy Director .
~ for Operations ‘is required prior to-the operational usefin a public relations . co
epi any individual «who is Gagaged i in. public-relations activities? 39
and who is located in or operating ih toc United States. -
KAN

0604148

_ States of any, public opinion influencing ‘information mediaf'The:op--: | Jonge

TY, radio, or news Oe!

‘

AOR pes esrrrectnmeeneeneme ene rge r aT pT THE SPHERE PUN EPR



--- Page 16 ---
NO. 50-10 4 September 1973

|
e : =
; ( SECRET C |
DOI 50-10 ae
-DDO INSTRUCTION 2 OPERATIONS- GENERAL ‘ |

d Officials, Representatives, or. Employees of Communist Countries in the - i
United Stateg (see DOI 60-11) oe |
* Prior approval of the Director or the Deputy Director for Operations iso
required for operational contact in the United States with or operational . H
use of Bificials, representatives, or employees of the USSR, its satellite D7 . B :
countries, Communist China, or any other country under Communist . . ‘
control{If, while in the United States, such individual is to be investigated, :
approached for recruitment, or contacted for operational purposes,{the prior EF
concurrence of the FBX will also be required in accordance wi para: .
graph 6.b., above. GS. MATONEL + . _ ; a
e.) Delegates or Employees of the United States NS ‘
t is “DDO policy that the operational use of/delegates or employees of
‘the United Nation3, including those of its[various ‘main organs and of VF
its related intergoVernmental agencié3] is of such sensitivity as to require -
.. Special consideration by the Deputy“I irector for’ Operations, especially .
: “worthwhile cases wheréin operational ' use of a "particular fUNY individual”
“is deemed essential for the accomplishment: of the DDO.mission, approval..
~ May. be obtained. In-each case involving a non-U,Sq citizen .assigned in-
~ the U.S. or a U.S. citizen wherever. assigned, thé:
Deputy Director ‘for’ Operations will ake regu
regarding use of hoes citizen elega es. Of ployees| not assigned
in the U.S.) If, whil 1¢ "States, the (sy) individual is“to be
investigated, approach recruitment, or contacted for operational pur-
poses, fthe prior concur ee the. Fey may also ‘be required as outlined
in paragraph 6.b., above. oss of
£[Staf# Members or Officials 9 Red Cioss Societies~ oo a if)
he operational use of staff members or officials of thefTaternational Red i
Cross or its affiliated national Red Cross, Red Cresceni or other equivalent
4 Breer requires special consideration and prior approval by the Deputy ~
irector for Operations:-.DDO elements should make" every effort to avoid’
‘ the operational use of staff. mémbers or officials offRed Cross societies. flow-* >
ever, when especially high priority. objectives are at stake and altemative : :
agent assets are-not: Available; approval for the use’of such indi: viduals x may ~
be granted by the Deputy, Director for Operations. -
vg, oe of the Vatican State FG ca)
: perational contact witho Ficials of the Vatican. St
: _ with the prior uproval of" t I
“use offVatican oft!
Director for“ Operations. : .
hh. U.S. Government Furided Professors, Lecturers; ‘Students or’ Grantees ae oe
US. ‘Or foreign m professors, | lecturers’ or cease AN ‘ether persons partici- - oF

al, athletic or oon a



--- Page 17 ---
DOE 50-10.

@PERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973

: G4
<change art (except cetain Fulbright saateag see paragraph 5b. .
bove) are considered to be in a separate sensitive category. ‘Operational i

use of such individuals while they are actively participating infin exchange CF

- . program funded by the U.S.\ Government{ requires special consideration -

C i . . and approval by the Deputy Director for Operations prior to such use. In
all ; * certain especially. wotthwhile cas s avherein 3 operstional use of a -par-
ticular )U.S. Government supported exchangee} is considered essential to
‘the accomplishment of the DDO mission, the Deputy Director for Opera-

: ; , _ / tions may grant approval. Memoranda requesting such approval will be
C . : - \ forwarded through the Chief, Foreign Resources Division. In such cases the
XY Deputy Director for Operations will determine whether or not to seek the

; concurrence f the U.S: Government sponsor; 4

, i Members of Educational. or Private Voluntary Organization cae

~ tions) In: compliance with the above ‘progeriptio :
thé most careful scrutiny of all- cases involving: erationil ¢ contact with
“Cs. $S. educational or private ‘voluntary organizations. including trade and et
professional organi, any ‘employee; staff °
member or official*of.siich an organization § prior approval by

the Deputy Director for. Operations. “Fhe ‘Deputy Director for Opera- : i

tions will determine whether pas) ‘not td seek extra-Agency approval for

the conduct of such operations.
CQ : (2) Operational use including coyert funding abroad offFereign based
. ; international voluntary organikftions|and th the personnel eof is per- :
“mitted even if the organization is also funded by. S. private. voluntary fiom
organizations,

iLOjficials or Employees: of* the “syrtcar-amet on Institute
perational . use..of the. officials . or. employees. of the/

_Anstitute requires. prior, approval. o the Depul

o Americahwhile- 1 they. are, ‘on as ige d
fot without the & 8: approvai of the Deputy. DRY for for Operations, *
¥ NS

olunteers to Ameritd are participants in prog stablished by various
Oreign countries i collaboration, avith’ ithe. , Depattment of State as a



--- Page 18 ---
S. SECRET - |
SO DOI 50-10
DDO INSTRUCTION). OPERATIONS-GENERAL So
NO. 50-10 Bea . ae 4 September 1973
. : \e Woe
Boo .

oo 77 ~ , a
Eevunterpart to the U.S. Peace Corpst Such volunteers are sent to the U.S. 5
Or a period of Service in schools and community development programs/? .
. . The name of the Organization may vary by country, . : oo

8. OPERATIONAL USE REQUIRES APPROVAL BY CHIEF OF AREA : :
Operational use of any individual in. the categories listed inthis paragraph. >

* is considered of such sensitivity as. to require ‘special consideration and ap-
proval by the appropriate. Area Division Chief. This authority may not be
delegated. The request for approval will be. by memorandum in which the
individual's covert approval status will be described, together with a concise.

explanation of the intended operational use. =...
afCitens or. Alien. Residents of :the U.S. Used
©. DOLSeI9y
‘. "The operational use.it ast c
- .. been-admitted: for permanent: residénce: or ‘ha
. period: in the U.S., requirés} ) ‘ alo “the.-Chief of the ‘Ares
Division ‘under: whose jurisdiction “intended ‘use. is,to take place. 7 oe
. Non-US. ‘Citizen Delegates or Employees -of- the United Nations not. As» C7?
», signed in the USY 2 ce on
' The operational“use of fion-U.S. citizen delegates or employees of the @€ b
United Nations Who are not assigned in the US. requires the prior ap- ; i
proval of the Chief of the Area Division under whose jurisdiction the in-
tended use is to take place. . ;
of Members of the Academic Community, : ; ; ; )
(1) Within the context of this instruction/a member of the academic com- £7
munity fis defined as:Cany student, faculty member, administrative
’_officér or staff official of a college, university or similar institution of -
higher: learning: including their associated -research centers. Persons
"associated with institutions such as police or military training centers ~ > .
: (except. the four college-level: military service academies) or under- - 2F.
going specialized technical training with business or commercial firms wee
‘are not considered to be members of the academic community. -
Operational use of finembers of the academic community, especially 72 F
those cases wherein an individual isto he made witting of Agency
interest, will be on a highly selective basis: Exch case will be examined
to ascertain its éssentiality to the DDO mission in terms of the ‘price
_ of possible disclosure, and ‘to ensure ‘that propery security procedures.
can be observed. ‘When it has been detent ited that the operational
use of apiember ‘of the academig(@ ‘
: TEA

ity oop defined above: is

eee

5
i
§
i

na

(2



--- Page 19 ---
¢ SECRET C

(CO ae atte DOI 50-10

- OPERATIONS-GENERAL:

eo NO. 50-10 4 September: 1973

» .:-+  4.Operationally feasible'and without: suitable alternative, prior approval
’ in the following cases will be obtained as indicated below: ©
(a) Any U.S. citized who is a}member of the academic community,
. , ._. and who is associated in any way with any U.S. or foreign college, 9
- ; oe ee . university or similar institution of higher. learning;[”
: () ‘Any ffon-U.S. citizen who is a member of the academic community? oF
; and Who is associated in any. way with any /US.-owned or U:S-9 ¢
. ; ; _ affiliated college, university _or institution of high D ? oO,
. . . oo ‘ing which is located cithexin the United States pr abroad. ° Z
Cc m : ee ‘If the individual is located in the Unite ates, approval will be. Of hfpeoeh |
we oO : quested: by memorandum to the Chief, Foreign Resourcés Division.
: The memorandum will include a statement that the individual is, or
“is not, a DCD asset ‘or contact, and in’ the event he is will include
«> the concurrence of the Chief, Domestic Collection, Division.
.. dividual is located outside’ the United States, appro

Ay.
XS

over the area “concerned.| ¢
academic’ communit
owned or’ U:S.-affi ad
- ¢, sidered sensitive. The operational
‘the approval of the Chief, of ithe ea Division Fin a any.case involving
‘a well known ‘person or “hawd ecial security implications, the
Division Chief to whom the request is referred. under the above pro-
*_ visions will consult with the DDO and obtain the latter’s approval.
(3) The provisions of paragraph (2) do not apply to, Domestic Collection
C \ ; Division contacts Jvith members of the academic ‘c immunity but such
J contacts are subjec to the following requirements:
. (a) If afméember of the academic commin dy would be asked to per-
form an operational task or to alter his Hormal pattern of activity
in order to serve Agency purposes, prior approval of the Chief,
~ Domestic Collection Division is required. Additionally, if such an .
“* individual will be in a foreign area; the concurrence of thé Chief ~~
. + Of the Area: Division concerned will be obtained. 7
“" (b) Prior concurrence will be obtained’ from’ the appropriate Area :
. Division’ Chief if an individual is:to’ be utilized in a politically. 2 v.00 >
. Sensitive area where his presence or activities could potentially
wot» embarrass: the interests’ of the ‘U.S. ‘Government. .
7 “ey? The. eqiiirements of -paragraph °8,a. “apply- ifa citizen’ or valien “ _ foot
- resident of the United States would be used in a- denied area, ae
- (4)-At the end ofeach calendar: year, Chiefs. of. Divisions .will submit’ a.
report to the Deputy Director for Operations (via Chief, Foreign
Resources Division) on the number of indi dugls\recruited from the

members .of the” ©!
way “with(O. S.-'¢

ng{-is-.also, ‘con-"
se of such individua also.requires ..~-

eeeteoan rite renyrpaieele nin peter



--- Page 20 ---
‘tentially sensitive operational cases in each Division. . —
(5) It should be noted that the provisions of this paragraph do not apply _ _ ~.
~ . to DDO employeesfvho wish to study or.teach pa Waly Approval for’: > oan *) 4
such activity will | @ obtained in accordance with the @ provisions of
AR 10-7. :

( SECRET ¢ OS
: . l
DOI 50-10 ; O i
DDO INSTRUCTION OPERATIONS- GENERAL ; »
NO. 50-10 ; 4 September 1973 co .
, ri
We ne
[eestemi community ig ‘that year. This andit will permit the DDO * eo ot
keep abreast of‘rhajot quantitative changes in the. number of po- : '
: i
|

L:

9. INDIVIDUAL CHANGES OF STATUS OR Gi

When an individual undergoes a:change, af status. which places him in one of Bo '*) |
X i

the restricted categories described-abov or transfers him from one category i
to another, his operational. ase tinued operational use is contingent upon '
approval or reapproval as ed for his new status.” Loa . nn 4
i

f

cy 10. INTERPRETATION OR MODIFICATION OF ‘RESTRICTIONS.

Certain of, the policy réstrictions ‘ scribed : in, this’ instruction are “subject to’
interpretation,. extension or modification’ by: the Deputy’ -Director ‘fer Opera:
ions depending:on the. -conditions”.and” the atmosphere. for-DDO ‘operations °
t any particular time. Especially when dealing on the. edges of policy rulings...
“and within the guidelines set forth ‘herein, particular heed should be paid to! ee
the price of disclosure, including careful consideration of the sensitivities of. .~!-

the individuals involved. When there is any doubt concerning the application

of these restrictions, guidance should be obtained from the Deputy Director

. for Operations.

7
|
|

|



--- Page 21 ---
—~

“+
’

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994
GIARISTORICAL PEREW PROGRAM

INSTRUCTION SHEET 733

os Ae

2/6/73
3/9/64"

to redefine. categories of
contract personne), Minor
revisions are made to up-
-|date the paragraph.

Former paregraph 54, Pro-
curement Contracts for the
Services of Individuals,
is renumbered 55 with no
change in text.

6/16/70

New paragraph 54, Agents, |
_ {is added to establish
-Jauthorities and responsi-
vilities ‘for the manage-
ment'of agents andto
. |etearly distinguish
“*. [between agents_and contract

personnel.

nea

Rescinded.



--- Page 22 ---
14- 00000

i
i
i
i
i
i
i

Hy
|
n. MANDATORY RETIREMENT FOR AGE st eeeeees I
0. CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FUND ....... .. .

p. PERIOD OF SERVICE FOR ANNUITIES .. .
!
|
|

- q. COMPUTATION OF ANNUITIES ........

|
|
. an ‘.t, RECALL OF RETIRED PARTICIPANT *. %
ns _ | § REEMPLOYMENT OF RETIRED PARTICIPANT ; 19
en “  § MONIES... 1. 118.19
| u. LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF RETIREMENTS 0000002... 118.20
|; szoTION VIII: MANAGEMENT. OF NONSTAFF PERSONNEL
§
i sl. PERSONNEL DETAILED TO OR FROM THE AGENCY ...... 119
| / 52 CONSULTANTS ... . 123
53. L. 125
. 54, . 128
“ | 55. PROCUREMENT ConTRacrs FOR THE SERVICES OF ;
. em! { . INDIVIDUALS - se eeees vee WO Ve
; Cc } ed 5659, Reserved. . ” : :
re SECTION 1 ix: REgORDE. AND REPORTS ~
wun 60... PERSONNEL ARGS AND, REFORTS.,

™~ Figure Title 5

ja Pigure ae Yeo -
‘/ 1. \éuisien INTELLIGENCE. choss seas
H Dis

'
|
{
: 2. NGUISHED INTELLIGENCE MEDAL ... i
| 3. INTELLIGENCE STAR. I.
H 4 INTELLIG ENCE MEDAL OF MERIT .........
4a. CAREER [1 Nyenri GENCE MEDAL ........... 4
5, EXCEPTIONAL SERVICE MEDALLION ...... cee 04, {
6. RETIREMENT MEDALLION ..........................000.0. 94.1 !
_? FORM 600, RECOMMENDATION FOR HONOR OR MERIT :
. AWARD | see baeeeeeneeeees sees 8B
j 8. _‘Reserved - : . : Tale:
3. OFFICIAL SEAL OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 100: 2.
"10." “AGENCY FLAG’.
om ‘AGENCY PLAQUE .

 BIOGRaPHIC DAT. TO BE SUBAITTED: BY
"UNDER COVER’ ON AN. INTENDED SPOUSE
o Boe FORM 3154, SERVICE: ABROAD a MENT

“ “<<
anes
Rea

Revised: 23 February’ 1973, (733) "

2
c
cs
ran
on
a



--- Page 23 ---
14-00000

wail “HR 20-53

gem paragra) ed policy, authorities,

and responsibilities conce: a veh eewers) mtract personnel. It does
not apply to consultants (se a services acquired through

wy
industrial or procurement contra! cle 55), to personnel employed by
proprietary projects (see HR 230-8 ents (see HR 20-54).

PERSONNEL |
1
|

a. GENERAL. There are two categories of c contract personnel contra contract ct employees ° |

r53. CONTRACT PER

and independent contractors,

(1) CONTRACT EMPLOYEES. Although “they are not appointed employees,

contract employees are ure employees of the U.S. Government. They have all

. the rights and privileges granted by law to U.S. Government employees

’ . yo, : : "im accordance with their citizenship, status as well as those rights and

privileges specified, in their contracts. They work under supervised con-

oo: se foe ditions and are compensated on a- salary. basis. Contract employees are
grouped into three categories: :
(a) Career Associate (Type C) Contract Employees: Contract employees
who perform duties, usually of a clandestine and operational nature,
‘on @ career basis. They are normally required to demonstrate their
operational value to the Agency for not } han three years, in the
case of US. citizens, or not less than_fiv , in the case of foreign.
nationals, to qualify for career associate) . When it is necessary
for a carger associate to have ‘thes stafl-type @ cess to.an Agency instal-

: . lation or eC t ffmatlor ‘he ‘must meet the same security ape
se . . .o proval crit eV att employee. :
: . Lo . -. (b) Internal ( Vie N66 dptract Employees: Contract employees, engaged
. Bo whe. cp, , for a specifi a of time, who normally: work Inside Agency. instal-..”
sort |” lations. They” are required t to meet the same ‘security approval ‘eriteria.
_ (es statt ‘employees, b put are “permitted only such access to classified
. Information as. Is autharized in their security ‘spproval and is required
.” dn the performance ‘ot their duties, .
(ce) External (Type E) Contract Employees: ‘Contract "employees, engaged |
for a specific period of time, who normally work outside Agency in-
stallations. They are not required to meet the same. security approval
eriterla as staff employees and are not permitted the same access
to Agency installations as staff employees or Internal contract em-
ployees. They are permitted only such access to classified information
as is authorized In their security approval and is required in the per-

formance of their duties.

t : (2) INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS are not employees of the U.S. Government.
. They are self-employed { individuals who are engaged under contract to
provide specific services. They receive only the compensation and benefits
_considered necessary to retain their services, In the Operations Directorate,
their duties are normally limited to historical research and analysis and,
- to the direction, utilization, spotting, or support of agents. They normally
do hot carry out espionage or covert action tasks. (Care must be taken _
'. to distinguish between independent contractors, defined herein, and agents,
i defined in HR 20-54.) . : or .

b. POLICY

4

(a it is. necessary to. provide tor ones
“not bemeb through the vse

-personnel:.. . ad
sNell-qualitiee individuals who |

» 7 0004156 ~ |


--- Page 24 ---
14-00000

: \ PERSONNEL Pp:
m : :

\

HR 20-53b(2) NG
to, meet. opérational

r (c) there is a ro ep
ez

the Agency to long- ane, oyment; :
(d) the nature of the misyo: Yor which the individual is being engaged
precludes his being subject to administrative control or working spe-

cifically defined hours; :
(e) the individual’s primary employer or interest is not the Agency and
‘the services the Agency desires from him are supplementary to his
primary interest or vocation; or Lo
Yo. . _ . (ft) there isa Jong term requirement for personal services which, for op-
: oo . * perational’or security reasons, cannot be performed by Agency staff
wet . : . , personnel . — ° ; Ot :
(2) The engaging of contract personnel is subjett to the following restrictions: . ./
(a) New contracts, contract renewals, and contract amendments for in- -
dividuals under current or anticipated nonofficial cover, must have
prior approval of the appropriate component of the Operations Direc-
torate. oe : :
: . (b) Contract personnel may be engaged only for approved activities for
oy which funds have been made available. Funds for these activities will
- oo -* be budgeted annually and, will not exceed Limitations imposed by the
. : head of the component concerned. a aN oe :
. es os. + (¢) Contract employees are subject Jacdirertosss anpower controls and .
: cellings established by the Director ‘of Gentfal Intelligence during the
annyal budgetary. review.\cycle. ‘Independent contractors are. excluded
from celling- controls. ~ : \ :
| (d) Contracts, wlll Cw ehever possible, .be, written, and ‘signed. “However,
re ‘when speci LSequ ity “or operational fac rs prevent the execution of
‘ ; ; - a formal wriffén-tontract, a memorandum in Heu of such a contract |
_ .. : Lo may be prepared tg dgoument tue Commitments and obligations of the
. . "Agency and the in ayy Soe 7 _
. H (d) Appropriate securityVor operational approvals will be obtained before .
any contractual commitments are made to individuals and before any
disclosure to them of classified information. :

(1) No commitments relating to the use of the services of an employee of
another Government agency will be made without prior approval of
the Operating Official or Head of Independent Office concerned and
the Director of Personnel. a

-- (g)-No commitments will be made to contract personnel that appointed.

_ employment status will be offered at the conclusion of or during any.
period of their contract service, without prior approval of the Director

en OL Personnel and the Director.of Security. _ a

. (n) Contract employees. must meet Agency medical standards prior. to the

approval and authentication of their contracts. A psychological assess-

ment and psychiatric evaluation of those contract employees in whoa!
| “the Agency may have more than a: short-term interest will be carried

out whenever: feasible. . : ete Se TS see anne oe

1), Indepevident’ ‘contractors.:3

J medical standards; however,

_ Which .obligates the Age,

. “@ satisfactory mech

oe . $
needs without obligating = [~

tens

te

oe

ft, required to. meet “Agency
Qiitract contains, any. provision
ide “medical or disability” beneLits, -

picn is required, to include a psycho-.
7 tion. if necessary: 7" "*

we So Revised: 23 February 1973 (733:



--- Page 25 ---
14-00000

oe €

ee Rate

INNEL ; PERSONNEL RE
\

digating (j) Contract personnel candidat
I : cannot be acknowledged m

n

one GAR 20-53 os
|
|

Whos empjoyinent with the Agency eG
oviged adequate cover and an ap-

ate te

: : propriate cover legend, This réq at legal entitlements and other ‘os : :
engaged ° contractual benefits be provided and tax Labilitles satisfied in a , Lo;
ing spe- | manner consistent with the character of the cover and cover legend. . i 5

: (k) Although staff employees are expected to sever active connections with an i :
acy and ° the Agency upon retirement, there may be instances in which continua- - oe ere
y,to his. tion tn service under contract after retirement is necessary or clearly | i

i in the best Interests of the Agency. The use of retired annuitants under ; } 5
; for op- a contract is governed by policies specified in HR 20-13. . “ . 4 y
wy stall (1) Not used, a,
nd (m) Coritracts providing for basic-- compensation at. a rate which, !f pro-. . me :
wrictions: | jected on an annual basis,.would exceed the maximum annual! rate . iq
: for in-” for a GS-15, will not be executed without the approval of the Director }
ust have of Central Intelligence. All such requests will be forwarded through :
as Direc- the Director of Personnel for his recommendation.

le. RESPONSIBILITIES
vitles for (1) THE DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL will

fitles will (a) formulate contract personnel management policies and procedures and
:d-by the provide guidance in improving the effectiveness and flexibility of the:
nn program within the Agency;
trols and *- (b) monitor contract personnel management to. assuge- consistency among
uring the - the directorates while giving due regard GY Neston needs;.-
excluded. = -  (c)_ provide a repository: for. sensitive eae ation using the
. : : guidelines for special files set. f cite eo

However, “ (d) approve and authenticase contracts a

:eution of (e) monitor contract ployee! telling autho atlas established by the
. contract Director of Centt intelligence; an

ms of the . (f) ‘maintain - ‘computer-based records on contract:‘personnel and ensure.

i currency and accuracy of Input and output data.
sed before (2) THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY will . ven

wefore any (a) establish standards and (procédures tor granting security approvals
t which meet the Agency’s contract personnel requirements;
yployee of (>) grant security approvals for the use of contract personnel including
yproval of their access to classified information and Agency installations;
armed and (c) ensure currency and adequacy of Security approvals by making periodic
ut co, reviews and reevaluations; Coe —
appointed . (a) provide’a repository for all _seourlty information pertaining to con-
suring any “+ tract personnel, a
2 Director (3) HE CHIEF, CENTRAL COVER STAFF will Qo: Bo
: (a) provide cover and cover, legends for coné ‘sonnel whose em- |
for to the ployment by the Agency cannot be pt edged;
are assess~ (b) ensure currency of.such cover Mids by making periodic.
i a neriad reviews and reevaluations; GW : , : ;
wes" (eg) ensure that the mat DA provi le lements and con- =~
tractual benefits ying‘tax Mabilitias onsistent with as-
ret Agency - signed cover an gends. : oe :

7 provision

7 benefits (4) THE DIRECTOR OF iXED: CAL, SER S) a
. a psycho- (a) establish standards and BRON ney for medical and psychiatric evalua-
te tions and for psychological Agsenent of contract personnel;
1973 (733) ~Revised: 23 February 1972 (733) . £2 IMPDET "127
SEGRE CL By: 002230
— * vA

O00h 1 5p



--- Page 26 ---
14-00000

racts, are set forth in HHB 20-12,

53. AGENTS. This paragraph sets forth policy, responsibilities, and authorities ,
conceéming the engagement and the management of agents. .

HR 20-54 | PERSONNEL
abies 3 oe)
r (b) make periodic reviews and mostegiiees juati ons-of ‘contract personnel i b. POLICY
when requested to do so, 4 ANS ae (1) Agents cannot !
(5) DEPUTY DIRECTORS AND HEADS'O: INDEPENDENT OFFICES will en- (3 Government em:
sure directorate uniformity of contract administration in matters such as . with normal pe:
qualifications determination, compensation, avowances and other benefits, | (a) Initial appri
personnel record keeping, systematic cost accounting, performance evalua- ‘ - commitment
tions, cover determination and training, terminations, and security and e an agent. i
j medical approval processing requirements. (b) Agents will :
j (6) THE DIRECTOR OF TRAINING will provide appropriate training courses ~ . and a mant
j and facilities for contract personnel. and control
4 : (1) THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE will : . > No com
soe - ‘(a) adniinister pay, leave, and allowance entitlements of contract: person- - : Densath
nel consistent with contract provisions an requirements; a Li. ata rat
(b) 1h eocrdination with the Covert eRe ster a secure system")  f- . maximt *
for the settlement of Federal al security tax ob- This lir
ligations. WWD does no
ad. AUTHORITIES om Yo . ; (2) No com
(1) The Director of P Sesetya and the ‘speslt Contracting Ofticer its, wit
(Chief, Contract Pelso S Division) are, upon request of a Deputy Director, benefit:
i an Operating Official, Headof Independent Office, or a duly appointed : normal
. contract. approving offic! rj. ‘authorized to. execute, amend, renew, | and. . Co.
i. . terminaté contracts with ‘contract personnel. . .
Ne (2) Deputy Directors and Heads of. Independent Offices may designate Con-
{ : . tract Approving .Officers to approve contracts when payment’ is" to be’. a co
3 charged against’ funds under their control Jota ye.
| (3) Authority delegated to” Chiefs of ‘Station and ‘Base’ under the provisions. ot. _ &. te
q FR 20-31 is subject to the tollowing limitations: ' _
j arn ‘ (a) All contracts executed in the field will be subject ‘to review by the = fo. . i
j Director of Personnel. “(d) In general;
3 (b) Deputy Directors may limit the exercise of the authority granted to ards. Howe ~
chiefs of field installations to any extent they deem desirable, es _ to provide!
(c) Contracts prepared by headquarters will be amended only by, or with | ay be carried;
the prior approval of, headquarters. Contracts executed in the field (e) Agents wh
§ may be amended in the fleld, but all such amendments must be. for- { the United
warded to headquarters. their asso<
(4) All contracts written under the authority of this regulation will be subject tax Mabilit
to legal review by the General Counsel under such conditions as he may 20-35.) i
prescribe,
e. PROCEDURES, Requirements and procedures concerning personnel records, i
personnel actions, security approvals, cover, cover salary, medical” evaluations, a re
compensation, qualifications determination, ‘training, and processing of :con- Bn 2
|
i
}

a, GENERAL, Agents are wit ting “manpower. assets, unique to the Operations .
Dizectorate, who .carry out esplonage and covert ‘action tasks on behalf of the -.-
Agency. Agents are not employees cf thé U.S.°Government. They are self-
empioyed Individuals whose services may be Thea « inated at any
time. Care must be taken to distinguish SRT ‘herein, and
independent contractors, detined in HR 20-53 eC \

acy

128

SiN? 23 Febpuary 1973 (733)

Rn raat aneetone



--- Page 27 ---
ww

C
HR 20-54b

[PERSONNEL

b, POLICY ;
AN (1) Agents cannot claim rights and privileges normally granted to U.S,
a Government employees; therefore, they will not be managed in accordance

with normal personnel and administrative standards.

(a) Initial approval of the Counter Intelligence Staff is required before any -
-commitments are made or any classified information is disclosed to

an agent.
(b) Agents will receive compensation, benefits, and emoluments in amounts
and a manner deemed best by the Operations Directorate to motivate
and control them, subject to the following limitations: -
(1) No commitment may be made to an agent to provide gross com~
pensation (basic compensation, additional compensation, fees, etc.)

. ata rate which, if projected on an annual basis, would exceed the
maximum rate for a GS-15, without prior approval of.the Director. - .
This Umitation applies only to payments made by the Agency. It
does not apply to bona fide coveringoms. ../- -. .« :

{2) No commitment may be made to an agent to provide special bene-
fits, without the prior approval of the Director of Personnel. Special
-benefits are Agency. obligations other than basic compensation,
normal overseas cost of llving payments, and ae operational

expenses. i. ore oe y .

(3) No commitment may be made to an agent that “ap jointed status

will be offered at the conclusion of his service unless such com-

-. . mitment Has b&enj;tecommended by.-the “Reputy Director. for ;
‘s . Operations or his ¥eblgne salveae the concurrencel of the Director of

edi |bytheiDirector of Personnel. -

subject to Agency}

be carried out, unless precluded by security considerations.

8) : .v to provide medical or diss
a

Fe] (e) Agents who are U.S, citizens, resident allens, or foreign nationals in
the United States, must pay Federal tax on all income derived from

their association with the Agency. Procedures for satisfying Federal

t I : tax ability will be determined by the Covert Tax Board, (See HR
y : 20-35.) .

3 ({) The use of retired civilian annuitants of the U.S. Government as agents
, : will be governed by policy set forth in HR 20-13.
* (2) All commitments made or implied to agents will be recorded in either a

Forme] Agreement or a Memorandum of Oral Commitment...

(a) A Formal Agreement is a-written agreement, signed.by the agent and.
. ; an authorized Agency representative. Forma): Agreements will be nego-
's . tiated whenever’ operationally feasible, ~~ « fee -

(bd) A Memorandum of Cral Commitment ts a written record ot an agree-
signed: by an authorized Agency. representative but not. by. the

Use of- Memorandums. of Oral Commitment..will. be limited to
terest not to’ solic :

agent:
- those cases when in the Agency's be
/s signature ;



--- Page 28 ---
14-00000 —

a we : |
HR 20-55 ~ Oo. PERSONNEL
re RESPONSIBILITIES AND Cae . ‘

(a) formulate procedures for the engagement and management of agents :
and to issue operating directives and special instructions, as necessary, 1
to control the use of agents by headquarters and field units; .

(b) execute, amend, renew, and terminate Formal Agreements and Memo-
randums of Oral Commitment. with agents; and to review Formal
Agreements and Memorandums of Oral Commitment executed in the
field; tee mo

(c) suspend procedures implied 1: in this regulation upon his personal deter- ,

mination that operational and sécurity aspects of an agent’s-manage-
mect are so sensitive as to require processing through special channels.

(2) The Director of Personnel is authorized to

. (a) approve, after coordinating with affected Agency components, the
commitment to an agent that he will receive special benefits; .
(b) approve the commitment to an agent that he will be offered appointed
status at the conclusion of his service, when such commitment has
‘been recommended by the’ Deputy Director for Operations or his des-
ignee, with the concurrence of the Director of Security;
com . (¢) execute, amend, renew, and terminate Formal eements and Memo-
: ‘randums of Oral Commitment when requé © so by the appro-
Ag authority may also
phel and the Special Con- C3)
i

SQ pmmitment written
* Kas to legal review by

fe may prescribe,

—

|
“|
a

(3)

55. PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS FOR THE |. SERVICES OF
INDIVIDUALS

a. POLICY. Procurement contracts whose basic purpose {s to obtain the services
of one or more individuals, negotiated with profit and nonprofit institutions,
associations, partnerships, proprietorships, and other organizations, are per-
mitted only when the. particular ‘services| Sought ¢ cannot be obtained in any :
other practicable way. won -

b. PROCEDURES

a Except as provided In subparagraph b(3) below, all Proposals for such
procurement contracts and their renewal must be justified {n writing by
the component seeking the services and be submitted to ‘the Director ‘of ©

. Personnel for his approval. before commitments are made or negotiations

. started. These proposals will deseribe in. some “aw the services to be ren-
dered, the qualifications required, the pr. tion of the task, and |
the reason or reasons why a ae is judged | to be. the

best method of acquiring aoe AMOS r7egs\S?

130 \\Y sey February 1973 (733)

qa The Deputy Director for Operations is:authorized to : @3

PERSONNEL

(2) The Directs
personnel g
examine th
sonnel. If t
rector: of P
Office of Lc
tract reque;
are written
BR 45.2, i

. (3) The approv

(a) for pro
~ dental j
reports!’
task pe
thme (

». (b) for pron
require:
testing,
follow~
tlon—r¢
above. !

¢. RESTRICTION! .
. . I
(1) Operating ¢ -

» through the
: erly briefed-
. Agency Infc .
“Operating ¢
the relation ©
affects the;
_ curity clear, :

-@ Technical 1
procuremen
_ employer-e .
” organizatio;
istrative au
the Agency;
cles, private

i
56-59. Reserved. :

Revised: 23 Februt



--- Page 29 ---
HR 20-55c

PERSONNEL .

(2) The Director of Personnel “ascertain whether any staff or nonstaff .
os personnel are available to perform the needed services, If not, he will
gaN examine the feasibility of satisfying the requirement by hiring new per-
be sonnel. If this latter course of action also proves impracticable, the Di-

rector of Personnel will approve the proposal and return it either to the
Office of Logistics or to the originator for subsequent submission of a con-
tract request to the appropriate procurement unit, Procurement contracts
are written under the authority of the Director of Logistics as stated in
ER 45-2, : .
(3)-The approval of the Director of Personnel is not required |
(a) for procurement contracts involving the services of individuals inci-
dental to research and development or the preparation of studies or
ote . . reports, where the fee reflects an end product (a,report written, a
, task performed, etc.) rather than a computation based mainly on
- |. + time (pep hour, per man year); |. Looe
(b) for procurement contracts involving the p equipment which -
requizes the services of experts or tecthyicia) elivery, installation,
testing, initial operation or ma: en e\treining, etc. However, any
follow-on contract for servi sh

_ _ AS) as tenance or opera-
tlon—requires the Directs Ss; el’s ir roval as set forth
above. SY . .
is
_ & RESTRICTIONS _ RO ; WS , .
, are 0.

(1) Operating Officials SPo: \\ ring’ all personnel acquired’ ”
he . through these procedures. Th re that such personnel are prop-
soe -erly briefed and thoroughly* r3ednd any Umitations on their access to

_.. .Agency.Information and buildings and other pertinent securi
Operating Officials-are.requized, to.advise appropriate. offices at |
the. relationstilp or use.of such ‘individuals is subject to“a~change- which,
+5 affects the-terms. of. their contractual-arrangements, thelr status,: or. s6:
curity clearances, ©. 0.0 oslo sea .

(2) Technical representatives and other. types of personnel engaged under
procurement contracts or other agreements which do not create a direct.
employer-emiployee relationship are prohibited by law from holding formal
organizational positions or positions requiring the exercise of any admin-
istrative authority. They are also prohibited from formally representing
the Agency in meetings with representatives of other Government agen-
cies, private industry, or foreign governments or industries.

56-59. Reserved.

*. a

£2 IMpDeT
Ct By: 002230


