
--- Page 1 ---
"\to4-40163-10066 -| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
Vo. oe
« .

SECRET |
Fvtntey ctl Capes. SHED

able personal courage, gocd security and common sense. If, ry pind he
fe the ideal type of Latin American agent. It will-be * real loge. to
the “Agency if ve lose Bight cr contact with sdolfo, I Dave set few men
more dedicated and more loyal. .

AIMAY

5. [Kanon UsATEGUI Lezana.| AMPAN-3, Recruited ry #/PAN.2 and so
close each other that we refermd to them as the Sreld “ust Twins.?
Ramon wme tn the salppicg business tn ifavana ini e had to
leave. He loat hia hore, cars, furnishings, ete. 515 firm de now
planning to send nin oa Nicaragua, an! i rave Trecameried hin to the
Nicaragua desk fir. FFenta He has all the qualities s:eribed to
Adolfo SAN FELAYG (see abeve) except that he has revar teen an stericas
citizen. He fpeaks excellent English. Ke 1s Cadicated, courageous and

most aaxtous to raintein contact with the Agency. 2t wiil be our loss
&f thie is pot done. :

ate? . “
. 6. Berpert | Barker. AMCLATTER«l. wife: Clare. Barker isa
© CubaueAzerican. @x-Captain in the U.3.A.P. See FXG end 201 for full
“ Die date. I recruited barker in 1957, and he served feithfully until
we had to exfiltrate hir sometize in 1960. He recru:ted a muzber of
_ Waluable agentes for the Staticn (including AMCLATTEheS, vnich See) and
bed an amasing encyclopedic imovwledge of cubas persons, events and con-
tacte in all walke of itfe. Be was e boxing saneger ard inay tivinately.
. abl Cuban personalities engaged in the sporting incuetry. ie hed o pwepy-
Gog loyslty to nis case officers and to the Agency. 2 bigrest, weakness
_ wae hie lack of discretion. He vas such a loys american (actually af -
pot technically) that he would fight at the drop of @ hat tf anyone east
Sepersions on the United States or its leaders. In the atacephere of
Castro's Cuba I might say that thet was quite often. +e ere fn ths
“. process of heloing him recover his lost Americas citizenshis. When the
. Stetics reopens { would certainly r-ormend that we esatinus to waintain
contact with Earker, If nothing eice he would race ¢ womcerls) iegemas
*| for the Chief of Stetion. His wife is an ttractive lucien vel who ts bi-
~ Vingual and aa balliverentiy “imer:-

gel
t
Be

: y ashe 43. Larger, ty lus and
.' \ 7 by language, sould sass either as au American or a VNB - a gemlne
“7 ageet 1f he could be taught to submerge his americaainn,

PETE INES OT ET

og, [Fanole Wir sneti] I vet Manolo through Jorss £U5%S6 31;
{pow & p¥isonar in Cuba aaa result of the 17th of April invasinn).
Manolo is working for us now in Miemi, and 1 OPegume wa have P24 Ot:
dats on him. Manclo's family owned, along vith Repurits Stsei, tae cap
* steel plant in Havana which was nationalized by the Cestre regiss (Cia.

‘ Autillaaa de Acero, 3.4.). Manolo nan 4 brother, mmrignay wite’ would
aleo be vorth cultivating. Through his tusiness es! Sarsly corrections
. oa Wanole knew 2 great mang veopie of enerationaL interact. One of bia
. frisnde was David SALVADOR, although Manolo aid fot ware ZA VADOR @
J polatdeal thinking (extreme leit and Qntied-erican), farelo wo
“7\ @bjeotive a reporter as I have ever encountered asong Lat!

sirname agen ¢

~ seoner

