
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10226-10045)

. ny

sales present.

ve Canadian,

 etpounstances woich they felt were net monitored.

, BAIT Boenuse of the extotence of civil war: 4)

[2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

or

seenet

4 may 1961

mxwoaAxona roa Taz RECoaD
Briefing of Mri. Maurice oletiet4, ,at-6, by wa/4, “clark Bieaons

ro

SvBIECT:

,

3, Ia view of the request of Ur, Maurice oistieid, 1-6
Proprescatative, for identities ang fortter particulars regardiog the
Rotert Mortca, Godden choo & wevting neld on 2 Bay.1961 with WA/4/C!,
Clark Stuaons, wtin Hr. Cleveland ©, Cras and Joba G. ‘Roberts ot BB/6

3. ‘At the outset BF, pievinas sriviées sve’ tiilontng tnfocnation:
. Robert Wortss Goddea fs & British sudsect vorn 10

Lina, Peru, oa 7 April 1932, He holds arittaa: passport Ne. C-24880, Lo
fesuod. at Masagua oo 14 Jene 1956... Re wee not rediasered at the.
British Consulate so Havaas ard was regarded 4B being Aserican or.

8. Teo saplcyeos of the Brttisd Eabaosy, Havana; ‘hag visited

-Codses in the Bavyaoa jai} (allitary G-2 » ction) on Sunday svaning, 3 .

& TS-sincte conversética with Geddas alone under
Gedgeg stated to
thea: (1) On 19 April ne was arrested dy the silitia (ts civilian
clothes) at his hotel; (2) He had been interrogated three tines and .
ve the iapresaion that te had sot 4isclased anything of faportance;
3) Bs wus acccaed of beteg a CIA agent. and told that he could be
aring tae third
intorregatios Geddes Daa snodn thet thor nero 6. mésgdge to Spanien
aigued by Gdéea which vas sest Allegodi¢ Dy dia by radio- tran saittor
asking that CIA sead arae to Cuba, .

30. April? 1961, and had

‘e. The Britioh ‘Bebsesy din Bavaca learned on Saturday,

S9 April 1961, that Geddes had regularity tees “picked tp” at the

Ravana airport co tis trips ta and from Miaat (ar, Oidfield waa. pot
given ts the tera

-cortaia wuat- exact: iBterpretatioa could ds: givea

“picked up™).

3. After relating the above, Wr. Oiditeld state? that his eervice
is taterested in chtatning an estinate of Ye sort of story the Cibaas
wight ose agaiast Gedtos or if prevacaticn agaios? the British Revassy,
perasps to prove that tho British Bedbasey had beer ta collumico with
the &. 8. Poferred to tne follovisg specific queatioss which te
had subaitted earlior on 4:itay and which tere relayed by UB/d to WA/43
R. Hopkies fcr assvera to be given ib the afteras 38 aeepton by Clark

Ginmoas:

2

Sener


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

B a. What was the identity of the agent t2wi¢e Cuba Who «Ave GALDES a

£
sat

the Beanage he browgzht to the CIA coetact ia Mikes oa 3h Barch Lady;
What eas the idestity--or caas or Ragee--caed by the CIA case

2 ' Be
Officer in Miawi;

.'@. “Was Geddes given any Bette of clandestine radto-tranesieaton;

d, What wore the fostructicas glyea to CRDDKS bp bts c8as officer.

4, ‘ite, Sismoas rapiiod aa follows: : . . -

8. The coly meaca of Codeunteatisa Given te Codtés, oeatdas bis

open cide paone
systes, Godées

contact vita his wife (a B-ca Ra Ry WES & very atngle S#
Was not @tveo any aeans for claatestice fACLO-tranemiesios,

. b. Siasonn then rsas sad Felated the follorteg chrozologs of
- Geddes! Sctivits . :

1 March: Gadde
FITH Cadvaza/4,
Gaddom had a apn

6s froa WH/4 files: : ; :
S cass to iaat on the sight of V1 Berea and nade contact |
8 Cuban fo Missi gnc waa it coatact aith the CIA office,
Sage fros Caboags/) a CIA ccutect taotde Copa, - C-4 put

Gedéou in contact gtth a CIA saso officer {9 Miand on 13 March, Geddes

claimed to bs an

@toup inside Cubs ofr watcha C~) wag a anaes

Cuban Navy has a
Cuba on or absut
was act kasea.
to Geddea' rapor
Havana, :

Active wesker of the Caitag Rovoluetsraria, a restaiance

8 abacer. “AT YEG Sates Geties aaid the
plea to attack all pre Po facilities ac¢ thos. flee

22 Birch. Cedtes d1q cat Bek for any Boney, Fis wativatics
Tae case officer JEatrscttois ts Caddies were retated @otely

t that the Copao Rayy Bred sefect. Geddes returned to

16 Barch: Geddaa departed for Aavaca,

30 Kareht Ve board tndirestiy ~ Gedéos had phored his vifa and dedicated

2

ts @ isdividsal (C-D wits gaon te had been collaborating ta.Caired
Beveluctonaria waa in trestle, Tae fact benind this ahs tnat on6 of our
ageuts (Uaeahor of the TR) dzatde ‘Cure neg RRALPOt dnetructtone visited ats
tife ta Cuba. As a vevolt = OR set of fPvO0 Sereiis was aerinted decliding
Cc-1, Besides C-1, ocas of tke others of Caih net eres of Geddes’ activitien.

‘21 Barch: - Gedden returned to Hiaai.

t

2@ March: Gsddes cane to Havana, he vas Kiveo @ sincle 8 syuten,.
Sianing about 28 warch ve had Freascs to Bvstett Geddes as a Presible
Provocateur aince the Jafectioa Bed rot ccoao off and possibility of measping

the defoction of

the Navy ascrot tn itself: was teplazstbole,

a7 Barch: Qsddos soet a S¥ ie SBage to Hiaat 'rogardiog the poastdle Cuban
MAVET Gefeotion, : i .

28 March: Through opam code telecon vith wite Said defection of Navy ast
r 4 April, - . an .

59 Marcd: _Gadeoo called wifes on telepboas,

Son

oe aetupurcey nuueth .


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Tae

ne ne

-3-

VApril: Godden sent on 58 aosaige white was daad-carried’ te

y & courfer. Gedéea algo had & telecss vite his wife oa
this day, - : . : a .
2 April: Os4ééa said in talecen ts wife that Saval conspirators
TOOTS weet 90 3 April aod Geddsa sovld give co oa 4 April a ginal

date for tha defectica, | .

4-April: Ggédes indivated 1a telecsa to vite that ihe Baral
Geroction vould taxs place "aay ¢ay” avy, an

TAprii: Ge réeoived o nssoage frou Gedéos delivered by.a tniré

pirty Ccourisr) that the Havy plana to defect on 3 cr 7 April..
Geddes returned to Hianl oad maid the date vas sev est for 6 or 9

april,
10 April: Ge@éos returned to Ravans, |
Ll dgeil: Gadden telephoned Bis vife that ths defection could take
place oa 18 or 14 April. a . oo — :

16 April: Geddes in telecon with wife rozerted that the éefwctien

eonte be on 17 or 18 April. _

©. During the acesudt of tts absre ekrvaclogy, Bizaces

wade the. following comments: -

G) te ou agent faside (C~-1) vouched fer Geddes bot we here is

‘ Beadqnarters 60 sot keoy t6 wast extent C-!3a¢ arcveé iets the. back-

ground ef Cecdes and his coatacts. We kere cid advies Hisai set to
take acy Bution until we nad-ebtaised Brit:as concerrasce bat by
that tiss Gacdes had alrondy returned ts Havaza, He reiterated that
Gedées wags 6 walk-~-ia ond wag fever trotted es an agest.

(3) Getdne aod his forecast -vegardieg the cefeetion of the Cazan
Havy wong suspect froe tha ‘oatset. Ho clainsd to be & Britisa .
Sttiser but vas alroaty perfcruiag for the £.3.

_ (3) Pe Br. Ol4field'n questisa so ta wasther Goddes had acy access
to a G/F ena, Stazoas roplied that to Sis kasvledge Geddes caly kad ~

Phone coatact with hia wifo, SY and eee of ecerior,

_. (4) % aras elivertos vere involved in the esatact with Gedées.
' (3) Simmons e2td kd would look into whom Gef¢es could certasizata

or put. the fLager oa. .

(6) fo Rr. Olofield'o gnestaen repeated regsest for iésatities of
C-4. Col, the Wiset caso officer, aad the cel teat wee arrests’ oa
16 BaFoh, Sissons replied that caly ths GCI nas tae aathority tp -

‘elena ovca Ltafsreation.- .
(1). Te Maat case officer never esrved 1asige Cuba.

die +


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

Bavara, .

A:

Seppe

“a. After Br. Oldfield ‘had put a aveber of questions te Ginnsas-
the latter asked Clefinid thethor Gottes 1s goseihly. a British agaat

Which Oldfield gaphatically ansvered ia the cogative. ;
(6. Hr, Ol€field saa that ke would now-sond off a coan:

te his sarvice fadicatiag that Geddez Bight be a pkozrsy—a provocateur,

Usvever, ba asked that bs bo PTOVided with the following: _

-&. CiA approciation of the United Rovolosisnaria;

CB. Hantitiss of C-1, C-d aad wexborn of txe oet vith ghon
-C-1 vas. arrested sx Barck 18 (Bota: Bimaors acknsaledged. that boatdas
C-) coacetvatly several btkar evabera of this cet sight bare knora of
GeSdes sad hin activities.) : . en oo

6. Iévatities of the Couriers who had contact vith Coddes

“2 "gL mie teentity of the CIA cage 6tficer--ths nase oF naees,
geed by hig’in ecatacta with Gedées; foe. Se,

es, @ Chrosplogtes} Gaunary of the vistta o7. Gsddos te Mieat
ani returne to Bavasa; ales a Vist of the natere of nis ‘COmaunicetiong.~
to Miami (by telecoa, courisr, ete.) aad Ceaguaications eeat to his 16

_ + Joka-Q. Roberte’
BC;WR/6

sBieation |

 Heeritiiced ta attain ptapancd macys tS) yell NLT Lee AGE. TURAN StREA NON nese

7
:

