
--- Page 1 ---
HN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)

t T JO
104-10216-10398| [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDEN

cal cakyt
ral .
ad

15 February 1965

SUBJECT: Meeting with AMLASH-1 in Paria,
31 January to 3 February 1965

|
|
MEMORANDUM POR THE RECORD |
i

@. The primary reason for again meeting AMLASH~1

a before his planned return to Cuba was to brief him on the rot

7 security implications involved in the infiltration and j

4 possible capture of Modesto Orlando Orozeo Basulto AKA t

: Bebo Orozco, who infiltrated into cuba on 21 Dec 1964, ‘4
Orozco, according to his we, went to Cuba to rescue Jose i
Vasquez .Horey and three others who were hiding in the. : f

, home of a woman named Gloria Cabrera, who lived at No, 72 ian
27th Street, between N & O, Apartment 3, Vedado, Havana, xt
Orozco's Capture, if he has been captured, presents an ‘

a indirect threat to the security of AMLASH-1 and a more

ut direct threat to the security of AMTRUNK-10 since Orozeo

: in Jan 1964 exfiltrated through the rat line established

" by AMICE-14 (Miguelito), Upon his return to Cuba,

cH AMLASH-1 will check the above vith AMTRUNE-10; and, i¢

still in hiding, r¢ the letter to UNSNAFU-9 mentions a

oe A good and pleasant return trip, this will mean that Orozco
is not under the control of the Security service. If the
letter talks abouth long, tiring trip, this Will indicate
that Orozeo has been arrested. AMLASH-1 was also requested
to send a report on the above and any complications which
have developed or may develop from Orozco's infiltration.

race

it

peel

b. AMLASH-1 Suggested that his nom de guerre "Charles,"
which we have been using for the-past three years, be
changed to "Gerardo."

SECRET

rs ces . - meee -



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000 7

-Z~

c. AMLASH-1 was Biven a resupply of S/W developer
Pills and carbon, He planned to take the S/W material
back with him to Havana, AMNLASH~1 again reviewed with

{

i

| AHLASH-1 to either UNSNAFU-9 or letters that may be addres

Hl - to his parents~-in-lay, -1 also agreed to send S/W
out in letters addressed to Juan Ventura CAMWHIPLI'g
business partner) in Geneva or Rome, AMWHIP.) was briefed —
to infor Ventura that any letters he received from

i 1 should be immediately air mailed to AMWHIP-)

i in New York. Since ANLASH~] Will probably find it

| necessary some time not to sign the letters to Ventura
in his true name, AMWHIP-) wag 8lso briefed to inform

i Venturz to forward to New York any letter received fron

H Cuba addressed to him and signed by a person unknown to

| hin, 8/W letters to AMLASH-1 should continue to be

i addressed to Ernestina Acosta, Edf, No, 526, Apt. 8,

| Esquina Calles 25 y H. In an emergency a letter can also
be sent to AMLASH-1's mother,

q
: | dad. sAYMLASH-1 Was again debriefed on the cache that had
a been put down for him in Matanzas. He repeated what he
] had previously reported and attempted to answer most of
H _ the questions in the WAVE cable, A cable on this subject
was sent from Paris to Headquarters, info WAVE, on 2 Feb,

how much of the radio equipment and other material had
been recovered from the cache.

i ©. AMLASH-1 was asked 4f he knew of any individual in
Cuba whom he could recruit and who could be inserted into
4 the Cuban Intelligence Service with the idea of attempting
: . " to get the DGI to assign this man to Caracas, Venezuela,
5 AHLASH-} could think of only one Possibility, an individual
| known as Gustavo’Gonzalez,. AMLASH-1 has full confidence
: in Gustavo and Gustavo has previously been approached on

mee
8
3
»
£
8
8
a
»
8
@
g
4
B
a
3
Pad
cy
3
*
8
%
3
eal
B
c
3
5
E
&

can still get hinsel? recruited by Pinero and then be

Sent on a mission abroad, hopefully to Caracas. (CAMWHIP-1,
who also knows Gustavo, will provide the background infor-
mation upon his return to New York, )

_ 2. AMLASH-1 reported on the upcoming FEU elections
on 10 February 1965, AMLASH-1 stated that Crombet, the
president of the Communist Youth, will become the new.

PIN teweean, maton

Ss cgihitaoy

“he

SECRET 7 . _

Sia aon

etehgee

ea

tee TEE a a



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

-3-

president and that his man, Laghro Mora, would be one of
the vice-presidents, (A cable on this subject was sent
to Headquarters from Paris.)

g. AMLASH-1 was requested to check with Fizzolo
regarding the precautions being taken to prevent sabotage
of the lodkotives being shipped from France to Cuba;
epecifically, how carefully do they check the placement
of the seals, are they special seals or regular load
serls, are there going to be any additional checks once
the locomotives reach Cuba, will they drain the of11 and
lubricants from the factory to the port, and do they run
the locomotives under their own power or are they towed.
AMLASB~1 agreed to attempt to develop answers to the above
requirements and pass the information to his contact in
the Paris Station. AHMLASH-1 also agreed to attempt to find
out and pass to the Paris Station through UNSNAFU-9 the
names of the Cuban techs training at La Rochelle,

h. In a general discussion regarding the persons with
whom AMLASH-1 had been in contact either personally or
through letters, AMLASH-1 mentioned Alfredo Portela,
AHLASH-1 stated he had received a letter from Portela and
had in turn written to Portela. He considers Portela a
friend which was the only reason for writing to him,

2 i, AMLASH-1 was debriefed on Cuban Intelligence
Service personnel. A cable on this subject was sent from
Paris to Headquarters.

j. <A cable was sent from Paris to Readquarters
suggesting WAVE send a S/W letter to AMTRUNK-10 stating:
"Este tranquilo, Carlos regresa pronto,”

Sseihenemnimmeneiomienacieiaisemeinenee carne eet eet re

k. AMLASH-1 was asked for information on the fol-
lowing persons:

(1) Samuel Gonzalez Rodriguez-Planes. AMLASH-1
reports he is a member of the Ameijeiras group and
is a good and brave man,

(2) Antonio Lusson y Batlle, Chief of Operations
of the General Staff of the Occidental Army.
AMLASH-1 reports Lisson if an independent and rare
type individual who keeps to himself and doesn't
involve himself in political matters. AMLASH-1 has
heard nothing bad about Lusson,

cats as, arb

Staaeneemerns: eomreawvnserny§ 63

#
#
FA

rage SUR aee As meee atte orem otk

eo



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

wna

mary

-¢- :

(3) Cadte. Raul Diaz Arguelles, Chief of
Artillery of the Oceidental army.

(4) Elpidio Baez Bigo. According to AMLASH-1,
Baez is a trusted Fidelman,

(5) Luis Manuel Cantillo Toirac., Assigned to
the Cuban Embassy in Madrid and one of the security
people, He was formerly assigned to Brazil, is young
and has for several years been with Pinero and the
Cuban IS,

(6) Enrique Oltuski Osacki. Oltuski is a close
friend of Faustino Perez and his stock sith the regine
riges or falls as does that of Faustino. .

(7) Sergio Tolfon. Code clerk in the Embassy in
Paris, TolYon is staying in Paris at the request of
Ambassador Carrillo,

1, Gastro enteritis, water pollution and unsanitary
conditions. AMLASH-1 states there are no real problems,
although the scarcity and lack of a balanced diet do
cause some problesas. The purification of water has been

. & problem which probably has been the cause of some of the
sickness in the country. _—

m. AMLASH-1 did not believe that Aragones had invited
him to fly back to Havana with him tn order to get him
back because of eny serious security matter. AMLASH-1
did state that Aragones was concerned that AMLASH-1 may not
return to Cuba. Since Aragones cleared AMLASH-1 for his
trip abroad, he is in a way responsible that AMLASH~1 does
not defect and returns to Cuba. AMLASH~1 feels Aragones
does not want any problems with Fidel in case AMLASH-~1
Gecides to stay out.

SEBI A ohn een emeneremn erat aren mime peer enener etna nerenyine enna erpei nae apnea ee

ra

a, Sc

_OSRUAT SS ate nar one evry, umage

nm. AMLASH-1 was unable to provide any information on
the political developments in Cuba in mid-November and
December since he had been out of the country since early
November. AMLASH-1 wap asked to check on the problems
between the opposing factions in the Cuban leadership and
explained the issues, the background and personalities
involved. -

|
©. Soviet advike or influence in political and economic |
matters creates ro tment among the middle and higher level i

‘ppg teane ay eunenotsren ae

Caban officials. Basically, the Soviets are not respected.

SECRET



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

H : p. Rank of Cuban officials under Fidel in teras of
I their influence in making national policy, Rseul is still
the heir apparent to Fidel. Next to Raul is Che Guevara,

After that, no other official, according to AMLASH-1, has
any great influence in the making of Cuban national policy.
President Dorticos’ relationghip with Fidel is gvod since
be is a hard and serious worker, has good administrative
ability and is able to work within the general outline laid
down by Fidel. Raul Castro has sone political influence |
and control in Oriente where he has placed his men in i
positions of influence, but only Fidel personally has any
poktical influence in the rest of Cuba, Even within the
military Fidel selects and appoints high army officers.
Che Guevara is still strong in the economic field and
has not suffered a decline in his influence and authority
because of his earlier policy of industrialization,
Guevara restricts himself to the economic field and plays
@ very small role in the political field. He is serious
and very hard worker, one of the few, according to AMLASH-1,
who has worked geven days a week without leave since the
revolution, Emilio Aragones holds an important pos{tion
as the organizational secretary of the PURS. He is the
official who was always at the office of the National
Directorate of the Party and has contact with all the
officials in the regime, He plays an important coordinating
role, Faure Chomon has been. accused of organizing former
13th of March Revolutionary Directorate people, but,

* according to AMLASH-1, this probably based on the fact that
Chomon always gives jobs in the ministry he heads to DR
people, Because of this Chomon today controls to 3 large
degree the Hinistry of Transportation. Of all the ainistries,
the DR's stronghold is in the Ministry of Transportation.
Other DR people who continue to hold important positions

“ in the regime are Alberto Mora, Ambassador Carrillo and
Jose Naranjo. a

Hee eanamntat one ata dae Meta tea Ae ee ee ee ene teeny eee

+

q. AMLASH~1 and AMWHIP-1 were unable to develop any
specifics, but from their conversations with Ambassador
Carrillo got the impression that Carrillo would prefer and
_ Welcome a transfer from the Eabassy in Paris to the
-.- oe. . + Embassy.in Madrid,

- .¥. According to Emilio Aragones, Anibal Escalante
is being considered for a job outside Cuba. The job will
probably be in the commercial/economic field, but a
decision had not been made as of November 1964 as to
location. ,

oa tepeetnie

Scant

HI
a

ran



--- Page 6 ---
rn SECRET
. -6-

6S. AMLASH-1 again reported that he feels Orlando i
Blanco, Consul of the Cuban Embassy in Bern, is :
approachable since he is unhappy with the Cuban regime,

| AMLASE-1 also feels that Enrique Rodriguez Loeches,

| Cuban Ambassador in Pabat, is approachable if approached :
and developed by the right person. Marina Garcia Gonzalez
assigned to the commercial section of the Cuban Embassy
in Rabat, AMLASH-1 feels ig also approachable and feels
money can be used as an inducement. Ambassador Carrillo,
AHLASH-1 feelea, if the proper person developed him, could

robably be compromised with Fidel, He is a charact

could easil ° SH-1 in :
& compromising situation, Ambassador Carrillo is a close
na of Lucy Echevarria. or

2. AMLASH-1 was also asked information on a long list
of other requirements on Cuba. On nany he was unable to pro-
vide information and cables were sent to Headquarters on the
requiresents on which he did provide information.

ete tA eae nt een te ns eter mennatnn cnt erte bape

Nestor D, Sanchez
BA/ AMWORLD

ce: WH/BA/EKOB
id ray) mop

File:

AMLASH-1 201 ; .

Internal Op :

"ETN ERAN Aa A EAT a sna cis
u
!
merece

7a

SRT

Priced

senha sty ve

giBpphemnern anne tan ne ern Hea nea se gst

Set pete iat ke

Ow


