
--- Page 1 ---
a
14-00200 cone (5 SOT i DS A

104-10215-10128] - {2025 RELEASE | UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 le
i : i . : MATERIAL REVIEWED. AT CIA H EADQUARTERS BY

_ HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MENBERS®

FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME:

INCLUSIVE DATES:

CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:

ROOM:

DELETIONS, IF ANY:

DALE DATE :
_ RECEIVED RETURNED REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING “FFI

NOT RE

2D BY Har



--- Page 2 ---
x

coer emer SN wet ga ey,

CONFIDENTIAL |

(When Filled in)

INTEROFFICE MEMORANDUM

; 28 February 1967

TO. : Director, Domestic Contact Service . pt

SUBJECT: BARNES, Winfred Clark oe
FILE NO: 196 289 vam ¥ 9 ? SY

1. Peference is made to your ‘request for security checks on the subject
person as a source of intelligence. inforwation.

. 2 This is to inform you that the necessary checks have been completed with
the. following results: :

a. J No additional information has been obtained, « except for such.
biographic information as indicated below or in the attachment,

Information has been received that Subject was investigated with |
favorable results in

Certain information has been received and appears in the attach-
ment which your Division will wish to consider in determining
_ the extent and. level of your use of Subject. : 5

3. It is to be noted that our checks vere made onthe basis of the identifying
-information you furnished or in an attachment to this memorandwm, Should it be dis-
‘closed that this infortation is erroneous or that Subject is known, by e different
‘Ramey this Division should be notified immediately. _ .

STEVEN L.
chiet, Personnel Security Division

Attachment:
State Passport Report

_. team)
6-65, fl

An2Ga SEreters "eee “CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Comey,

Be Winfred Clark . - 10 January 1967
ero. Bie 29, , ; 7

- nh January 1967 a passport file of Winfred clark BARNES was . : f
reviewed at the Passport Office, Department of State. The following
is a swaary of the information contained therein

Date of Birth: 1 ifay 1912 at Gatesville, Texas; verified 1 by
birth certificate —

Father: Shaw Andrew BARNES; Date of Birth: 8 May 1882 at Kennedy,
ne : Texaas. current residence not ‘given.

. | Mtherr Velma Elizabeth HARRIS; Date of Birth: 8 March 1868 at...
- ‘Thelaies Texas; current residence not given.

PASSPORT ISSUED: At Miami, -Florida on 27 Snnuary 196, #0755210, ‘tor
a period of four weeks to visit Mexico, Guatemala,
: Costa Rica, Peru,. Columbia, Venezuela, Argentina, and af
- . Brazil for the purpose of tourism. - wee aptees
.. Peymanent eddress: ©5350 Southwest 76th Street :
oo (* Milamt, Florida
: Mailing address: International Petroleum Company, Ltda .
: "396 Alhambra Circle -

: Coral Gables, Florida
: Occupation: Director
Spouses. Lots Enquist BARNES; Date of Birth: 8 Marcy 1915
at New Haven, Connecticut; current residence
not given; Wed: 17 February 1945; no information
bate on. whether or not marriage has been terminated.

At kiant, Florida on 27 February 1961, #810331, for a
period of varying from one day to three weeks to visit
Bermuda, Bahamas, Jemica, Trinidad, British Guiana,
Guadeloupe, Barbados and Suriname for the purpose of
> business.

RENEWED: At Hienil, Florida on 12 May 1964, fora.
... period of ten days to visit Peru, Columbia,

-and other South American countries for tha’
“purpose of.basiness. Peat

SUBSECT' a first passport was iasued at Veshington, >. c.

on 21 February 1957, #328617, for a period of indefinite —

. tite, to visit Bermude, Hehwmas, Haiti, Trinidad, Janica,
Honduras, ml Salvador, Costa’ Rica, Panza, . Micaragua, -

‘confipentiat |

A crngnemene ene te iene ate en ene eaten ep ern it eames fanaa it een Nm ie te ermemn S *



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

and Cuntemala for the purpose: of business

‘ RENEWED: At Havana, Cuba on 2 separate occasions:

. 13 February 1959 and 5 June 1959, for 2 period of
approximately wo on both reneval forms, countries
to visit and purpose of visit not given. Los

i



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

WOMFRED CLARK BARHES __.» Sesurity Divialon kea

loys geented ad hoe elearnnce thea

‘Sscurity chacke will by completed.

IAL, THORNE -
Lial¥on Orricer

EXCIUIED FROM AUTOMATIC |
WIRADING AND ISCLASSIFICATION .-”



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY _ us November 1966

BIOGRAPHIC DATA Aa S a7 7 ISS §p —_ :
DATE AND PLACE OF BIRTH —

fs
__ BARNES, _Winfred____ Clark oo. 2 Bay. 1912, Gatesvilie, Texas _
la. SExX]8. CITIZENSHIP .

. ALIASES VW Va eZ es? | | 1

|. FULL NAME OF SPOUSE, DATE AND PLACE OF BIRTH, CITIZENSHIP

RESIDENCES Cnctading No., and § Street, ome, ED. ete)

from! z ro. “COMPLETE “Aopaces

Present © 5350 Southvest 76th Street _
; Miami, Florida

ye 136284.

evres

mami of empLoven | -

- \Eeso-Ziter-Auerica Inc. -~

Coral Gables, Florida

Coral Gables, Florida _

International Petroleum Co.

1960 : 'Bsso Standard O11 S.A., Ltd, a Coral Gables, Florida

1959 [gsso Standera 011 (Cube Div)
1957 ineso Stendard O11, S.A.

1955 Humble O11 Company
EDUCATION {High school, coteoe, graduate work, etc.)

Un Iniversity of Texas
Mustin, Texas” aK.
¥y_of Pittsbur,

i
{
i
aa | . _ é ‘6 -(15— ion, oe
. { 10, ADDITIONAL PERTINENT INFORMATION. INCLUDING - -FULL NAME, ‘CITIZENSHIP DATA ON PARENTS AND CHILDREN.

ee 6 HON 8B

‘oO CONTINUED



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

pad.
c CAR pias

me wit’

Foe ty -§350 Southwest 75th Strost
= TO ees Miami, Florida

BUSINESS: |

a” Subject is General Manager and in Cuba Division at:
f SO000L9 | - Esso Standard Of1 SA, Havana, Cuba

| Subject | is' now with:

DIRECTOR!
4136264 ; Esso Inter-America Inc., Coral Gables, Florida

re é

| INACTIVE ACTIVATED
INACTIVE

pare. 14 AUG 53 pans £2 13 = le
\ ttians BCS _ mitts AL —— ;



--- Page 8 ---
yeonn00

° Fanking Agency officials.

toa a, : Director, Domestic Contadt Service

negli
~* Attachments: a/s

i ak a

Pee aan oops Se retin

-) CuO-N-P-[-D-E H-T-T-A-L

|

1

: Ll Hay 19657
4

i

MEMCRARIAE POR: Chief, Ment Office

t . t

SUBJECT: . Executive Leacership Conferences on
‘ . Public Affaira

|
| «
|

1. On Priday, 28 April 1967, the business executives attending
the Conferences for Rusinesa Executives on, Federal Government
Opcrations » conducted by The Brookings Institution, were briefed by

2. YI have attached for your information biographie information
on the executives from your area who were present.

JAMES R. Mas

se

Control w/atts

peo "* “QROUP 2
Excluded from automatic i
downgrading and oad

declassification

C-O-N-F-I-D-E-N-T-I-A-L



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

OTE

pepo ae

WIN FRED C, BARNES *

Director /
Esso Inter-America Inc.

Mr. Barnes attended the University of Texas.

He began his career with Humble Oil & Refining Company, where he
held'various marketing positions before serving in the U. S. Army
from 1942 to 1946: He rejoined Humble as a District Sales Super-
visor at Corpus Christi, Texas, and later held the positions of District
Manager, Assistant Division Manager, and Marketing Manager in
several of Humble's marketing areas. He transferred to Esso Standard
Oil, S.A. in Havana as Marketing Manager in 19:7, and was General
Manager - Cuba Division at the time of the loss of that operation in
1960. Upon his relocation in Coral Gables, Florida in 1960, he became

Eastern Region Manager for Esso Standard Oil, S.A. Limited. Mr. Barnes.

joined International Petroleum Company, Ltd. as Marketing Coordinator
in 1961 and was elected a Director of that company in 1964. Today he
is 'a Director of Esso Inter-America Inc., with responsibility for
petroleum marketing, public relations, government relations, and

operat i ions in the Caribbean and Chile.



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

LAT LO.N@R, NEOR
[ ! _ , CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY:

ft aa . ~ :
This moteriol comains information affecting the Nutional Defense of the United Stotes within the meaning of the Espionage Lows, Tile ;
18, U.S.C. 793 ond 794, the tronsmission or revelation of which in'vany monner fo on unouthorired person is prohibited by iow.

bn :
on . . 1

- C-O-H-PeI-D-B-N-T-T-A-L

| os

COUNTRY hoo  REPORTNO. -- OO~ B-3,168,238

g

t i
SUBJECT Attitude of Segundo Cevallos, «= DATE DISTR. == =» 6 Oct: 60
Key Official of Hational Bank |

NO. PAGES One

! oo, .
md . : : REFERENCES

DATE OF .
bare id 60 and earlier

PLACE & “Hava: ne /'
DATE ACQ. to Sep 60
I
1
Us! mationsl, graduate engineer, an official on the steff of a large

ofl company.

Source hao had years of experience in cozpany operations outside the US
‘end has been located in Cuba for many yeors. [Source io norzally available
for reinterrogation should this report generate additional requirexents. }

nis. 1s UNEVALJATED mrcamarion

. SOURCE:

|

1. In Sep 60° talked to an old friend who was president of one of the US-cmned
tire companies recently ioterevened by the Castro regimes. My friend

stated that he hed recently contacted Segundo Cevalios, one of the - .
‘top officials of the Rational Bank, in. coamection with obtaining approval
for come of the company's US technicians to take their furniture and
appliances out of Cubs.. Cevallos said, "I don't want those technicians
bee ,., |€0 leave. We need them." At this, thé rubber company official stated

Ir." =". lehae it was too late and that the technicians hed alresdy gone.

ot . . .
. 2. |Cevellos then made the statement that he was very wach concerned about
i | the flight of technicians of all kinds frem Cube. He said that the

: +. + | Bevolution had been fought to give Cuba a wore highly developed industry,
but that the technicians were leaving and industry waa being seriously
effected. :

' | Cevallos then said, “Sousthing is wrong. ‘The revolution hes gotten off
. | the track. somevhere.” He then added, "I have got to talk to "Cha' about
this.” . : . ;

~ toa .

‘| Cevallos is a man of about 60-63 years, and has a very iaportant position, .
| fm Ghat he is in charge of granting foreign exchange. My. friend said

| that Cevallos is a very pleasant indivyiduel but ceems to be a theorist,
@ professorial type who obviously has had little or no business experience.

'; extremely nsive as evidenced by his comment that he would talk to "Che" -
| Guevara about how the revolution had gotten off the track.

at
! ‘
' :

t i C-O-N-P-I-D-E-H-T-I-A-L

la.
ES A CS (CS OPTS

te

. NOFORN is . ea - NO DISSEM_ ABROAD. a Sug en EEMITED
' EIMTYEB: Dissemination Limited to full-time employees of CIA, AEC and FAT: and, within State and Defense, to the inteltigence components, other
j. Offices producing NIS elements, and higher echions with theit immediate supporting & _ Not to be disseminated to consultants, external prajects or
| reserve personnel on short term active duty (excepting individuals who are normally full-time employees of CIA, AEC, FBI, State or Defences) uniece the
i written permission of the originating office hax beon obteined through the Assi Lo

bee

ae ee

Be has « beckground 25 a writer and philosopher, and epparently is _ +



--- Page 11 ---
14-000004

e

This material contains informetion-offecting the National Defense of the United” States within the meoning of the Espionage | Lows. Title
18, U.S.C. Secs: 793 ‘ond 794, the transmission of ravelation of which, in ‘ony monres to en vnouthorized perion it prohibited by tow,

COUNTRY

“SUBJECT

DATE OF
INFO.

PLACE &
DATE ACQ.

SOURCE:

ok

2.

6.

= NOFORN
LIMITED.

.

,

_ Steongly im favor of the companies and against the Castro regime.

‘The second indoctrisatica session was headed by an overt Communist from
: the Texas Company. He delivered the straight Party Line, auti-us,

: off the vorld for peace”, and caly Communist ideology will survive, ete.’

: ef; ths whole population of Cubs to chow that everyone was behind this uate
. Goctrine.- He then said in response to a question regarding what would

. strongly disapproved of any Pressure tactics.

| Dissemination limited to (all-time employees of CIA AEC and FBI: and, within State arid Defence. to the intelligence components, other -
altices producing MIS | elements, and higher echions wi
reserve personnel on short ter

all Gubsns ‘bad colored blood, and should not make 2 distinction and

n e “ O  hretes e' e . "@°
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

F
4
te

!

C-0-W-P-1-D-N-H-2-T-A-L °

i . Soa REPORT:NO.';*  OO—B-3,168,139 to

‘Anti-Castro Attitude of ICP Personnel DATE DISTR. , 6 Oct 60

cs NO. PAGES Two

REFERENCES

Sep 60 end eerlier

Havana/Sep 60 aed earlier
i THIS [S UNEVALUATED INFORMATION

Us : national, graduste engineer, an official on the avaft of 8 large . : 4
Of] company. _ : _ a

Souree hes had years of expericace in company operations outside the ,

ds ‘of Sep 60 there apgeer to be some etgotftcant developzente eceurring
aupag personnel of the staff of the -Cubaa Petroleun Institute. The
Institute hes counondeered a building of Reco Standard O11 SA for _
use eo headquarters, and is currently engaged in mixing the parcennel
oe) ‘all three intervened ofl cozpanies in ths new headquarters.

The ehuffling around of personnel has further lovered the sorale of
the petroleum industry exployees, and I have been told that 95% are

|
Stace IGP established its ney offices, indoctrination eeastons cf exployees
have been schedcled on a twice-a-week basis. The first session was
bold recently and was concerned with the "Colored Problen of the World".
The gist of the renarks of the conference leader was that Cubans were
of. Spanish ethaic origin, and because of the close ties of Spaniards
and the Moore for so unny hundreds of years it had to be realized that

Sea aes die tn tee tte ce oe ie be

should have no prejudices concerning people with colored blood.

enti-icperialist, anti-sonopoly, “The Soviet Union 1s the great hope

He’ “also stated that, "The Declaration ‘of Hevane .of Fidel ‘Castro will
be’ our doctrine,” ond said that it was desired to obtain the signatures
happen to those ‘who did not sign, "You are either for us of against us."

At this, one of the office girls who had been « " strong ‘Fiesiti 2 got. @- -
and remarked that such comments Teninded her of the. Batiste days, and she

| _ C-O-H-P-I-D-E--TEoAch

"NO _DISSEM ABROAD - ” LIMITED

immediate supporting atalts. Not to be disseminated ro consultants, externa! projects oF
fuels who are normally tall time employees of CIA, AEC. FBI; State or Defense) unives the
rence, CIA.

active duty (excepting it



--- Page 12 ---
yeonn00 +

7.

9.

10.

11.

_ Was ‘cancelled.

, in shutting down the refineries without resl justification, allegedly

" 00-B-3,168,139

One of the male office euployees then stood and stated that he agreed
heestily with her, and added that it was not the intent -of the revolu-
tion to "get into this sort of. business.” He then asked, “Why are ve _ .
getting all this Communist propaganda and why do we not hear anything about -
Jood Mart{?" His ccuments were greeted with spplause, i ,

AlChicd emplezee. stocd uy aad, calked for 45 minutes; He really lata it

oa the line concerning the way the revolution had failed the people of

Cubs, and had leaned far too much toward Commnfism, Yhe conference ..
leader did not interrupt sid following the conclusion of the employee's -
recarks did not even ansver. ‘He merely asid, "That’ ie’ all", ‘Bet up
and walked out. However, the next scheduled indoctrination session .

a)

Although mixing the enpl es of the three companies wae dove doliberately .
to ‘break up a feeling of trust among employees who knew each: other, . ond “aes t
te introduce a feeling of fear’ concerning strangers, there has been clese
cooperation on the technical level between employees of at least two

refineries. For example, technicians at Esso and Shell recently collaborated

because of HurricarsDonns. When the word got out that the refineriss -
were ehutting dom, ICP officials rushed in and protested vigorously that
there was no. denger, and that the action should not be taken, The
technicians then said, "Well, it is too late now," and they kept the .
refiesries shut down for three full deya, Both Shell and Boso technicians
concerned enjoyed this minor ect of sabotage hugely. uo

They also cooperated in dealying action when they were ordered to start
the cat plant. LPG ic needed badly, co the technicians decided to keep
the unit shut down. ICP officials screamed that it was unnecessary

and ordered then to start, but the technicians said that 1¢ wae not
practical because it was too difficult, and possibly dangerous, to stop
end stert the wit. They aaid that the shortage of catalysts made it
impossible to figure on keeping the unit going, and go it was aot the
Fight thing to do to start it at all. Consequently they have been able.
to keep the cat-units shut down completely since the storm. oo

be
ad
"3

BUT ke ket!

roy .
One of the top Shell engineers who has participated in suck actions
ie going to attempt to akip the country as @ test, because many other
technicians of the oil cocnpenies are desperate to flee Cuba and are
trying to arrange ways and means to do so. .

' :

Ne Be titel Lande eet BL

C-0-B-F-1-D-E-H-T-1-A-L
HD DISSEM ABROAD © “ LmaTED



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

a GH

i

This moteriat contains information affecting the Notional Defense ‘of the United Sores within’ \the rreaning of the Espionoge Lows, Title,
18, U.S.C. Secs. 793 ond 794, the transmission or revelation e which in ony manner to on unovtonzed person is prohibited by low.

: CIA*TNTEAHAL USE ONLY”
} \* COeN-P-1-D-R-H-T-I-A-L

COUNTRY Guba

CENTRAL, INTELLIGENCE AGENCY®

REPORT No.

06-f -3,/6 8,127

& SUBJECT Desire of Of1 Industry Technicians . atéostR = BF auyeh CO
8 to Plee Cube /Bffect oa. Production _ : ee
B . NO. PAGES Two
4 j REFERENCES
a DATE OF Sep 60 and carl
8 NFO. oF : ter
i PLACE & c
a DAN eo, Havana/Sep 60 and earlier .
i THIS Is UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
zi SOURCE:

a

us national, graduate engineer, an official on the staff 0 of a larga
oi1; company. :

Source has had. years of experiszce in coupany oparationa cutoide the US
@ndjhas been located in Cuba for many years. [Source is normally .
evailable for reinterrogation okould this report generate additional
requirenonts. )
iy
J. a real body-blow could be given the Castro regina 4€ a few selected.
‘technicians in the of] refineries ekipped the country. As an example,
at thé Esso refinery there are four technicians whose loss would have _
a very severe effect on the production of. the refinery. These wen are
all young, extremsly intelligent, well trained, and are’ completely
, loyal to the company. They have served ismediately below the super-
intendent and the assistant superintendent. These four vould. be given = -
: inmadiate jobs in the US, because of. their outetanding backgrounds, if.
they ware able to get out of Cuba., . . ,

aaa oan iam

2. The top figure of the four is Leon Hequin , Miya, who to « opectolise in
the Processing Departnent, one of the most important functions in the -
plant. This. departzent's responsibilities deal with the physical processing
- of product from crude to the finished material.

3. Bequia is 32 years old, married, no-children, but expecting a ehtia in ‘
Bec 60. He is a graduste of Auburn University, with a degree in chenical
eo mechanics! engineering. He is a Cuban national, I believe of the °
Jewish faith. He is about 5°10", weighs about 160 Ibs, has close cropped
black hair, and is a very personable, intelligent young man. He is a
very|good leader, and was definitely one of the men on their way up
in the company. .

4. noqule already has been branded a counterrevolutionary in an official. Acta,
and has been taken out of the plant and.put into the office. Apparently: .
the regice wanted to get him away from the productioa ‘Ifme for fear of |
‘ possible sabotage, and also wanted to utilize. ‘bis undoubted: ‘talem and
_ knowledge of the industry in headquarters. = Py

5. Hequin is extrensly eager to get out of Cuba, but he does ‘as havea
police exit permit, and since he has been branded counterrevolutionary oo
be is afraid he would not get his Passport: back: if be’ Presented it for
s police permit. - :

NOFORN : | i _ NO DISSEM ABROAD : LIMITED | °
LIMITED: Dissomination limited to full-time employers of CIA, AEC and FBT..and. within State and Defense, t0 the intelligence component sree
‘Silices producing NIS elements, and higher echlons with their immediate supporting stalls. Not to be drsseminated to consultants,"erternal pretmrs ve



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

| 4cothee cucstanding young man.is Equin's assistant, Jose Ramon Alvarez,

_ (Cuba, fs Santiago Pardo Suarez del Villar. Re is about 35, a graduate

C-O-H-P=1-D-E-H-T-I-A-L
. o2- ws

Fe

about 31. He io a graduate of Auburu University and te a top flight
engineer. Since Alvarez is single, ha’ says that he will wait until :
the others get out of Cuba. He also wanta to hang back to be able

to do some sabotage before he makes his departure. He believes that

he will be able to get out on hie-own.

A third top flight mechanical engineer, who ia extremely.cager to leave

(Of the University of Havana, Pardo is head of Maintenance and Construction,
\@nd ie an extremely intelligent and capable engineer. He. is ebout :
5'8", weighs about 170 lbs, ard has dark bleck ahair and a moustache. oe

‘The fourth ie. Raul Capote Ortiz, a graduate of Loufeiena State University |
‘with the degree in chemical engineering. Cepote is one of the top .
technicians in the Processing Bepartment. He is married, but I do

mot know 1f he has any children. mo Lt

: an . -end= _

ENE TE TOA SS TS IE SGOT MOE OL Aa A RS BO LSE a te“

(CIA INTERGAL USE ALY
© C-O-HeF-I-D-E-R-T-I-A-L

WO DISSEM ABROAD



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

MATLC ORT PSI :
Lo _ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

‘TR motefial contains information affecting the National Defense of the United Srates within she wmecning ef tho Espionage Lows, Tule
18. US.C. Sees. 293 ond 794, the tantmission or revelation of which .in-eny ‘manner 10 on unouthorised person is prohibited by-low. |
' . : a

“| C+OntePet-D-E-8

— coer a

COUNTRY Guba an og * 00~8-3,16h, 609
| SUBECT Operations of Refineries/Effect of Use DATE DISTR 23 Aug 60
: - of Soviet Crude O{l/Jet Fuel Production :
i lk “NO.PAGES ‘Two
: , REFERENCES
! . +
: DATE OF Aug 60 and earlier . am
}. INFO. ae _ ‘
i: > PLACER Havana/Aug 60: end earlier
i. DATEACQ. : . :
io i THIS 1S UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
FS TS OE INFORMATION
foo. “1 .
y SOURCE: US netional, graduate engineer, sn official on the staff of a large ofl -

: Company. - ;

1

i

1
7
t
I
{

a

Source has had years of expertence in company operations outside the US
and has been located in Cuba for many years, [Source ia ucormally avail-
able for reinterrogation should this report generate additional requirezsnts. ]

“1. As of Aug 60 the three msjor Eefinerics confiscated by the Castro regics
, 880 operating in fairly good shape. Their principel problem ie that

_ the Soviet crude being supplied is very light and they cannot run as
= Bich volume because gae pressure builds up. The Esso refinary, for :
eto exemple, hss a capacity of 36 theusand bbls per day on heavy crude, but ™'
26' thousand bbis per day is the best they have besn sbie to do on the .
Soviet crude, and it has been runaing at a rate of only 20 thoussnd bbls
bey par day since 20 Jul 60. . mo woo

2. The Soviet crude available to cste hes been coupatible with the refineries
and will not damage then, but in addition to not being able to get as
much volum, the refineries cannot get as mich fuel ofl because of light
ends. Thie is trus of all three usjor refineries. .

3. The refinerads vere designed for 26 gravity crude which is fairly heavy.
The Soviet crude is 33 gravity, and has ceused an imbalance in that
they are now Producing more gegoline than is needed. As a consequence,
Cuba is searchicg desperately for fuel of]. The USSR has said that it

- is not im a position to. supply fuel ofl and so Cuba has turned toward

. Mexico, even to the extent of attexpting to arrange deals whereby they
‘will erade gasoline for furl oil. ; : :

Pater

“The imbalance of gesolins is indicated by ths fact that the Cabaiguen .
_kefinary vas shut down recently becauze its gasoline storage was completely
filled, | oo *

Guba will reach @ critical potat abeut 1 Sep 60. The Esco refinery slowed
down from 26 thousand bble per day to 20 thousand bble per day because

{t hed only a 10-dsy supply of crude. Tha supply on hand was sufficient
to lest caly until 14 Aug, tut around 11 Aug the refinery wes supposed
to receive « shipment of 80 thousand barrels of crude, However, this -
is caly exough to operate four days. . : i

|
|

ee

7 NOFORN : NO DISSEM ABROAD : a LIMITED |
. EINTFEB: Dissemination Haiited to full-time employees of CLA AEC and FBT, and. within State and Defense, to #1 ligence componente, other
offices producing NIS sheibente, end higher echiona with theic immediate supporting staffs. Not to be disseminated to consultants, external projects or
reserve personnel on shdct term active duty (excepting individuals who are normally full-time employees of CIA, AEC, PHI, State of Defense) eness the
written permission of the originating office has been obtained through the Assistant Disector for Central Reference, CLA. . a
eto rea



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000 . t oe: . TY r a: ere eo: ‘ ° at  @:
ai >

7 se : ~ CENTRAL: INTELLIGENCE AGENCY ~

This materiol contains information offecting the National Defense of "ha ‘United Stotes within ‘the, meaning of the Exponoge tows, Title»
$2. USS. Secs. 792 and 74, the tromumision er revelotion of whuch in “any manner 10 on unauthorized person ix prohibited by low.

COUNTRY oe ROR 8. 00~3-3,264,652 0 |

i : . 8 ;
; SUBJECT \Shortage of-Lubricating Oi1/, = Sst DISTR. 23 mug 60 }
{ . Operating Supplies for Refineries/ ; poe
i- Ship Bunkerage a. NO. PAGES * Two | :
: te . "REFERENCES 2
4 jt af
! DATE OF Aug 60 . i
i INFO. - j
> PLACE & Havana/Aug 60 an
h DATE ACQ. t ‘
I THIS 1s UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
3
: i
} SOURCE: us national, graduste enginser, en official on the ovate of e large

oil company. — : ose

Source hao had years of experience in company operations outside the U8
€nd has been loceted in Cuba for many years, [Source is normally ~
available for reinterrogation ehould this report generate additional ©
Feretrenente.] : ~~

2. 4a ‘of Aug 60 ‘there is a shortage of lubriecsing ofl fn Cuba vhich will:
Becoms critical im a fsirly short time. Great efforts have been made |
by the Castro regize to obtain lubricating ofl] from US supplicarc, and

& vessel, the Mar Carite, has visited a number of US ports attempting
to ‘obtain the ofl. Howsver, it has been refused “everywhere and had to.
return to Cubs in boliast. As of 10 Aug 60 it is loading molasces :
for delivery to Boston, end will then proceed. to Montreal in an attempt
to obtain lubricating oil. : :

eS

. ry former Esso employee, Frank carela, left Cuba oa 2 Aug 60 for Mexteo | i

“ to try to obtain lubricating of1. He is going to visit the Mobile {

blending plant, PEMEX, and several others. be }

a Pett. Weahlace , Troe , bla,

A us nationsi recently employed by ICP to attempt to arrange for the

purchase of necessary supplies and spare parts for the ofl industry

has been traveling throughout the SW part of the US, also attempting to |

arrange for lubricating oil, but with no success. This individusl is. 4

- such an unsavory character that it is not beyond the bounds of probsbiity 7

: that he might "go south" with the funds entrusted to him, which are |
}
|
|
i
t
|
!
$
i

considerable. “
mlere are 20 principal types of lubrateting ofl needed for the total

. econcuy, and the actual status of supply of each is-notinown. They
. may be completely out of scae and heve six months supply of others. ne

However, the general story is that there is a “one month supply” of ‘4
lubricating Gil evsilable. —

Lubricants for power plants, transportation, end. commmications ere the -
_ priary concern. They ere in critically short supply in diesel lubricants.
_ for engines and heavy equipment, and turbine of] for powsr Pleats. oo
There is no lubricating oil manufactured cn the island “al chough ‘the. 5
Castro regims is trying to set up a pleat. However, this is @ long . 4.
Fangs project and takes « lot of tine and aoney.. aos _ "sg
wv. 2
1

| ; C-O-HOP-I-D-E-N-T-T-A-L cee’ eo -

eb

poroRN” woe - " 6O_DISSEM ABROAD : oor LIMITED
a ; Dissemination limited to falt-time employees of C1d, AEC and FBT: and, within State and Defense, ¢o the componente, other

in immediate eupparting sieffe. “Not to be disseminated to consultents, external projects or
uals who are normally full-time employees of CIA. AEC. “PBI, State of Defonse) unieas the



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

* 7 SOURCE: US patfonal, graduate engineer, an official on the state of a large

ora : US and has been located im Cubs for many yosrs. (Source is normally

CENTRAL INTEL GENCE AGENCY

This material contains information affecting the ational Defense ‘of the United States within the meaning of the Espionage tows, Title
18, USC. Secs! 793 and 794, the tromsmission oF revelation of which in ony manner to on unauthorized person is prohibited by low.

j
|
\.

: a | : C-O-N-P-1-D-B-Hi-TT-AcL

: + -
COUNTRY Cuba, oe | REPORT § NO. . 00-B-3,16,653_
SUBJECT Friction in Few Menagesent « of ; Date DISTR: 23 Aug 60

Z Beso. Refinery . : ; :

i . “of NO. PAGES One

f .
: ed REFERENCES
} .

—_ .
DATE OF Aug 60 and earlicr
INFO.
i PLACE & Revona/bug 60 and earlier
+. DATE ACQ.
: : THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION .
!

on company.
' Source has had yeare of experience fa ‘conpany operations cutside tho
available for reinterrogation should this report: generate additional

ee
Ff
ull

; an
: 1. a 1 Jol 60 the Castro rogine intervened tha Esso refiasry in Cubs,
a The |interventor appointed vas Commander Olivio Ping, @ career

Heavy. Tho aunber two pan ie (fnu) Guardia,
t 4@ former marketing analyst in ths office of the cozpany. :
: 22,2 Aus 60 there 19 evidence of definite friction botuoss Fino and ”

2. Commander Pino is an tateliigent, attebte, and hespitable parsoaslity.
we eres crag inese joult, and to the best of ny knowledge has never
- worn a barbuds’ beard.
a |
3. Guardia, oa the other hand, te real hard-core Commmist, who feale
that Pino is too soft and not revolutionary encugh. Guardia wents to
take a hard lino toward the employees. Be wantg to cut salaries ond “get
things. in line.” Pino knows that ouch abrupt changes would remle in .

Theré are indications that Finn recently Cold Guar tn affect to stay
7 fa the office and keep his mouth shat. :

Pino|te dicectly ender Alfredo Gatideres of ICP, end both are frtends
and eevociates of Fidel Castro, not Radl, or "Che" Guevara. If something
happens to Fidel, both Pino and Guticrrex would definitely be replaced
quickly, because they are not the hard-boiled Party line typs.

i.

peter 1oD-E-W-T-T-A-L q seP 1960

a

. Bese

|

NOFORN ! "NO _DISSEM ABROAD | 7 kinrrep ~ 4

LINTTED: Dissemination limited to full-time empleyees of CIA, AEC and FBI; ond, within State end Defense, to the dmtoltigence components, other j

+ alfices producing NiS: eleonente, and higher echions with their immediate supporting staffs. Not to be disseminated to conaultants, external projects of, 1

1 + reserve personnal on short term active duty (excepting individuals who are nocenally full-timo-emplorses of CIA. ABC, FBI, State or Defense) untees the! i

tee written permission of the originating office has been abtained raroua | the Assistant Director for Central Reference, cia. ct j
. C nee .

oe . . |

5
act
3
2
1



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

fay SOREACETE oo.

any,

This moterial contains information atfecing the Noticriat Defente of the United ‘States wuhin she meaning of the ‘Expeonage lows, Tete
18. US.C. Secs. 793 and 794, the tranimistion oF revelohon.of which in ony manner to pn unauthorized person is protubsted by lam.

= CoOeH-PoT-D-E-NeTsI-AcL ; :
COUNTRY Guba : — toa “REPORT NO. “00- Awd es |
SUBJECT Leonel de Paula Arias, O11 Iidustry DATE DISTR. 1 ay

Procurement Agent (Biographic) :
oy . NO.PAGES ~ One

"

} REFERENCES
|
i

OATEOF Aug 60 and earlier

INFO. :

PLACE &-

DATE Aca. Havena/Aug 60 and earlier

A
: : Tes ts UNEVALUATED INFORMATION

SOURCE: ,

° us national, graduate engineer, an 1 official on the atafft f of a large oil
company. ;
Source has had yeare | of experience ‘ta company operations ‘outatde the US. :
and hes been located in Cuba for many years, [Source is- normally available
for [efaserrosrtiee should this’ report generate additional requirements. ).

1. Ia Aug 60 the Castro regina: sent two representatives to. the US to attempt:
to obtain replacement parte and machinery for the ofl industry. One of .
these men is Julio Caunedo, on the staff of ICP, and the second is Leonel
de Paula Arias, a former ¢ employee of Esso Standard oil SA..- .

— .

2. De Paula is about 28-29 years-old, 6'1", 180 lbs, He has black curly hatr.
and fair skin. He is married and I believe has one child. ie ie a Roman
Catholic; and has never been considered. as having any. Left-wing: inélinatiens.

3. Be Paul speaks excellent English, and I belteve. studied ta “the us. He hea’
a degree in engineering and worked three yeare with the Esso refinery,
ssinly . in maintenance and construction. As of Jul. 60 he was. fection head
of the ‘Refining Department, Purchasing and Warehousing.

4 The choice of ‘de Paula to go to the US to obtain necessary supplies is
sound because he is the man which the company would have.chosen to do such
a Job 4£ required. He has a reputation of being a good hard worker,
intelligent and devendeble. He has « pleasant personality and handles
binself very well. . Lo a -

S. De Paula was considered. one of the better. men of the plent ond could be
' " elassed as a key technician because of his knowledgé, background, and -
ability, end it would definitely burt the Castro regime if he fled Cuba.
However , the opportunities for employment in the oil industry in Latin
: America! are not good because there is considerable prejudice against
Cubans on the part of. other countries in which there are, refining. operations,

wend- :

s
4 . a, 6 SEF i360
3 . . C-O-H-F-I-D-E-N-T-I-A-L
; ;

NOFORN NO DISSEM ABROAD. ~
LIMITED: Dissemination i imited to full-time employees of CLA, AEC end FOI: and. within State and Defenie, to the intelligence componeats, other
Offices producing NIS elements, and higher echions with theit immed:

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY . on ye

sient ers

ANNs eR

Ba

Limirep,

jupporting staffs” ‘Not to be disseminated to consultants, external projects or

WERE,

fererve personnel on short|térm active duty (excepting individuals who are normally full-time employeés of CIA, AEC, FBI. State or Dofenac) arlene tna,

