
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000.

(oe Rec eA ARR ALOR SE GTA CST ABER taR ate ALE Wl ethene

' . TOP SECRET

1. Attached is Annex A of the Top Secret study
entitled, The Examination of the Bona Fides of a KGB
Defector - Yuriy I. NOSENKO dated February 1968 (copy 10).
Copy 10 of this study had been forwarded to you earlier

for your review.

2. Certain portions of Annex A of this study are
deleted since it contains information which bears on the
security of ongoing, viable CIA operations, or is related 3

thereto. fy

3. We request return of the study (copy 10) and Annex A -

when your review has been completed.

Attachment: As Stated Above . a |

WARNING NOTICE - SENSITIVE INTELLIGENCE “SOURCES AND METHODS
INVOLVED

E2 IMPDET CL BY 011340

. TOP SECRET



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

RE

Statuments of Soviet Officials Abouc. NOSENKO

i
j

4A February 13564 be . _ : .

NOSENKO defected in Geneva.

ban meh

6& February 31964

SR

4
The Chief of the Soviet Disarmament Delegation notified 4
the Soviet Ambassador in Bern shortly before noon that i
NOSENKO had disappeared, correctly placing the date as
4 February. They speculated privately between themselves 3
that he might have been “poisoned” or injured in an auto- 4
mobtle accident. , 4
a
& February 1964 , 4
” . 4
An official spokesman of the Soviet Mission-in Geneva z
reported to the Swiss police that NOSENKO, an "expert . . YY
temporarily assigned to Geneva", had been missing for four an
. days.
9 February 1964 .
s Evening news broadcasts in Geneva carried reports Ry
attributed to both Soviet and Swiss sources that NOSENKO
had disappeared.
10 February 1964 om
a
The Swiss press quoted unidentified Soviet sources 3

as saying it was presumed that NOSENKO had defected.  _ cece ugne vans a ve she

2.18 No. 197124
copy 10



--- Page 3 ---
Top Secret

(Annex A)

10 February 1964 (cont Laued)

A U.S. Department of State press release was tssued
identifying NOSENKU as KGS officer and acknowledging his
request for political asylum in the United States.

long tenure in the KGB, NOSLNKO would have a great deal of
important information which he could inpart to intelligence
agencies of other countries. Certainly, he would be
acquainted with many KG employees and could identify them.
He alse would be intimately acquainted with a large number
of Soviet agents working inside the USSR against American
and British nationals.

According to a sensitive source,

: eee 3 Ihe bulk of NOSENKO s xnowledge concerning
KGB activities, would revolve around the intelligence
operations of the KGB in Moscow and also KGB personalities
working in Headquarters. NOSENKO was also undovbtedly
familiar with all KCB personalities in Geneva and certainly
knew some KGB personalities in other countries.

Comment: NOSENKO identified a number of KGB officers in
: Geneva; he asserted that some others,. known
by CIA to be connected with the KGB,were not.

362.

Top Secret

caters Spee enmi et seaeerenboame io ans seit em



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

ce

RE

officers

Top Secret

(Annex A)

in February 1964 (continued)

According toas nsitive source

was affiliated with the KGB for
approxinately sixteen years, since about 1947, end was an

employee of the Second Chief Directorate in Moscow. His

father, now dead, was a Deputy to the Prime Minister of the

Soviet Union and also Minister of the Shipbuilding Industry.

There ts a shipyard uaned after NOSENKO's father in the. .
Ukraine.

Comment: NOSENKU claims to have served in the GRU until
1953, when he entered the KGB.

ae - several KGS
It appear ry “quite certain to
Chat NOSENKO had the rank of lieutenant colonel in the KG3.

Comment: NOSENKO was at the time claiming to have been.
a KGs ileutenane colonel.

According to a sensitive source,
from KGB officers

photograpy sbagiaaepsares in ve S. newspapera {gs not that of
NOSENKQOre worked with NOSENKO for several years
in KGB Headquarters; he described NOSENKO as a person who

likes to be fashionably dressed at all times and is fond '
of women, by nature a friendly individual and generally . an
well-liked by his fellow workers. NOSENKO worked in the an
Secoad Chief Directorate.

TS No. 197124:


--- Page 5 ---
(Annex Aj

lo February 1964 (continued)

.

ws:

Comment: zi PERN EO EES SIREN OSs

he photograph accompanying Anerican
and Swiss press accounts of NOSENKO'’s defection
wus by error not that of NOSENKO but’ of
a sensitive source Vladimir SHUSTOV, whom *@S3GRM and NOSENXO’ both

idenrified as a “clean" Soviet diplomat at the
Geneva Disarmament Conference.

Noting the publicity accompanying che defection of KGS
officer XOSENKO in Switzerland, GOLITSYN recalled that

NOSENKO had been a Second Chief Directorate cfficer working
against American citizens.

Comment: Routinely, GOLITSYN had reviewed in March 1962
(before NOSENKO contacted CIA) a list of
Seviet delegates to the Disarmament Conference.
NOSENKO’s .name,. which was on the list, did not
at that tine prompt any comment from GOLITSYN.

Al February 1964

Anbassador DOBRYNIN informally notified the Department
of State that a Soviet note would be delivered later to ask
how NOSENKO had left Switzerland, to request his release,
and to demand an immediate interview with hin.

12 February 1964

S.K. TSARAPKIN, the head of the Soviet Delegation to the
Disarmasent Conference, read a statement at a press conference
in which he strongly condemned the Swiss authorities for
permitting NOSENKO's "kidnapping" and for hindering efforts
to locate him. TSARAPKIN demanded that immediate ateps be

taken to return NOSENKO to Soviet custody. 0

. Top Secret.  -- : Copy ——

hme acyl rte’ we Brest



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

casi rates

12 February 1964 (cuntinued)

Top Secret

(Annex A)

At simultanecus press conferences in Sern and Geneva, the
Swiss refected these aeusac ions of non-cooperation and aoted
the Soviet delay {nn advisi.z the police of NOSENKO'es disanzea-
vance acd Soviet failure to cooperate with Swiss authorities
in locating NOSENKN. Loe

The Soviet note earller promised. by POBRYNIN was delivered
to.the State Departsint. A noncemmittal reply was given to
Soviet queries concerning the requested interview and the

means of NOSENKO's departure from Switzerland.

The Swiss Embassy asked for a meeting with NOSENKO in
order to obtain assurance that the defection had been
veluntary. Arratiyewcnts vere made to have NOSENKO meet with
Swiss and Soviet representatives in Washington as goon as
possible.

NOSENKO arrived in Washington at 2130 hours.

tb

32-23 February 196

14 February 1964

~ In Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GROMYKO read to
Ambassador KOHLER a statement deploring the “evasive” reply
of the State Departuwent to Soviet inquiries in Washington
and terming the whole event of NOSENKO's disappearance a

“1s Ne. 197124
Copy in.

seat aprachwio pan nt! rman ame men



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

acyl ome arom He ate

Top Secret

ra :

1 (Annex A)

14 February 1944 (continued)

erican Tncelligence organs”.
nd for NOSENKO's amnediate release —

“pross provocaticn by
GhOMYTKO repeated the
from American custody.

Tne Counselor of the Swiss Embassy interviewed NOSENKO at
the Washington offices of the U.S. Immigration and Naturali-
zation Service. The Seviet confrontation tamedciately after-
wards was handled by Miniscer Counselor G.M. KORNIENKO, and
Third Secretary’ V.F. TSAKOV, a recent arrival in: Weshington,
NOSENKO told both the iss and the Soviets that he had
defected of his own free will after careful consideration

-and that he had no desire to return to the Scviet Union. In
response tu KORNIENKO's questions, he specificaliy renounced
his status and rights as a Soviet citizen.

18 February 1964

Feliks KOVALEV, a Seviet diplomat in Buenos Aires, told ree

. a CIA agent that he had actended the Institute of Inter- . 4
1 national Relations with NOSENKO. <Accordiag to KOVALEV, * i
NOSENKO had twice married, had a good family background, {
nae ° was the son of a Minister in the Government, was notorious |
i for his “adventurous" nature, and “famous for his character”. |

a

Sele ne CR ee NW a
seca Da a SPA ESSE RET

RE ARI a sisal aed :



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

> EIN aaa ana eat cer mee

: ef ard o De NE es eee ane owe cot er a BE ~, .
wi at dae ee SS Beer wens dns NE ah wren are g Mir oe et ee ees

ok
g .

> . Y

(Annex AY

3.4 SEB

wae ww

B OS Ga eh OH csi GE



--- Page 9 ---
mil 56 eh acter 2A el ES ee

Top Secret

ett te SSN ee

LENE ETA ENTRRALL IEEE Hi TALE PRE ORE YC ES ADSL. SM “TELE
aS ST eRe rh r Z cv £3 4 _—

wteare

setlist

oe amar TaD

“TS No 197124»



--- Page 10 ---
14.00000 +

1O bad been in the Second chief Directorate
for about i4 years and was acquainted with almost all of the

employees of this directorate. He was awere of the structure
of the KGB and knuwi many personne} of the Firet Chief

ae z pene NOSENKO, as Deputy to the Chief

ef the Seventh Department, had in his possession a telephone

directcry which iisted the names of soze.10,000 KGB employees

ia Moscuw. Only Chiefs and Deputy Chiefs of Departments

these phone books. 5st pexpressed raeh Mth officer

opinien that "NOSENKO ds much more vaiuable to the FBI and

CLA than sas Oleg PENKOVSKIY because of the fact that he

- knows se auch about the methods of work of the First and

Second Directorates of the KGS and is familiar with so many

individuals in the KGB both in Moscow. and abroad. eggiizagmpa KGB office
said that PLNKOVSKLY was able to furnish American and

British Latelligence with a lot of information concerning ~

defense secrets of tne Soviet Union, but NOSENKO is much _

more knowledgeable ia Latelligence and counterintelligence

operations of the kcB."

= &@s &5 Go

Comment:

: :
NOSENKO has never commented on the KGE i : , 3 i
telephone book referred +9 above.



--- Page 11 ---
ALES AMET RMT TI atid
Golo Bway DEERE EY FR serbian
Pact TSE See aNcrin
Pa acre mare tts
SEDATE AAD

TS Ge UMA TR eT CRC OS TeS TO epeRS hoacess Tem set ee a
Ee PUES iui RMMManaaTrE A Ra ca oot
SERIE Aan arpa CARS es A AED CL TRE NCE ED
PONE EL Ts SET NAY BAN AES ER SEBS ETT ey ase
TE AE diee re erence nino ttn nee eee (tere >
UME LEASE ERE: us, TPLSAES Pare



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000,

Aceording to a sensitive source, a in a resporse to 2 question

whether N°SLIMO actually ceected or whether Gigi the defection night be a

«35 "trick", the source replied: that fron his owm knowledge of tis mat tter,

| he was convinced that 1%

22 February 196)

.

XO's defection was rot e "trick" by the KGB,

According to a sensitive source from conversations with verénas unnamed .KOB

officerst HOE2!

WRCU ee mene tates -
statione c eS
help agents were develo
assumed by the KG0 that

HRA

RINSE MET SME Ye Ae eres en Arner nt se

locatior of

Comment:

24 February

Women clataiag wo

visited the

micros.

.

in

linited to
brousht to
clained no

1964

worked azainst personnel

an frnbassy
ped ar.
he is fami

ano othe Pm

NOSENKO knew

that conta
Geneva in
one in the

ia Moevecow,

liar with

assy.

and with

x these Americans, fei

rhe number

is
s
and

that there were micro-
three seneral locations in the

Embassy, his specifie informacion regarding
the number and location of microphones was
ined in a written lise

1964, a Li
KGB knew

st which he
he had,

he the wife and mother of NOSENKO

American imbassy tu Moscow for the firse ef

me,

expressing disbelief that he had voluntarily betrayed his
family and country
him.

“TS No. 197124

peony

and requesting a persunal meeting with

10

r]
\

et


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

{Annex A) : a

24 Feoruary 196% (coatinuad) 7 OI

Comment: Ns

SO coafivmed their ddentities as hie wife :
and mothe: on the basis of physical deacrip- !
tions. On only one previcuse occasion have
Metnbers of a defector's family called on a4
foreign embassy in Moscow. ° Following the :
defecettun of Yurdy Vasilyevich KROTKOV in

England in 1963, his wife appeared at the

British Febassy to make inquiries about him. 4

ete

aE

= Gr KUROCHKIN (fnu),
GB SéTt officer schee uled for vavaizanent to Washington,
‘ will not be sent us he fs “well-known to NOSENKO. Ina the
y ‘course of-his duties in Moscow, KUROCHKIN had very often

A visited the department where NOSENKO worked and, as @
result, NOSENKO is "more than casually eacquaiated with hin”

Comment: NOSENKO has never identified KUROCHKIN nor 1
referred to the name. : , - :

X 18 No. 197124

ae


--- Page 14 ---
14-00000- +

= ios

ee ster a pceeny og

(Annex A) es SE ; os

February 1664

Nikolay ARTAMONUV, who defected from the Soviet Navy in
the late 195i's, noced the publicity accompanying NOSENKO's
defection. He volunteered to CIA that he attended a naval
Preparatory school wita che son of Minister NOSENKO in
1944-1946.

Comment: ARTAMONOV's description of the school and of
the dates involved differs from those.chaindd
by NOSENKO, :

KGB officer Vladimir TULAYEV mentioned NCSENKO to a
CIA double agent in Vienna. TULAYEV said that NOSENKO,
whom he knew-well, came from a wonderful family, leved his
wife and children, and earned a good salary. (TULAYEV
later said on another occasion that. he had friends who
knew NOSENKO well.) --°

Comment: NOSENKO never identified TULAYEV by nane or
. photopraph. When asked, NOSENKO dented
swe guest, ©«kemoving bla. . Sone, . a .

oe



--- Page 15 ---
om ARLYN Sawes Hac botene

February-March 1964 |

) pat : Tus fs A KG3 conmission
was in tne process of studying “the scale of loss" [caused
by NOSENKO's defectiou} to the USSR. The commission was
very jarge, forned froa difference cepartments of the KGB.
The study (sic) was made "because 1c fe supposed that
NOSENKO had access to many rocket matters, to many nuclear
matters, €O many strategical objects of the cvuntry...many
details about life of the leaders of the country, in the
governnent...that he knew very much sbout internal relations
between the people working in the KGB, that he had many
‘close friends among them and [spent] days and nighta
“together with them. The whole history of his life was
studied step by step very carefully."



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

Vous

‘According to a sensitive. = source,

officers

ROSENKD knows many

of the chiefs ana Geputies of the” XGB directorates and
departments at KGB iieadquarte:3 tn Mosecw. In KGB Head- -
quarters Ciere ure four separate dining rooms for personnel
who work there; one. such dining room is reserved for chiefs
and deputies of departzents. Secause of this fact, NOSENKO
has a vast xnowledge of the hierarchy of the KGB.

NOSENKO never referred to the dining rooms

until the January-March 1965 tnterrogations,

when he volunteered that he had eaten occasionally
in the “chiefs' dining room”

cone

. os Ne.- yore



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

(Annex A)

: DEP CEPR 4 SER ATO MPL TV
UES TANT EAT DUREMAUR SERED LANA) SADE AEA

The tvo women claiming to be the wife and mother of
NOSENKO made the last of five visits to the Embassy in
4 Moscow. NOSENKO's wife had explained that she required
' sone definite statement in writing from her husband so that
{ she could plen for her own future and that of the NOSENKO
q children. :

. -376 . a ‘ oo. ‘
re LTS No. 197124
- | Copy



--- Page 18 ---
PenDk CIRC ah gta aeatmntte nna mene ee

ARRAN ag ML PERL ROLE Oe A TIME EN E Hete

md

(Annex A)

1964
ding to a sensitive source ° : :
B(fron various unnamed KCB officers <Q 2RRBE™ certain-
fhere seems to be unaninous opinion among eae KGS
chiefs CMBR that NOSENKO...could do the KCB a tre= - og
imendous amount of harm. NOSENKO in his position as «¢ de- mo, *
puty chief i: one of the departments of the Second Chief {
Directorate tould have been entitled to have one personnel
directory of approximately 30 pages setting for the iden-.
tities: of all cf the supervisory officials in KGB Head-
quarters. NGSENKU would also have had a .00-page directory
listing by nexe and telephone number all che rank-and-file
employees wor 7g in Moscow The opinion was expressed by
some Qikwmyp koa “chicfs" ef mer that if NOSENKO
were merely able to make these two directories available
to American Intelligence, the KGB would be severely damaged
for the present and for several years to come.

Comment: NOSENKO has never referred to the KGB direc- . : a
tories described.

KGB officers 1.1. PETUKHOV nad P.P..BORISOV in Canada
told their agent George Herman SPRECHER to cease all intel-
ligence activity for a year, to destroy any incriminating
materials in his possession as well as to supply the Soviets
with passport photographs so that “escape” documents could
be prepared for himself and his family. SPRECHER asked
whether the action had any connection with NOSENXO's recent-
ly publicized defection, but the KGB officers denied it,
asserting NOSENKO "was just a secretary". .

TS No. 197124

Copy 10


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

(Annex A) : ; er : -

) March L9hy {conceinued)

Copment: When PETUKHOV reconcactad SPRECHER in February
1965, PETUKHOV acknowledged that NOSENNO had ” .
: in fact been the cause of KGB c'ncern, that he : t .
: . had had sume connection with NOSENERO, and : 4 :
HOSENKO may have known something of what the i |
xGB was doing in Canada.
NKO described a KGB [llegal, whose name- -
was unknown to his, who apperently is-identical..
to SPRECHER. .

March 1964

According to a sensitive source who

» was
briefed in h office in KGB Headquarters by a Second Chief
Directurate officer of the American Departments Personnel
of that Deparcnent, in which NOSENKO had served until hie
defection, were so shocked at the event that: they would not
menticn it ace all.

: a sensitive source
Ne Commenc: In this and other contexts@is@cume has stated
or implied chat NOSENKO served in the American tot
Department in 1963-1964: -WOSENKO asserts he : oa.
left the American Department in January 1962 “ot :
and served in the Seventh Department until his

defection. ns : a :



--- Page 20 ---
14.0000

teen

: No. 197124
Gepy 10.



--- Page 21 ---
“(Annex A)

‘April-May T9604
VLASOYV, case officer of Robert Lee

JOUNSSN in Paria, began to meet JOHNSCN on the street rather
than in various restaurants as had keen thetr nabit. At one
of their final meetings before JOHNSON returned to’the United
States, VLASGV told JOHNSON that a Soviet Intelligence officer
had defected to the Awericans in Geneva, and that extreme
caution must therefore ve exercised in JCHNSON's contacts

with the G8. VLASOV said that the defector-could nat identify
JOUNSON but that JGHNSON should dispoee of everything he had
which night link him te Soviet espionage activities. (se

p 24fuor a summary of the JCENS ON case.) .

KGB officer G

!
i

ar EOFS AEBS: Brin sha
EES Bc errae 7

May 1964: According to a sensitive source
re (from unideutified bourses, presumably from KGB
officers <qEEIgrrrn Srl in: ): Two comnissions have
been establishea by the CS’ for the purposes: (a) to
Jdetermine why KGB employeea auch as DERYABIN, GOLITSYN,’
“ and NOSENKO defected while serving abroad, and (b) to attempt:
to eliminate the "weak" employees and duprove the efficiency
of the KGB. :

1 nt mean



--- Page 22 ---
ene: The KCB was
uicrephones fa the U.S.

(Annex A) , , . .

29 Mav lio
According to a sensitive source from a’ KGB officer

eet

ucky that the Azericana found t only
Embassy in Moscew. Actually,
about 200 microphones were concealed by the Soviets in the
Embassy. NSOSLNKU was respeneible for furntsniag infornation:
to the Anericans which resulted in the microphones being
found. ENKO knew only -the general locaticn of the 46

microph s which were found and dees not have any knowledge
of the remaining ones.

12 June 1944.

Professor John M. THOMPSON reported at the American
Embassy in Moscow that en unnamed Soviet official with whom
he was acquainted told hin that NOSENKO waa a profligate
with two wives and many debts and is considered in Noscow
to be someone they are well rid of

22 June 1964 | . : v
According to a sensitive source :

eee ten thee

The consensus amOngAKGS employees Giz) ae
is that in the fucure' the KGB will be feeling sharply the
effects of NOSEXKO'’s escape to American Intelligence.
NOSENKO is considered to be vastly more important than either,
GOLITSYN or DERYABIN. This opinion appears to be based on ~
Several factors Firat, NOSENKO worked against personnel
Stationed at the American Embassy in Moscow and with his belp
agents were developed among these Americans. Second, it is.
assumed by KGB personnel that because of his closeness” to:

a) i ~
(fron various unnamed KGB. office recmsteReees

“

de



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000 3

a 7 22 June 1964 (continued) 7 - : .

4 the American Exbassy in the past, NOSENKO would also be
familiar with the number of microphones which had been
i installed in the Embassy by the KGB'and the locations of
: these microphones. Third, as a Deputy Chief of a depart
: “ment, NOSENFO would normally have had access to a telephone
directory Listing all personnel in all directorates of the
KGB in Moscow. Another factor, which is a forridable one
in the minds ci other KGB employees, 1a that NOSENKO
travelled in a rather influential circle of friends in
. Moscow who were high in the Soviet Government. All these
i " comments were cited as reasons for NOSENKO being en
“inuportant catch" for American Intelligence, but no one in : H
the KGB really knows exactly how much information NOSENKO
-had concerning the KGB. . . H

29 June 1963 : a t
~ GOLITSYN (from personal acquaintance): NOSENKO, the son

of the former Minister of Shipbuilding, waa a KGB officer

who had worked in the American Department and the Seventh

4 ‘Department of the Second Chief Directorate. GOLITSYN, while i
: on his own First Chief Directorate buéiness, met NOSENKO two. I

or three times in the American Embassy Section in 1953,

‘and had seen hin occasionally at work during 1958 and 1959.

1 4 When GOLITSYN asked him where he was working in 1959, NOSENKO
‘replied that he was assigned to the Seventh Department.

“NOSENKO served in the American Embassy Section from 1953 |
-until 1957 or 1958, and was specifically responsible for , ee
KGB coverage of American military peraonnel in Moscow during . : }.

i

ae ‘ 1953. For the remainder of hie service in the Embegsy Section
; until 3957 or 1958, NOSENKO may have had the same responsi- -
; ‘bilities or may have been working againet other Embassy :
F personnel or correspondents, but he was definitely in the
American Department during the entire period. In 1957 or - . : i
” 1958 NOSENKO was transferred to the Seventh Department, and : - te
- was a senior case officer there es of 1959. NOSENKO did not
my “work in the American Department of the Second Chief Directorate
American Department at any time during 1960; GOLITSYN visited
the Embassy Section on at least. three occasions from early
1960 to early 1961, and would have known if NOSENKO had been.
dn the Section, particularly 4£ NOSENKO had been Deputy Chief.
G.I. GRYAZNOV was acting as assistant of the Chief of the
Section during this period.



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

_ Top Secret

(Annex A) . : , ad

29 June 196% (continued)

ae

Comment: NOSENKO claims he-lefe the Embassy Section in
. -1955 and was assigned to the Seventh Department
until 1960, when he returned to the Embassy
Section as Deputy Chief. NOSENKO did not
-identify COLETSYN's photograph and had denied *
since defection that he has ever met or aven’
seen hin. ° .

oma

we heltt TB 2.

x

us " MOSENKO! a-

defection ¥.S. MEDVEDEV from the Exits Commission of the

CPSU Central Committee travelled to Geneva to speak to the

Soviets scationed there and to Soviet delegates to the Disara-
“ ament Conference. MEDVEDEV underscored the seriousness of

the defecticn and urged greater vigilance againat euch acts.

The defection caused the recall of Nina Ivanovna YEREMEYEVA,

a KGB secretary in Geneva. It was rumored that some. sdxty

Soviet officials stationed abroad would be transferred from

thetr assignment as a consequence of tha NOSENKO affair.

V.A. POCHANKIN, a KGB officer with the permanent Soviet

Mission in Geneva, speculated that he had been completely

exposed by NOSENKO and would therefore have to return to :
Moscow. Yu. I. GUK who was knov t oSSE AR EReEE> ource i
had been discharged from the KGb because he had: recommended

NOSENKO's travel to Geneva. “According to one rumor, the

chief of the Department in which NOSENKO had been employed, . ,
would also lose his job. f. :

Py

: Toe : by a sensitive source

Comment: MEDVEDEV, ry “KGB officer formerly stationed tn x
..., ., New York City, was said by. to be one :
of those from the CPSU Central Committee who ~
conducted interviews with KGB atte tte H
abroad. @ 5

= eS Ge GD

%

Foe ARR RENE Atte RARER AIT RANE Teams one he
' os



--- Page 25 ---
. Top Secret’

(Annex A)

June 1964 (continued)
Comnent: (Continued) - .
GUESS a Counselor of the Soviet Mission at the
United Nationa, as the Communist Party organizer ©
and possibly a wember of the KGB, buc said that
MEDVEDEV's role is uot important and that he
worked mainly with the Minfectry of Foreign Affairs.
POCHANKIN, who NOSENKO had identified as e *
KGu officer, was still in Geneva in December 1966.

sexitine

: .
!

29 July 1964
Accordin t

Crom Sensitive sources, | presumably KGB officers Kam
a y: An investigating commission of the
CPSU checking into the circumstances i
surrounding NOSINKO's defection has thus far been responsible : i
for the expulsion from the KGB of 15 Second Chief Directorate ‘
employees. These include GRIBANOQV, who was also expelled |

‘

. i

LEB beak

from the CPSU and was stripped of his rank of lieutenant
“generel, GRIBANOV has been: given a very: small pension, like

an ordinary Soviet citizen. This drastic action was taken

since the primary responsibility for the defection was placed ,
on GRIBANOV. It waa realized that, in addition to being Chief

of the Second. Chief Directorate at the time of the defection,
GRIBANOV was a persenal friend of NOSENKO and had more or -

less treated NOSENKO as a prorege and had taken many steps 4
‘to further NOSENKO's career within the KCB. It was felt :
‘that GRIBANOV should have been aware of NOSENKO's plans to
defect. Three of GRIBANOV's deputies were also expelled Cot
from the KGB, one of whom was a Major General BANNIK , mot
[BANNIKOV]. Of the 11 other Second Chieé Directorate euployees
expelled, some were found to have been personal friends of: :
NOSENKO and some of them were found to have confided to ROSENKO~
details of cperations in which they were working. $.M. GOLUBEV,
“a KGB officer stationed in Washington, would be leaving for’ —
Moscow because the investigating commission had determined tote
that Yu. I. GUK, a mutual friend of NOSENKO and GOLUBEV ‘told - -
ROSENKO that GOLUBEV had been assigned to the Washington Legal
Residency. GOLUBEV had himself worked with NOSENKO in KGB :

whale Itewed



--- Page 26 ---
ad

#

(Annex A) . . . , oa

29 July 1944 (continued) ,
Neadquarters sometime ‘in the pest, buc subsequently NOSENKO |
and GOLUBLV were given different assignments within the KGB’
and thereafter did noc associate with one another in the a
course of their daily activit-egs. a

,
\
. ; '
ent: NOSENKO retracted in 1965 his earlier claies |:
that GRIBANGV had been instrumental in his :
advancement and assignments, NOSENKO identi-:
fied by nape and photograph GOLUBEV, whom he
lad hnowa personally since 1959, but NOSENKO |
said he nad never worked with hin at KGB Head-
quarters since ‘GOLUBEV had always been in the
First Chief Jirectorate. GOLUSEV left for the
USSR on 28 August 1964. A

July-August 1964
According to 2 sensitive source:

inforration Ez r is ay about

NOSENKO was er fron KGB Meadquarters which reported |
the conclusions of the commission which had been appointed |
to prepare the damage report on NOSENKO's defection. The |
letcer, which was very brief, said that “the less was very
great and some new forse of work should.be created to be
efficient in the future". The Legal Residency had not ‘
before received any "reports or commentaries of NOSENKO's |
escape". : : H

7

ater she

Sei achat.

BS bate,

tan tp



--- Page 27 ---
fe aah ie aeatemah ce

- Moscow. It was im this way,;,GAMKRELIDZE stated, that he

(Annex A) . . —_ mae __ ” ‘ te : - : a I

November 1964 :

Asked while visiting the United States if the Russian
people had been tuld of the ABEL-POWERS exchange, Soviet:
mathematician &.V. GAMKRELIDZE replied to an American
acquaintance that they had not been told officially but
they knew about it since there was "quite a grapevine” in

learned of the NUSENKO defection and of its significance.
According to the "grapevine", the defection was very .
damaging to Soviet Intelligence in that NOSENKO was the.
Chief of the American Section, and he knew the identities
of all Soviet agents in the United States.


--- Page 28 ---
1400000. = +

(Annex A)

November 1964 (continued)

Comment: GAMKRELIDZE is suspected of having connections
with Soviet Intelligence because of his '
statements, actions, and unusual freedon of
solitary movement while on visits to the United
States. GAMKKELIDZE rebuffed a CIA recruitment
attempt in 1964, but added that he "welcomed
the opportunity to meet with an American
Inteiligence officer...to compare the Soviet
Intelligence officers he had met with their , k
Anerican counterparte’. During that 1964 . i
meeting GAMKRELIDZE again raised the subject : : :

. of NOSENKO, describing hin as "obviously a ! : :
traitor to his country”

ate

pitladieneest

EY OTT

crepe ne

December 1964

| sos a GS source :

ee etheet

Nikolay RESHETNYAK, NOSENKO's/roommate in Geneva at the x
time of his defection, told B® that he had been
interrogated by the KGB in connecticn with NOSENKO's defection,

and that he had luter attended the Moscow trial in which
NOSENKO was sentenced to death in absentia. RESHETNYAK !
source“Teported to QEGMRemEmED the dismissal.of large numbers of !
KGB officers, including GRIBANOV and GUK. From what |
RESHETNYAK said,

thought the KGB might go so far
source ’ :


--- Page 29 ---
AANA AEA OF aN ARN ee Hk nN acme tE Ah Me Ue RG HN ne AE yatta

"

(Annex A)

December 1964 (continued)

to the United States to locate and kill
later identified RESHETNYAK as a KGB

as to send someo
NOSENKO. (@
officer.)

2

Comment: NOSENKO identified RESHETNYAK as a Ukrainiaa
Ministry of Foreign Affairs officer on the-
staff of the Disarmament Delegation.

29 January 1905

According to a sensitive source

onversations with unrecalled KGE officers
: It 13 common knowledge among
4OV was expelled from the KGB end
CPSU and is now on pension, partial rather than full, as a
result of the NOnENKO defection. When SOSENKO was being
considered for assignuent to Geneva (in 1964), a summary
statement of his activities was prepared in tke Second Chief
Directorate and sent to GRIBANOV. This summary contained
considerable. “coupromtsing information" ‘concerning NOSENKO;
if acted upon properly, it would have removed hin frow
consideration for this trip. GRIBANOV read “the summary -
material, ran a line through all of it, and, added the nota-
tion: “Send him to Geneva.” The general. feeling ie that
GRIBANOV was willing to. overlook a let of NOSENKO's os
deficiencies because of GRIBANQV's long-time friendship |
with NOSENKO's father.

= a

Comment: NOSENKO originally asserted that GRIBANOV
was responsible for sending him to Geneva in.
1964, but after retracting his claim that
GRIBANOV had played any special role in hie —
vive comes assignments, ha asserted that BANNIKOV. epproved
: the 1964 trip. . NOSENKO denies that his father
and GRIBANOV were acquainted.



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

Top Secret ee, ee

(Annex A) . : a . . .

8&8 February 1965
According t to a sensitive source from a’ KCB officer

i ns Prior to NOSENKO's:
defection he was eputy to the Chief of 2 department in the
Second Chief Directorate. Whtle working in the Seventh
(Surveillance) Directorate in Moscow, ¢aRaERiy on three the KGB officer,
Separate occasions participated in conferences between
“feportant people” of the Second Chief Directorate and the
Seventh Directorate NOSENKO was present at all of these.
Although OS s a Deputy Chief he held only the rank a
ef captain in the “GB. @QSBRW aterifured this (the the KGB officer
disparity between jub and rank) to the influence which 3
GRIBANGY exerted ox the behalf of NOSENKY | ‘ St

asa aah dey

the KGB officer
Consent: NOSENKO has never identified Gas a NOSENKO 7
alvays claimed that he had been a lieutenant '
colonel in the KC3 until October 1966, when he i . {
retracted that claim and asserted that he had ' :
been only a captain. .

peda sses

i
\
{
, i
* 1
According to a sensitive source from a KGB officer ‘ i “ |

z a “GRIBANOV has been disnissed from
the GE, expe!led from the CPSU, and is presently living on
@ small persion. His dismissal occurred immediately after
NOSENKO’s defection. In addition, not less than 50 other
people were dismisicd, many of whom were close friends of
GRIBANOV. Most of these were from the First and Second
Chief Directorates. with the majority from the Second Chief
Directorate. The present Acting Chief of the Second Chief M :
Directorate is a Major General BANNIK, whose appointment ,
has wot vet been approved by the Cencrel Committee of the

CPSU. One of his deputies is a Major General (7.A.) . f|
SHCHERBAK. a oy : .

_

senararce mph eavomrmgar on



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

(Annex A) . . ;

8 February 1965 (continued)

Corrent: GRISANOV wags reported in operational confact

with a senior Western ciplomac until late
autumn 1964 (almost a year after NISENKO's
defection’, when he turned? over that contact
to another KGB officer

9 Feb ry. 1965 ;
2 ruary.
-According to a sensitive source from a KGB officer

ys bs,
ae): The anount of damage caused
‘ "unpredictable". NISENKO knew

few empicyees of the First Chief Directorate working abroad,
but knew many such enplovees serving in KGB Headquarters by
virtue cf seeing them fu the dining room which ts reserved
fer chiefs and deputy chiefs of KGB lepartments.

dufection is

Eariy June 1965

ccording to a sensitive source
efeee (Prone

iversations with KCG3 officers GRiiaiinee

Major General BANNIKOV is currently

temporary Chief of the Second Chtef Directorate, having
replaced GRIZANOV who was expelled from the KG3 because he

- supported NOSENKO in his career. GRIBANOV is working in a
small city outside Moscow as the chief of security et an

uninportant military plant and fa now a "nothing".

1
i
\
|

i
i

ve tag tesenet omen

4
i



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

B to a sensitive source fron 2 KGB officer

meeting de

ribed): <A

eeting
1 of all First Chief Directorate peraononel at KGB Headquarters

i
; was held cn 15 July 1965. The meetiog was devoted to the

clreumstances of the expulsion of.thé Chief of the Second
(Brttieh) Department of the First Chief Directorate, Ye. A.
TARABRIN, about three and a balf scnths earlier. I.A. BELOV
and other officers also attended the meeting. According to
officta! staterents made at che meeting, after the defection
of NOSENKO the KGB conducted an extensive investigatton to
determine which employees knew him and the nature of théir
relationsiip. Curing this 1ARABRIN was questioned; he said ;
he knew SOSENKO, but only casually and only because of Limited
contacts within the KGB. The-investigation deternined, how-

ever, that TAXABRIN attended severa: parties at which NOSENKO
das present. Girls tnvited by NOSENKO were also there. i
a sen- GEE, described one such party. Thereafter, TARABRIN was |
itive afforded a hearing and was accuased of willfully concealing \.
Frource vital infornation. As a result he was expelled from the KGB
and the CPSU and was deprived of all pension rights. ,

cena rene

Comment: NOSENKO had most recently asserted that he net
GRIBANON socially only three times during his
KGB service, and on each occasion TARABRIN was
Present. NOSENKO satd be twice provided girls
for GR!IBANOV and TARABRIN, once in October or : ann a
November 1963 in circuastances simtlar to those -° -
referred to. NOSENKO said that TARABRIN was !
Chief of the British Department from 1958 to , :
1963, when he became Deputy Chief of "Service -
No. 2", the reorganized Counterintelligence
Department of the First Chief Directorate.



--- Page 33 ---
teases Renmin Hh

URE Ree Me ene eR. cre etter eam ra wenn nies MaRdbAERE

sefection, many
Patty, ace

Lb. Vv, and Seconé
Chiet Virectorate Chief GRIBANOV had been expelled from the
Party anc from the KGh. GRIBANOV had been especially
friendly with SOSENKU, had given him many privileges, and
they were “buddies aud aight buddles".

Comment: SEMICHASTNYY, not SEROV, was KGB Chairman in
1965. SEKOV became head of the GRU in 1958.

Winter 1965-1966
Source, a

7 Hi MBy self-professed former XGB Second
Chief Directorate agent (from KGB officer V.G. SVIRIN, a
colleague of her husband at the State Committee for Science

that SVIRIN was later head of a KGB unit conducting operations

against the American Embassy in Moscow):

NOSENKO's father was a Minister or General and his mother
was Jewish and "always {involved in some blackmarketeering”.
NOSENKO was not a KGB officer but a "civilian" connected
somehow with the KGB. When KOSENKO defected, everyone said
he was detestable. NOUSENKO told the Americans about the
microphones and things (sic) in the Embassy.

va de alonsankeaal

wee Slit eae



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

‘Top Secret

(Annex A) ; , ot

Winter 1965-1964 (continued).

Source's

oH allegation {is the single report
fror any source describing NUSENKO as other than
a KGS officer.

March 19466 , . _ , ‘ '

Ac

ording toa sensitive source,

t_NOSENZO,
“who was not personally known to » was An important
Jt os DOSS in. tHe KGBO. When: NOSENKO was a young man, he vas in
“the GRU Mili:ary Acadery and was then sent to the GRU
Information Department for a short time; in all, perhepe
for a year. NOSENKO had been a very undisciplined person i
while in the GRU and "not very good". We wan to have. been
discharged from the GRU; however, his father, who was a very i
influential person in the Ministry of Shipbuilding, was"
able to get MOSENKO tranof--red to the KGB. It was the opinion
of persons. to whom & talked that NOSENKO had. given
very, very. good information to the U.S. after his defection .
and that NOSENKO had had great access to KGB infornation f
-which included all means of KGB coverage of people in .

Moscow, microptione systems in the embassies, etc. Based on  .'
NOSENKO's information the American Embassy found many of the ....-....

nicrophones.

mee IE



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

tie,
BAN

Top Secret are

(contin,

xO has claimed that he. rejected an offer
tu attend tie Military Diplomatic Academ.
‘Gabich he, "~~ Source

like W@agpmys, called the GRU
Military &

; ‘adeay), by choice accepting assign-
‘went to th

Far East on entry to the GRU in
he time, the Military Diplomatte

J A9STE At
“Keadeny was a four-year course; if NOSENKO
did attend, the school, he could not heve

e claimed in the GRU. is ource
Lesides NOSENKO) who alleged

Copy

“TS No. 197124



--- Page 36 ---
14-00000

Yop 3 S2erct

Cécazy Ad

ALTA

ce a

oot Feb eee |
i crake aRR CSR Rta ad e rr

: : ry é PY A
TET 309 pescentiaiemeggnerareo mar nitenrnantesinaiisevens trees a
SACS ae + Ra Ook TREE TLD UAC OS : :
at 4 EP aR AEN UY Ls ash RRS OSS
: . iho
|
i
t

Edmcmnareent er Mae ue Oe

A SORA RLS ahi ahem i,

pee PAPE TE ee eee DF
de BE ceas UE PSST :

ES vd

e
wi
tA

"TS No.. 197124

. Copy. 10

Top Secret Pos



--- Page 37 ---
Hid-1966.

Yurty Deitriyevich KOROLEV, a Soviet journalist, visited
Paris and spoke: with representatives of the Freach magazine
Paris Match. KOROLEV indicated that he would like to serve
a8 a stringer for che French journal and proposed that he

begin with a atory on the life of the family of a "Soviet
secret agent”. As KOROLEV spoke only broken French and
English, the magazine staff did not seriously pursue the
matter at that tine.

Comment: KOROLEV is believed identical with Yuriy KOROLEV
who, as of 1964, was employed part-time for
the United Press International Moscow corres=
pondent, Henry SHAPIRO, whom both NOSENKO and
GOLITSYN have identified as an agence of the KGB
Second Chief Directorate. KOROLEV has travelled
previously to Brussels as a correspondent for
the Soviet publication Sputnik, sad to Japan
and the United States ss s correspondent for
Novosti, the Soviet news Agency. The offer. by
an official Soviet press representative. of
information on a "Soviet secret agent", which
turned out to refer to NOSENKO, is without
precedent.

October 1956

Soviet journalist Yu. D, KOROLEV returned to Paris with
an interpreter to renew his offer to Paris Match editors to..
Provide a story on the life of the family of a "Soviet secret
agent". The atory vas to concern NOSENKO's family and their

“TS No, 197124 |



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

es)

Vife in Mose
Statement Ko
"NOSENKO, ah
organizatinn
two years a
it was grant
the Soviet

. positions fn

algo was clo
familfes and
35, two dauy
The family &
the incident
to the Inter
compensation
nach publict
defected, bu
KUROLEV disp
family going
indicated th
could be obt
others know!
corresponden

Comment:

_Gtate, is granted automatically upon the wife's;

28 January 17 . no - f

According
rah

knowledge of
his explanat

_knew these matters better chan\@
at KGB lleadquarters longer.

“Top Secret

. (continued)

ROLEV provided Parte Match editora stated:
out 30-35, an officer of the Soviet Secret Polic
+ defected co the USA without his family abou: :
© and asied for polttieal asylum in the U.S.: . ot
oto him. This was the mest serious defeat of :
vurity organs as NOSENKO occupied important po
nptooage and counterespionage departments and : ,
nely Sequainted with the ccuntry's leading : ,
humes. - NOSENKO's family consists of a wife, ] ‘
Nters, 10 and 12, a mother and a younger brother.
4 uot prosecuted (sic) but feel very badly about |
(the defection}. Very soon the wife will apply: '
National Lawyers Organization fur a divorcee and |
+ It is possible that this case will be given.
ty. is wife has not heard from him since he
€ tt is obvious that he is still in the USA."
layed a photo spread showing NOSENKO's wife and
about their daily affairs in Moscow, and :
at additional photographs of NOSENKO's family i
atned and that intcrviews with then and with '

hm NOSENKO could be arranged for a Paris Match '
t. .

|
Sw since NOSENKO's defection. A short background aan
e

A divorce from a defector from the Soviet Union, i
who is legally considered to be an enemy of the

Fequest.

toa sensitive source , ' : |
(from personal knowledge): Referring to his own! * - 1
KCB organization, ian ® said if NOSENKO heard
fon, he would call/¢ a child, since NOSENKO
because he had’ served toe

\

- : TS No. 197124 ;
vis Copy 10. |:


--- Page 39 ---
1400000 pf
4

}
g
nN

Fm sa tenn nc ee een tel neste ee ner

ae

vo ‘Top Seeret

(Annex:-A) _ , at

February 1967

~ According to a sensitive source ,

BP (from unidentified GRU sources in Moscow):

7 NOSENKO worked only in kU Information Department of the GRU,
and only for about five oc six months, after which he went

“to the KGB,
May 1967
aay “According to a sensitive : source

The xGH assumes that NOSENKO - whole
ayetes ot surveillance of Americans. He worked on it, knew
all about it ond exposed the whole system of work. He knew
all the pests, the sources (few words unclear) he knew all
: the surveillance groups and knew surveitllants by sight.

4 According to a sensitive source

£ : ‘ A i: ‘ts 3: When
NOSENKO werhed in the Gau Information Department he worked
only it*the Center (Headquarters) in Moscow. Ne worked badly
there, and received bad efficiency reports, a3 a result of
which he had arguuents. Then with his father's help he went
to the KCB. :

3. June: 1967-
ccording to a sensitive source

ns sue Zep: There had been some
- KGB suspicions cf Pavel Fe — SHAKHOV while he was in
> Geneva, because he had allegedly had many American contacts
which he had not reported, and NOSENKO was sent. to Geneva to

SHAKIOV.

‘Comment: NOSENKO claima he was sent to Geneva in 1962
to investigate SHAKHOV.

investigate him. Rezident KULEBYAKIN is etill suspicious of


