
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000

eRe Rs og a cape eine Seneber te

104-10219-10282 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

. ‘y

LSPEM patereeeen PITAL

b Ang ant 6904

MEMORANDUM FOR: Federal Ysroen of lavestigation |

SYRIECTe Berson Pogaupon MIT Cal biceleg
. Wiltiacn Marcibina bLART IF, .
Stee ee ee ue Bpbornpge @ Bo eee

aot 3. Raderonce te made ta oye wermogenduin of AV Faby 164%

. eaptioned ba above, and alee to Lares somes dated 23 June b9Sl,
odézesced Go tha Siveztag, Nathonsi Becassiy Agency, etth copy to this
Agerey, Selject! Legare Tergusom MITCHZLL, William hasnilne
MAaiE lg REO TLAAN EOUS © UF ORATION GONCTBNING"s

. & The fallewleg lntormathon oupple nents the mefoutal ez. . .
* " "| Miselas Georges PAMASCOU aka DAMASHOU axe DAMADECE che :

. BAMASLUE, eapvared ta paragregh & cf oat 37 jee 3563 Temowanduite :
ao: - Pedsrend oa elie TOe

& Caz soppy scented oes in Meibsarne edvised thas Australien
eruutiy Seweice fxdiews vedlect Ghat Niccias Gecty,6e DAMASGOW aka
Damarcon Qroen antional berg 10 March A533 a6 Atauaalria, Syyre.
Bo. apvived is Sydney, Ansivahin, tre permanent dwenianes un &q Cuistar
S| B98& beard the &, 84 S72 ERATIBIAY EAS @mareling oo CGgenk Panspeat
_ | Re, £653/196% leenoa’B 8 Morel A969 88 hlenerd ring Egypt. AS tho

Me nsd LT IST ie!

_, Uae of ite egvival ta Spdaey, DAMASCUU wae io poseacnics af - 3
’ Ageipailes Vise No. 4238, tesved in Calvo on 13 July 1966. Howes > -
éacesterd a5 faktoway wivglea, § feet 26 lachboe taki, nopmel balld,
” Waroets epna, blush haie, ecevpaiion "wetter, Ha departed Australia

- oa 25 Kay A969 aboard the dy 3, CRONSAT, destination aot indicated
ead aa ef 68 Fedy ayél hed wed vesorter ed é Austrsiion . .

“"" "Be Ose soprencatadves ia bMemee Cisy mavamwtthe. Ln
a earned that Ansoiasio Goorges DAMASCOU aka DAMASCUS, aiotag of
the shove, em 8 Jedy 1960 appiled ab De sientona Consulate in San
* Antonis, Famne, feo a Mentehs Tourist Cord to enter Menfeca to wielt
hay Brethed Nigsles Georgee CALMSSCUR, then sostding af the Hotes

ScRieid, <an 3h Toe jars! edheenansces cate cite ota Bad cei


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

wee the reeiplent of o Calted Seates Vina os d¢ Cstober 1760, Os ide

‘ ~ Bany 89 89Sa."

” tves in Egyps hed learned in the leterim tha? Kieolea DASASCOU, who

‘ titi residing ia Alemandria, thet be plans ts marsy the danghter of a3

, Miselas end Amastast[ts DAMASCOU aka DAMASCUS, dled during ths

Lesfentninamtybiitnaniy wa ty Aa TRANG es

Haren peseeman 9 “y

New Vora tk cacaina lily. ot the Wise of het opmastall ce tet ae orhey
pormit, she made co wanikan wf any weeding pheno, The atanigen
Goveramens eppvoved ber tip ve cuadttiae fact cba Cegrete with ag
Cousslate & i686 Beas bord, 60 4 gaafanios ci hed ixtoniten te depegt
Mexico open expiratica of her toasts} card, + utscas bLcindy ration a
Bileo corfais se record of Ber actual evrived io service iotlewing
aggoovel cf hog O duiy 1960 application, The seas recant corrgepende
engo on this case contained in Lietcas filer in daind 1b February 196k,
Peficating thas Anestasse DAMADCUU again pe qoested & Vouries Card

ew of show? the dase of the letters, at which tive ar edurese in the
Valted Ctstee wan given oc e/o Meritea Consel, Yar. Avteads, Texas,
ta gaply to be? cogerd appiicatias fog am eatry parait, Meniecas exthorte
tles ageia peyptled with o request tast she post a bved in ihe emoend ef
16, G6 Pease, to guarenise deyarvere from Mente opea eapiratica of
ley Convict wlan, Gisve lo ne further Infovroaden curpestly avaliable
ga her gavther travel piensa.

; Go With eeferenee to Ficoias Geeryee DAMAECOU, 07 Bsals
h@e infogrnatien puperted ta prucading paragraph, « recheck hy oug
geprevcetatives wita ofsictole of the Ueited ftstea Ermkeasy toe biazteo
Clay Boveated thet Kigctes Georgse VAM ADACU, born 16 Meech 1938
st Alenertria, Egypt, bolder of Creek Fasopest 13638 heeusd ta
Alewondsis, Egypt: on 8 March £569 og valid to 29 Apett 1963, with
Gédvese ef & Lideabeth Rep Reed, Ciigabsth Bay, Cpdacy, Angiralia,

opplication, DAMASECY indicated th2t be decired to vielt the Ualiad
Gtates fer B psvled ef tow menths, caecyieed az 8 pleacuve telp to olals
bda eleter. Mio ving sppileation did mot inelede any destination adéresg

. ba thd Unlined Seteds Li waco alee resied that the visa card maintaiacd en
Micelas DAMASHOU ts the Emberoy ta Medco City contains a Koteties
‘3oG53 ta kuomigration and Nataroliaiion Services Loo Angeloce”

te Theaugh 6 vetlablc confidential ecusce oss raprencuiae
bo identliess with the ladividual daacribed Ia preceding pasagraphs,
currently resties in Las Angolet, Callforndia. ot 3699 Nosih Gardaor,
Agertment 18, ond thst be advised Bic mother aed pounger brother,

” Amacgtcen official, who ts ust farther identified, The seme course -
alse ecvieed that Georgcn DAMASCCU aka DAMASKOU, fethon of

eamunse of 1940¢ Yellowlag the denise of the fakes, Angelika
BAMASCES use GAVOURAS, widowed mother of Micelas ond Ansctasta

peer



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

ot

Mee

. ebrtovsly ts waadle te travel, Mo furtbor lalyr ciation wan available ca

. View Sestian 22 well as iba (adices of the immigration ead Naterslilsne

- Owised Mares, and alne che contasto in the Usited Siztce ef Nieolas

ce ye pete ae

coger
ws tc i

oy wae

Byed bint i

| DAMAZCOU, fo compary of a pouager coe not tdantiGed by name, bed
planeed to conigrate feers Egypt to fote ber ser Nivoles be the United
‘Bhatos, However, price te the gaciigstica of theee pleat, Aagelika
BAMAICOY ouffaset a stroke, erect deteile cosrerriug vaich age 294
basea, but cho ia reported as af thts wuitizg atlif to be pareiysed and

‘ the pasathle future emigestion plai.eg of Angelina DAMARCOY a6
BAVOURAE and/oy of the ecidentitied yougar brotasy of Niselas
| BaMase CAS and of Avastasia DAMASCCU, .

eee _ @ Ga beastie of tks repovtsd Bitag of an application for &
‘Uated &eutos View im July 1936 at the Uf, Acabesay in Laendoe by
Amastasia DAMASOOU, sur representatives is Loades were poquested
to inigiet a choca of Sriised Maison Indices fa tha nomas af Micalae
BAISAS COD amd of Anasicvic UAMASTOU, Kihed advised Chat as of
late July 8568, they betd tu traces on Nicolas Georges DAMASCOYU ep
DAMASAOU eke RAL ACEC ete GAMASCES, bat tees although thoy bad
he 6PBE6E Ga Aanstants PAM ASC CU, thes cara coniinuing 60 chuck bap
pooeible resideace te Licedcow ducing 1754, based co the reported visa
agpllestion data, Milet efrived thas thep beld ve traces os either
BMieelas Geoeges DAMASGOU aba VAMASEOV aha DAMASCUS a7 on —
the eloter Acortaste Gertges DAMABCCT,

3. I is enggested tha the tndices cf the Departmnat ef State,

thes Sarviae, Bogertinent of Jyetica, may contata further detatted
tefogmation on Che cugrank immiqvatica status, Sderechouts te the

Georges BAMASCOY oka CALUSCUS, of Anastasio Georges DAM ACCOM
sha BAM ASTUS, tod euy otter embers af (Ne lemily «ko may kore
spplted fog eniep viens tturn sheoad,

_ . de Wik vegaré.to Juets SILRRA Casacpe, mentioned ta above
eeleporead reamorsnéum of \7 Fety bi6] bes contac: of Nigolas :
DAMASCLY abe DAni AsV, UL le suggested thas the indices of the

« Depagtasent ef State may rors additions inisymetion oa hie exctivitles
~ Gasing Rao cervies uf the Mexican Smbserz ix. Waokingten DeCe

Tee Infor mstion fer: ated above fe far the iutarnel ese af

as


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

7
3
é
t

oe

a | Beet National Beseviry Ayoucy .

_ SFER
‘ ~ oro vo roeiaat

_- adteesscos Galy exd rasy nce be fsrthes disscontaaton withons the prier
“ goreiccton e€ the oviginstet. .

feta

Atta! Liv, s. Peesiay KReyuctde , .


