
--- Page 1 ---
14-00000

104-10106-10300| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | a
f. RETURN TO CIA . ORI LUA be
an { i Background Use Only . Cc
. ‘ " Oo Not Reproduce eos

Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO

IDENTIFICATION: NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet
KGB officer who defected in 1964 and
was subsequently involuntarily con-
fined in the U.S. by the Agency for
a period of approximately three years.

BACKGROUND : NOSENKO first contacted Agency per-
sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962
and subsequently defected. in. January
1964. NOSENKO was brought to the U.S.
and after a period of relative freedom
. he was involuntarily confined in
.- April 1964. From April 1964 to
: August 1965, -he was confined at an
Agency controlled site in Clinton, '
Maryland. From August 1965 to
October 1967,.NOSENKO was confined
at |Camp Pear Virginia. In October
1967, he was returned to the Washington
area, given increasing amounts of
freedom until he was given total free-
dom in April 1969. NOSENKO became a
U.S. citizen in April 1974. NOSENKO
‘was employed by the Agency as a
consultant in March 1969 and continues
under contract to date. His present
salary is $23,500 per year.

APPROVAL : (1) The legal basis to confine NOSENKO

against his will was discussed by

Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with
the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April
1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the
Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence
Houston, advised the Director of Security
by memorandum that such confinement was
proper (Tab 2).

(2) There are a series of lettérs from
the DDCI, DCI and others to various
agencies, including the Department of
_Justice and the White House, covering
the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing
awareness of these agencies of the
NOSENKO affair (Tab 3).

(3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine-

‘ ment were established by the Office of
ue ; Security (Tabs 4 § 5).

up


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

RESULTS

TERMINATION

COMMENTS

iC

By memorandum dated 2 October 1968,
the Director of Security forwarded
two reports to the DDCI summarizing.
the results of the NOSENKO case to
that date. The reports are voluminous.
One was prepared by the Office of
Security and the other by the FBI.
Both reports conclude that NOSENKO
was a bona fide defector. A draft
memorandum attached to this file,
dated 21 October 1968 and prepared
by the CI Staff, raises question
regarding NOSENKO's bona fides

and challenges the above two reports.

NOSENKO continues under contract to

the Agency. He is brought to Washington 7
periodically to consult on matters
germane to his background and experience.
Various reports dre available in the
files of the Office of Security which
detail financial aspects of this case.

No final accounting has been made since
the project continues.

(1) While the Office of Security files

do document the rationale for the original
confinement of NOSENKO, they do not
document the rationale for his continued
confinement over so long a period of time.
A memorandum dated 5 August 1969 states
that various congressional staff officers
were briefed on NOSENKO and states that
concern for his safety, as well as con-
cern regarding his bona fides, prompted
the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6)

(2) Office of Security files document
a period in 1969 during which a mail
cover was placed on NOSENKO.

(3) During the above period, NOSENKO

was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida.
During this trip, Agency personnel, with
apparent Headquarters approval, obtained
the services of prostitutes. This
apparently occurred on at least two
occasions.


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

FILES :

Be eel

(C

Office of Security files on NOSENKO
are maintained in the following
locations:

OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen)

OS/SAG (Contact - Mr. Bruce Solie)


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

“2. My. Helms explained ths No
and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what .

to another country might be a consideration. Mr. Halas
explained we would probably face publicity problemas in. - ;

ae

MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD “= 2

SUBJECT: Discussion. with’ Deputy A
“thy _ General on Nosenko Cas

Bre eocHr Helus,'Mr. Houston and Mr, Murphy met with *:
the Deputy Attorney General and henubers of his staff to
discuss subject case. - Present from Hr. Katzenbach's-—
staff wera Messrs. Foley, Yeagley and Reis. —. a

we at least considered to be two problems on which we :. >
would like the advice of the Department of Justice. a
First, we would seeoa feel compelled to begin hostile. ae
interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth
with respect to his mission for the KGB and we wondered tek
what the’ legal position would be in circumstances in. *

: which ve detained Nosenko against his will for this pur- |

:

ing. that we could obtain no additional information from -*. --
Nosenko to deport him, We had thought of taking hin to.

- Germany. and transferring hin to Soviat custody-in Borlin. _
where this has been done a number of tines in the past,

"3, There was soae discussion of whether deportation.

deporting to a third country of the kind We would en- —
counter if ho were free in the U. S. Nr.’ Helms noted _
there were many itens of. information which we and the.

- FBI realize are of no Significance beeause of the file)

holdings»we have but which an unscrupulous newspaper nan .
could use to create sischief, This aspect was then dropped
and it was the consensus. that Berlin was probably the best
place, . : . : .

4. The question of the basis for detention was again
raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under
which Nosenko is in this country. He is hore as an “ex-
clusion and parole case" which means he has not been
admitted and has been paroled to the Agency which is
responsible for him while he is in this country. This



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

Laces

in Berling a

oa

. . at oe -- Sith |
ns “a. Ira nin
Co BBS ey

7. 2s . .

parole can be interpreted. to mean’ parole to a specific
locale which would provide sone justification for our. |.
detaining hin for questioning. It was then pointed out, -
however, that. if he said he wished to leave the country -
to return to the Soviet Union, technically we would not.
be able to detain. hin- further. .In this event, we would

be faced with the: need to deport his quickly and quietly

and for this purpose the. immigration warrant of arrest.

and deportation was probably the“best instrument,

.Se: Urs. Katzenbsch asked Mr. Foley to check into -
this and Hr. Foley will in turn contact Mr. Houston,
Mx. Houston will. in turn discuss the problem. with CIA.
Office of Securit officials to get the background-of |. a
their liaison with the INS on these matters, ; coe A,
, 6 Nr. Helas thanked. Mr. Katzenbach for his assistance
and wa departed anid sone jovial banter with respect to

- "The Spy Who Came in Fros the Cold" about what we expected

to happen to him when he started to Climb aver that wale

David E. Murphy”
Chief, SR Division



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

pie LON

N

OGG 64-0903

MEMORANDUM FOR: : Director of Security.

~~ SUBJEGT: |” Parole Status of Defectors

i:

..  1,° On 2 April 1964 we had a discussion with the Department
of Justice or the status of aliens whose inspection by I&NS is deferred
upon arrival at our request and who are then paroled to this Agency.

. It was the position of the Department of Justice that we were responsible

7“ for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole.

. “" 2, As you know,. a basic parole agreement was executed by the
: ‘Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955. After setting up
". conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states: ;
"After parole of Such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume -- -;
“= Xesponsibility for care, supervision and control of a.kind and degree it
‘ believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States”
_ “during continuance of their parole status." This means that the :
. responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary: _

. to protect the internal security needs of the United States. ‘The word
“minimum" is not necessarily a limitation. It merely means that good
judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary.’

. any .

ee

3. The agreement further provides that upon-completion of the
parolee's intelligence or operational purposes in the United States or if
internal security reasons so require, the alien will be removed from
this country through arrangements made by the Agency and, in such ve
the A, will inform vice in advance of each proposed’

LAWRENCE R, HOUSTON.
General Counsel


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

(7 (C Tanuary 1975

SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO

1. Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United
States in February 1964 was known to appropriate agencies and | articles
had appeared in the public media.

2. NOSENKO was in the United States under an I&NS parole as
the responsibility of CIA. _ The FBI was fully advised of the Presence of
NOSENKO in the United States and interviewed } NOSENKO | on several
occasions in March 1964, The United States Intelligence ‘Board was
also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning .the defection of
NOSENKO, On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet

in the presence of I&NS and State Department officials
officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum in

‘the United States,


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

authority g granted under Section Tot:
the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, as amended,’
ag approve and xacommend for your approval the entrance
- of subject into the United States for permanent. residence
-is in the interest of the national security

and-essentiel tothe forthessnce-of the national intelligence
- mission. ‘In- accordance with previous correspondence in
. Section 7 cases;. itis understood that you. will present this
: matter to the ‘Attoriiay General for bis approval.

Since his- defection in: February 1964, th subject b bas
provided valuable. information to this Agency and he wilh
contin ta be of value in the future

cl ; Subject has bee investigated abroad and here over 2
period of five.years and has submitted to a technical inter—"

: , wogation. The question of bona fides is a continuing one and”
—— should any information be developed definitely disproving his <-
+ bona fides, it shall’ he mads. available to your Service and the.
Attorney General. .

: G20e? 1
. > Sietaded fom quartic
dovnsradiag 198

dzclazsiticatsa



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

30 October 1927 Nicolayev, Ukraine, USSR

- Male - ‘Divorced -..- _ Brown Blue/Gray 5ft. 12 inches

~ a 7 Sevier ~, Caucasian —

~


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

=: TSS ~ Cawiidate Coyarmuntsh Party to
_° | 4987-1949 + Mamter Semenunist Party, OSSQ -



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

Selaneateatenaet

vational inter e st:
wee OF “to-this Ageacy—Thereiore- WTS réquested ‘subject's
ot parole to this. Agency be extended for an additiqnal. |

“period of six. (6). months beyond th the expiration date of
his stay of 16 August. 1969... a

. Deputy 3 Director of Security” _ oot
- Pm, (lavestigations and Operational Support) . Se
osraasst ee. 16 July 1969 oe

oO . 10 iN

CNOKT poctstet ma



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

“use Previous. ° cr : “pv: THTERN AL”
EDITICNS. c . | USE ONLY :



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

', il February 1954

3 7 MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. McGeorge Buady
oe - tly ot : . .

¢ Yuri Ivanovich HOSENZO

SUSJELT =:

; ‘3. This monoraadim refers to tha State Dapartrent fos
relaase of 16 February.on subject: case and provides addi- 7% - *
tional background. as well as information en his. current:

a - oe woe ve - °

£ officer, NOSENZO is regularity

“ Sa. HOSEMKO also attended various Sessions of the |
* Disarmanent Conference held in Genaya in 4982. During 7)
| ‘the. course. of these sessions NOSENKG Bough? contact with 2". ;
officials of the UL Ss. Goverazent, informed those erficials .-=.
iL, that: he was affiisated with the Sovist State Security ap—
“paratus and voluntearad to aid the UL 8. Goyeranant Ame.
datecting Soviet subversive activity directed acainst the - ../.
_U, S, Government, - During the courses of his eontact with
. U.S, authorities HOSENKO stated that bis cooparation with. -
_.the U.S. Govarnzant originated with his distaste and hatred oe
. for the Soviet vegime in general; with His desire to obtain. 2).
“. + 1) yevange for the unjust death of his father, 's senior official =
. gn the Sovist Shipbuilding industry, ind with the general...
‘ adaivatioa of the-Aaoricans with whos he bad come in con--
tact within the Soviet Union, 0 st

we - 4. In iato January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Genava, |
' gzain Rasquerading as a menhber of the Soviet delegation —~
te the Disarasnent: Conference, Subject secretly avtified |
his CIA contacts in the United States concerning -his pres-. .
eaca ja Geneva and arranged to meet with these contacts,.
Duriag a series of seetings NOSENXO provided information
including docunsnts concerning Sovier Stato Security acti-~
vities within the USSR and abroad and a detsilod account »
oft the XO3 operation against U. S. Professor Sarghoora
which NOSENKC said ha had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICGASTRIY, the Chairmen of the Cownictee
for State Security (X53).

’



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

5. ° During these MOSt recent Restings NOSENKO announced
Ais desirs -zo- jaaye the uSssR permaneatiy and seek his ‘future
in the West. Hy Claised nis new work in the KG3 (First -. -

. HBaputy Chief of char C2epartaent Charged with the Survelllanes

. . | and reeruiteent of American visitors to the USSR) was ox-..

Te panding and that he would not bo able to visiz the West. 2

Tony with any iraquency,. Accordingly, he Prepayed ‘a -request ‘far

; the United Statas..- He was tsker-ts a

exe he is currently undergoing interso-

Cz being made to remove him te the Ds. |

Q te aes

extensive and that we will require additional
_ thorough interrogation to establish Subjact's beoaa fides,.

ed that CIA: contact with sub jec

cerned with substantive aspects of the Disarmaent Conference,
aad he therefore is not expected to be able to Shad much, i
any, Light. on that araa of our interest, Deo ot

one 7s. The ‘possibility that SOSEHXO*#s defection was da- co,
: Signed. te wrack the conference was Bost carefully considered,

. The -decision to accept hin was taken on thé conviction thar
1° a the Soviets would ROT have chosea such a yolnerablo agent: -

re *. Qstakl officer of the £53) for this kind of noys, . .

_ Thonas ke. Raranessines:
> #2 Acting eputy Director
8 o's Sor Plage

" CSR/DEM/jif o i
eo. ' Distribution:
os “Orig — Adse. oe
“2 cc-+ SR/CI/K-Dcwagy
“Yec- efor
iicc - CSR-. ;
Sc - DB/os ©

Feb 64°

wna ore FEL . Le Lf
sur. AYIYW :
YER AMY a,

i

tyr

1

ae



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

SUBIECT: |

“ status,

‘0 KSB. dn Hescow but-sas included in the Soviet delegation.

gent which pernittéd his to farry out intelligence
. Security functions. in Geneva on behalf of the KGB.
: Sisarmazenz Conference heid in Geneva in 1982, During the- -

“. paratus. and goluatesred zo aid the B. 3, Goverment-in ;

. 8, Sy Governssnt,~ During the course of his contact with

.taet withia the Sevie? Union,

Ce ENED MALE
" C-NTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

WASHINGTON 25, o.c,

._, OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE oot

12 February 196g.”

‘United States Intolligenca Boatd Menbers

NEMORANDUM FOa:_

Yuri Tvanovich HOSENXO wo

“daw “This memorandus refers te the State Departsent ;
‘Feleaass of 13 February on subject’ case sad p¥Yovides addi-
‘Sienal background as yell as information on his curtent-~"

2.) As a ESB staff offtcor, MOSERKO is regularly
assigned te the. Counterintellicencs Birectorate of ths

‘to the Disaraanent: Conferenca as part of a cover ar

3.” NOSENKD also attended various sessions $f the
2y.

courses af thease Sessions, HOSENKO sought contace. With tle

officials of the By 8, Soveranant, informed these officiais .

that. ha was affiliatod with the Sevist State Security’ ap- :

detecting Soviet. subversive activity: directed against the

U. S&S, anthorities, NOSEXES Stated that his cocperation with
the U. S, Sevornaant originazed with his distasrs and: hatred:
for the Soviet regime in Seneral, with his desire te obtain - :
revenge for the unjust death of bis father, 2 senior official °
in tha Seviet Shipbuilding industry, and with the gewerai- 7 2,
adsivation of the Anericans with whea he had comg in con— ~ -
'4. In lats January 1964, ROSENXO avrivod in Geneva,
again sasquerading as a moaber of the Soviez delagation
fo ths Disarmament Conferences Subject secrerly notizied
his CIA contacts ia the United States concerning his pras-—- |
encs in Gaensva and arranzed to meet with these conizers,

Suring a series af meetings NOSENXS provided inforpation
including documents concoring Soviet State Security acti-
vitios within the USSR and sbresd and 2 detsiled aceacunt



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

of the XSi operation against us S. Professor ‘Sarghoorn .
which NOSENXO said he had personally suparvised at-the
direction of SEHNICHASTHIY, the Chairaan of the Comal

oe tter -
an .. £or State Security: (XSB).°

_ 4 Se. During these most recent meetings NOSEXNXO announced
“his: desire te leave the USSR pernanently and seek his Suture
+. dn the Yeat. > He clained his new workin the £68 (First: fro

‘Deputy Chief of thar department charged with the surveillance

and reernitnent. of: Agsrican visitors: to.the USSR) Was ax- -

1 panding and that/he would not be able te visit the Jest 7
., with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared a regtest for
“political asylum in. the United States. He was taken to ana
. Fruakfart, Geraany wheres he is currentiy undergoing interre-
; gation. Plans are nov being made to yYenove him to the U. Sy

fuse ot -

-: S+ It should de geted that CIA contact with Subject
has not been extensive and that wa will vequive additions] -
.thorongh interrogation to establish Subdject’s bona fidas. -. -
. LE shonld aise be noted that NOSENKO's duties ware. not con+
“earned with substantive aspects. of the Disareament Conkereaca
and he therefore is net expected to be sbin ta shed.a ch, Lf:
/ omy; light om that.area of cur imterast.. | «+ oe .

momma CE 7.. Tae possibility that NOSENXO*s defection vas da-" |---
’ ' . Signed te wreck. the. conferonce was most carefully considered,

: The. decision to accept hi. was- taken on the conviction thas.
‘the Soviets vould ast. have chosen. such « yalnerable agent~
w(staff officer ofthe £63} for this kind of move... 7

"Marshall 5. Carter ~~
- Lioutenant’ Ganaral, USA
ten | . Deputy Director .



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

ul

Embassy nficial at. the=r-can.
frontation hare-last Friday-that;*
he leit: Switertand. on the-way

to. the. United” States 28 -hours} 2
before t-his<defection~ was::re-|Swiss
‘ported by~tha*Russians. i
‘Swiss authorit, ~3 s
Ht; This statementby ‘Taformatio
tatt oficerof-the’ Soviet Com-|today: shes. rt
mittee of, Stzte'7Security; thalon the defec! fon 3
: eared toamount|+\The-y Soi
O92 deni2t-of the Soviet charge, Gereva:: it.
-that the Swiss: authorities. bad tae’. Swiss: police
been negligect.in preventing his|5. that Rtr--

défection.. SS ee 4
Roe WN Axo, WhO qu:

member of the Soviet delegation x id piais

to the Genev2. Csarmament con- ve. 9 a tual arter..

ference Feb: £ was’ allowed: to| defection- took “pl. ML

meet with viet: diplomat|the preceding”

here in the-eresexce-of:-Uaited,
tates officiais:svSh—, %
r t= Departmen: :
mounced ‘atithe: time .that th: wrmeeting-
|Soniontation was -taking: plac Nosenkoi-i
in. Washingtor at the request.af/ bassy_ofti
| the: SovietsExnbassy, but: no!)
other details:were made -pudlic. ftom: :
I rhe. departmeat.said that.:.almig
pine ¢ ment al 2

ww

gt
. . . 19



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

These developments . came-
28 the Soviet Uniom kicked up
‘ta diplomatic fuss over the dis~
“appearance of’ Ne Nosenko on

Feb. 4, from Geneva, where

ne nad been assigned as an

{exper vin the Soviet delega~
‘tion at the 17-nation disarma-
eat conference. ” Phillaps
‘said-he was .“oo temporary
‘duty from KGB. (secret Do
neadavarers in Mos-

Up ta yesterday Moscow
had been cirecting its public
: alamatic wrath at the
iSwiss, ¢aarging them with
yy. The provision
inlomat to inter-
xo was to assure
the United
part in no
r soil. a

ted the Soviet

_ See DEFECTOR, 43 Col. L

valready had |



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

=

aceite
SAE,
2 fatto

NF *
a seeaecoatss
rig eee ro

ors. that:
atearttens

vez ‘Stepped ‘rup.. its}

protest: after-‘Tsarapkin,-had
}publicly- downgraded-the :

eretthat the|in. Geneva= At: any-‘rate U.S:
S.a° gen-idisarmament + negotiator’ Wil-
gn -the pos-|tiam ‘C. Foster: and ‘Tsarapxin||

it" been: overlook:|in Geneva yesterday at which
is, fe! e .thati they said the case was-not dis-

;pected.+
lintervie

? nied. ‘in | meetiag="
i treatment} weet

x.



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

(} ‘the, ecord and will

to be made for the installation of :
‘adequate’air-conditioning equipment to insure that a”
comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under-
stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available
through Logistic ‘channels. )

(3) Subject is to receive a bath; change of underwear;
change. of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed.



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

= : ; erizined that we. will, have custody of
the Subject until at least July; ' It was ggested that perhaps. we may

wish to-explore. some modifications in the assignment of personnel

. or schedule of: ‘assignments. In. addition,: the Acting Chief, Support
. Branch has suggested, that. immediate consideration be given to .

devising” necessar pr rocedures. to-be ‘followed: ‘inthe. event of an

; emergency involving ] loss of" contre of ‘the Subject. This Should

: and’ ‘specific procedures devised, and all guards roperly i informed
as to-their responsib ities in. this ‘matter :

- : we Jack M. Bauman
Bauman/ewd(5-12-64)



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000


