
--- Page 1 ---
104-10182-10057)

12025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992]

NO DOCUMENTS MAY

BE COPIED OR REMOVED. FROM THIS. FILE


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

st is tobe Sea SfaE GSE EGR

S-EL0-8-E-2



--- Page 3 ---
a

‘transportation and per diem provided for under this para,raph must, be ©

iy

|

‘al Basic compensation in an amou
$6090 ‘per. annum. be

OG ‘uarters will nov 10 nent you no on yo t
provided ‘bya ‘cover facility. without gtlor amendment of this
. agrao-riont. 2 .

2.. Taxes. Monies paid you. directly, or guaranteed by-the Government:

under\ghis pa agraph conutifute income Pr. Federal tax pu poses. You witi
be advil ¢ fo ; r g a pr such taxes.
“The meth f : nd b: iy iBadticate imple |

ment ite

and for authorised operational: ‘travel. You" inay, be. entitled to per r diem in
lieu of subsistence, during such travel and, when Suthorized, while on
temporary duty away from your permanent post of agsaigamont. Ail travel,

properly authoriged, and éxpenses incurrad hereunder are aubject to: pay-
ment and acéouniing in substantial compliance with Government: regulations.

vill be advanced or ‘Feinbu ed tunds for
necetsary Operational expenses séifically adproved and £ ialty limit
ed by the: Government. Such funds Ude sudject to pay:nent and accounting |
in substantial conformance with applicable Govern: nant regulations. —

4 ‘Cperational, Expenies. Yo

|
|
I.
|
|

5. F epay vient. It ie recugnized that your failure to account for or refund: i

Sny monios advanced you hereunder shall entitle tho Covernment to withhold ;
the total amount of: such incebtecness. or any. portion thereof (rom aay Monies |
ue you under the terme of-this contract in euch manner as.it deems appro

priate.

:

Fees SVE 4F?



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000 |

a

to an employee status,

ecution of Lo. rucnents.— nn
this contrac is@ure the custudy of Governinent. funds OF take title of

in the performance of services under —

Fecord to property of any nature whatsoever and wherever situate, which

P Y has in fact bean purchased with conics of the U.S. Covernniens, .
Tecoytize and acknowledge the: existence of a trust Folationship,
839 OF constructive, and you apres tu execute. whatever docuaient
may'de required by this Organization tu evidence this relationship.

8. Status. You are. not an omployce of the United States Covernr.ent
under this agreement and are not entitled to any benefits normally incident

9. Funding. 1 necessary to protect the éecurity of this arrange:nent,
monies dua you hereunder inay be junded in other thana diruct nauner. It
is underatood and agreed that any mcnies 60 funded constitute Pay:nont by
‘the Coverament in‘ satiataction of ste obligations under th : :

agreement, —

WwW. Cover. (a) It is anticipates that you will undertake a cover venture
inthe course cf your Performance under this asgree:nent. Such venture: muet
be approved by the appropriate Government Tepresentative uversesing, your
&@ctivities prior to its initlation. Any and ail ducur.ents which you may :
execute in the course of said-cover venture are subordinate to this agroe-

ment and any contradiction in terme which in any way anpiily, extend or-
Yeotrict your righta and/or. eblizgalions hereuncer ahali be -resulvea by this

azreement which shall always de dominant.

~ Government will joan you $4

Bpprovalby the Government;

Meory note, payable on de nand. saic toan “
in a fcreign bank and a £3999 letter cf credit will be soaued you a-ainst that
deposit. The additionai $1999 will be released {com said account, after

‘(b) To provide capltal (or your approved cover venture the’
220e be secured by a rcn-interest bear-z, prom

be depssited to an account

representative cversceing your activities.

|

ce

i
i
|
|


--- Page 5 ---
. | - 13, Unauthor inte. No promises or commitmente por- -
dl taining to rights, privileges 3: efits other thar thoge axaresa! ty stipulated

‘this organization.

i}
| . ia, Term, “This contract te effective ag oft Noveaber 1¢69, and shall
i continue the réalter for & pericd of two (2) yeara unleos. soaner terminated

i} by the Governirent either:

{a) Ey aixty (60) days actual notice to you from the Covernmont, of
{b) W.thout prior notice, in the event of a breach of this contract by

your violation of the security provisions: Kereof. or by your vtherwise.
rendering yourself: unavailable for. acceptable “service. :

Subject to the. avaitebility, of gprepriationa, this agrea:nent nay be extended
‘upon notice from the Coévornment. In the event of voluntary termination on
your part or termination fcr cause by the Governi-ent sricr to the expiration
of this agreemant or any renewal therecf, you will not be eptitied to return.
trave! expenses tu the United States. Termination or expiration of this agree
ment wiil not release ycu fro:n the obligation of any security oath your tuay,

be required to take.

UNIT: EB STATE if TOW “RNMENT

ACC2PT ab: . . Kocntracting

Frest G. Maycring

witNsst = m oF Rasta UVES Da

|

|

|

; by “|
|

|

|


--- Page 6 ---
oO

,
INTERNAL,
USE ONLY

8.008

- CJ unctassieten

VERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1958.0 -are73)

ewe

Saath. ot Peutiud ato dde Tak

fey,


--- Page 7 ---


--- Page 8 ---
RE
* A dee fdéd: heh d: Better’:check the Georges ‘V.
“Restedt, iomediately - recognized” hia, ‘approached the taxt which subject had: left and:
- re-entered, looked hard at Subject who caught the significance. of Rostedt's extra-
ordinary: “attentions, crdered ‘the: taxi ‘arcund the corner, paid ‘him~ his due fare, and
Te: -Joined Rostedt... Tt was at this moment that Friganza returnéd on intuition.

. The trio then went tc lunch, taking a circultous
lunch from about 15-15 néurs Hostedt had an oppentunt!
. Suoject and to put tc Subject several questicns ecneerning wiilingne:

route by foot. and taxi. Cver
ty, to acquaint. himself with .
ss and the Job. rr

AD ter lunch Friganza and posted: decided that under the aL stances it would
able to keep. Subject in Paris rather than risk his arrest ‘tra ling between
. a Ambert: or returning to Gap to h his varte d'identite, revalidated.
Accordingly while Ro spunt the next ij mrs. or so with Subject, Friganza
reciurned te the Pari jon where he asked for the use of 13 rue Weber Safehouse.
Paris Station had committed the safehouse ror the night of 6 and ¢ April as weil

as the morning or 8 April but beginning late afterncon 8 April the house was
‘ assigned for the use of ASASPIC. Arrangements were made to have Platipcdis who
_knows Subject to be at tt safehcuse at 1630 nours (alternate 2350 hrs.) on 8 April.
Subject t was Instructed to go. to the safenouse, ring -4 longs; 2 short, whereupon

he would ‘be admitted by Piatipedis. He k ise given the name Jon Sandor:and
toid that in the eves: unavoidadle I. * Should, clajm that he nad been lent
the apartment by Tom Broxn, a friend of gohn’ Sz He was instructed’ net to
ansxer the phone and not immediately to answer the, door: -If after persistent ringing
he felt obliged to answer the coor, he should pretend he had ‘drunk. tco.much wine,
was cleoping heavily, and sheuld come te the ‘door.appeuring groggy. Subject was
rurther instructed to stay in the sarenouse duri ig daylight, hours and toe venture out - 4
at night only if necessary to buy food, eat, etc. He was told that Prigunz oula™

return for him sometime between ly and i6. April. :

ny ke will

Between 6 and 8 Agri Subject wi

oe

ro

Antheny H. Friganza
Case Officer

ws 7 ; . 7 : . “SECRS t. a .



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

rent may be heeded to pring AEASPIC.-
‘only af: er ats cussion with Dexter
and:

": Subject wilh heed. no other’ dcéiiments, being tt it
one time use to cross’ at Strasbourg. This ‘document 18 ‘belli i
‘event that it 16 needed-for, the 6 April meeting in Paris wit! Subject. ‘Per i
: cables ‘from Headquarters - ‘Rostedt is empowered to decide whether Subject should i
be brought to Gerwany and if so, it would save one extra trip to Paris if this
document were carried by the linderaigned to ) the 6 ‘April meeting 80 that he |

‘ ; mi could ‘be brought directly to ‘Germany. .
bes yo . 4. Photographs have already been given to the MKTOPAZ officer.

. Anthony He Friganz Aza

“approved:

een |



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

Av vatheont-

‘Assessnent

: j@. then discussed future: meeting arrangements ‘with Subject’ subject will
7 appear ‘tn front of the Cafe Georges. Von the Champs Elysees | ‘at! 1214" and 16 hours
“on 6 ‘April.’ He will wait” ‘for. five minutes in front- of: the: cafe but will hot. °
‘Jenter. If we a¥e not: there -hée-will return for the altérnate. ° In any event -
Valternaté contact will be made through Annick. Subject was ‘instructed to clear
-up his affairs. in Ambert and be prepared to depart for Germany ;: however, tt) was.
also ‘explained to. Subjest that we were not authorized to-make a final commitment:
to Subject and that’ much as we regretted this, this would’be-left ‘until 6 ‘April...
. Subject, was paid Francs 15,500 for: which: no receipt was obtained since we were
in a hurry ‘to catch'a plane for the. Hague. If Subject has” any difficulties he
will write Annick. “He will not return to Gap. He expects to stay with Josef.
: Dassaud in Ambert, until. the night of, 5 ‘April when he will travel to Paris by -
rain. It was further ; -agreed that. on ‘or about’ 4 or 5. April Subject will have.
sent a letter to Annickfor "Mike" ‘in. which he will conform his arrival and in a
‘double talk inform us. ‘4f he has had any. trouble.

. We 2 isctssed with, “Platipodts of:-the ‘Paris station the need to send "Maurice"
Q to Aanick on 4 or 5 Aprit to see if Subject ‘had written.

m SO : . : _ ._ anthony H. Friganza —

: Case Officer

mn
ta]

CREST



--- Page 11 ---
/ SECRET

rancs a. ‘piece (near}, 5100). However. | Subject. gets. ne income ‘other
free rocm.and board where he.now lives; and will not receive
. outlay of His other two partners has been amortized. Taking
L1-by_ horns. wé explained to Subject. tthe delay: -A telegram’ nad been sent -
certain co Teagues” in Paris who were supposed to write a letter to be for =
rded:te ‘Subject. The man: to whom tne telegram was. sent was on ‘leave -and upon
urn he’ waa not notified of the telegram we sent; consequently,’ Subject was not
infornied ashe should have been. We are terribly sorry and hope that Subject would
appreciate, such a minor matter..-In any. event, we reminded Subject that he had not
een promised a letter cn ‘or about 1 February but rather told that he could expect
2 hear from. us then. Subject agreed ‘this was - so. . .

oF Subject was far less interested in explanation than a decision. He rhetorically

asked whether he was accéptable, adding he was obliged to assume he was not, and
commenting that although there are “many “two legged: people in America also” he
thought he was probably a unique perscm from the point cf view of language ability,
experience as an operator in dangerous ‘sit tuations, etc. We replied thus: One man
(the psychologist): has already come’ all: the way from the States just to see Subject
and -ariother was on: his” way. From. this Subject could - fairly conelude the importance’
“"Héadquarters” ‘attaches: to Subject's candidature and that far from being a dead
‘issue, Subject" ‘s prospects were good, although all depended on him. .

. ke then turned. to the matter of Subject coming ‘to Paris. - subject éxplained ~
that Paul ( - ) had been sent by the Paris station
‘te ‘Annick: and had ‘not done very well. He had failed to convince Annick that he was
sent by Mike (Friganza) and apparently altholgh we did net go into tne details of .
this, he did net get the message straight. In any case Subject immedi ately said
that he c6uld come to Paris anytime although he would be cbliged.to travel
illegally. Thi bee use he had permitted his Identity docunent to expire as of 14
February 1959. ever, Subject feit he could make the journey by train without
being caught because the police are not checking most trains. He did not want to:
travel.by car ‘because. he had heard there are cccasional road blocks (this, may be
true for the undersigned ran inte cne.on the drive from Paris to Ambert). Sibject
also said he eculd Stay as long’ as need by but it was absolutely essential that he
not be cbliged to stay at a hotel -- he could either stay with annick or at-a place
pat at his disposal. by us.

24

bobo, . am “Gases Osficer

77)
iS)
.a
i)
a}



--- Page 12 ---
TaDODOO

: _ . MM FMAKHX 1959: Subject wos met by the undersigned at the Gare Aust erlitz “at :
Be hours. Henry C. Ladue cz the Paris staticn counter-surveliled the meeting and 1
. : “our progress from the staticn by fect and then by metro to the Severes Baby lon - :

station. ‘Ladou is certain that cur meeting was not surveilled. after gcing cur ~ :
*-ewn-way. from Lacou,* we took a tax!

é@ Opera, switched taxis and then went to a
afehouse in the rue weber 14. te 7 Subject washed and shaved we arcve in the ‘
car provided by the station to Les les where we had dinner av the Pied ce Cochon, © | .
We returned to the apartment at 4’ 2 hours, talked for another hour cr se while .
ving. a drink, and then retired. sing this conversation Subsect was enccuraged . .
4 prompted to.develop theush a varfety of: matters which we hoped would tend : :
. give’ us better grounds cn wiich tc as

ss nim. Nothing ‘of particular eperational
or r Blographic ‘significance was discussed.

.. 22 March 1959: After breakfast Su = was asked to wait until we returned. ke
“went with Ladou to the airs to c2et, the LOFLUTTEN operattr. After the cperator

mand returned to the apartment and suggested that:

r from

We walked to the safehouse

“arrived we decided ona prcgr
Subject spend the afternoon on his cwn and agreed on a 2230 rendezvous net

_ Port Maillot and the safehcuse where Subsfect was met.
and retired at about midnight. oo ot

left the apartment by about 8:40, walked to a cafe

rangement passed the corner of Pert Maillot

R operater observed us and follcwed us

upstairs and left the apartzent where we met

end introduced him as Mr. Brown. After avery - .

we absented ourselves from thé room while .

ny in’ preparation for the LOFLUTTER exaainaticn.

ment cn his own, it having deen

the Tout Bien cafe. The

“with us where it was agreed

Paris on 24.0r 25 Maren. T

the apartment. 5

apartment where
z

‘and rue Malakoff at whitch vie
to the apartment. We showed >
the operator and tock him upset:
brief intréduction with no’ ex:
' the operator reviewed Subfec
At about 1245 hours Subject

ments for ti ckets, “ete., we re ‘sured to
and the operator. During this botef seezing $
Francs, making: a total of Francs 49,200 or $100.
night of 23 and 24 March-chez Annick and we would retura

Case Officer
SECRET
No security flaps although t 2.45 there for a beautiful ene; Our false
identity document: Ss together t's lack cf any legal documentation £5 raw

material sufficient for this:



--- Page 13 ---
14

u weENT ;

1 enveyex Ss

H Faure FaANKFURT ras

FRANK FLAT ‘i

“ocd Devrscntano ).



--- Page 14 ---
. 27 ‘ : ‘



--- Page 15 ---
. Sled he. rete whe @ rad y ~
ad dan” wet uw wel: ve ben vcd mele Cet

, the a ( FE wrecepshin wk Ay hae )

wowed e Ww od boner |

Ese = We
a apres.

NOD. en edreme ok we Back ween Ne

ee

hy


--- Page 16 ---
14008 ee

to be sonsthing, you have to act accordingly. “His.
into a concept ‘of dignity and pride ‘in his

“The fam. iy ett georgia when the. suns
3 Subject feela:that ie i re

: Becaiis 4
the family “was ‘able™ to live- ‘coafortably and aven opulently.
_ vicissitudes of life “prought the famiiy progressively to material degradation

and‘ financial difficulties which greatly” influenced Subject’ ‘a way of think-
y lived in an artificial

However, the

ing thereafter. Whereas: the. family had ‘previous

: o feudalistic way» life became tough. subject feels that the family was
Sas . brought int ¢ more. ‘airect contact. with reality and that this was not . . :

necessarily a “pad: ‘influence. :

van 6. subject actually ‘aia not want “to leave Georgia. He felt it was
a flight. rather ‘than a. tactical retreat. -Apparently. he has never been —
able to accept’ -this humiliating - defeat and it maybe that part.of his. an ’
urrent: motivation for affiliation involves: nis perception of an opportunity .
He. . de a person who cannot

to take countermeasures, against the soviets.



--- Page 17 ---
‘a precocious ‘child and hie lexpertencea, disillusionsent in his Taaiy.

ty. It ‘is as. if he suddenfly: Alscovered ‘to: ‘his Breat d dis- .

appointment that there. was no Santa Claus.

8. At first Subject felt his’ disillusionment was "unique and peculiar.

to his particular life experience, but he soon discovered that his dis-

content was characteristic of others. He. experienced this fighting

attitude within himself and he reflected it in his non- “conforming. be-

haviour. :

9. His nother reacted to his behaviour with “Gver-affectionat

solieitousness: She jwasn "t aetually ‘able to determine the reasons ‘for ‘is:

internal distress; but, she was aware something “was ‘taking place’ witha” him. ‘
The mother. was apparently. a ‘marked - ‘conformist ‘who insisted that ‘subject ,

abide by. the sceial order. She took him to a psychiatrist, ‘because. ‘ef his

. behaviour ‘problems and: because ‘she did “not advise hin of what she was: -

doing and: got him toa ‘psychiatrist, on a subterfuge, and ‘begause Subject

eo



--- Page 18 ---
- affection: “This reed for love and. affection is prot ‘the most: primary

of his. Hotives. :

In ‘respect to the flight of the family from Georgia, Subject feels
he was, too young to understand it. However, he feels he revolted against
“tes His. idea is that one mus Ss Bight, surpass and conquer. As a young boy. ,
he felt he was much stronger than several million men. This is extremely »
important as regards utilization of his services. First of all ‘he is
motivated to succeed out of a ‘spirit of revenge, ~ and secondly ‘he is self-
confidant and optimistic. that he will succeed despite the hazards of. the

. undertaking. He is ike a man who wants to kill an elephant -- all he
wants from us is a high-powered rifle -- then he feels he would be equal

to the elephant. Ts - oo, ot _ :

a cs Subject also : seems to reflect, disappointment in his* father as
a personal ideal. He regards his father as a very independent person,
‘kind but profoundly selfish, but wtio would nevertheless give you the

shirt off his back, His father was fond of the children, loved the whole |
family and was happy, when: he saw others happy. However, subject is con-
vinced that if his. father “had succeeded, none of the things that. happened .
in his life would have come to pass. He feels that. his motner's suicide.
7 is. a direct consequence of his: father’ s failure to succeed. — :

: 13. “when his father. and. sister returned to Georgia, “Subject was “ativen
to: despair by ‘the breaking-up of the “family. The death of his mother and
the departure of his father and sister was quite a a threat to his seourity.



--- Page 19 ---
- de in.G rita. “Subject t feels that: father was: caething important
to ‘realize’ hia. objectivasy or: chiéve his purpose. ‘However, he feels
i his father accepted defeat: by Returning to Georgia to die. _The mother
a not ‘BO with: the, father and. apparently was at “her wits end- afte n
ther left. “Subject ‘regards his’ mother! as’ the. “axle of -the family and :
nrough suicide, he-fes ls she deserted him.

15. “subje t's sister followe . - father to ‘Georgia, out of a spirit
: of. affection é “sacrifice, ” ‘she! felt that her father needed her ‘and .
Subject ‘feels ‘she was a éributary ‘of his mistakes. ‘The sister has a Ph.D.
an in languages and taught courses in school. At the time of Stalin the

: . . children would aay "we have done this arid’ that thanks to Stalin" and she

_would reply "you are individuals and you have done this or that without

Stalin." As a: result she was. ‘arrested: and sent toa soncentration camp.
“with the shange. of regimes ‘she: obtained her fre edo and © got. her Job., back...”

. 16. The sister’ 8 ‘husband returned to. Russia also. and Subject believes.
that ‘because he. had, served inthe: German amy . he may have ‘been sent. to. a,
concentration camp. “He feels the intelléectual level of ‘the brother-in-law
is’ ‘lower than that of. sister... The. brother-in- law apparently has an
inferiority complex. ‘He emigrated’ to ‘France. ‘at a much later date and

apparently ‘could not adapt ‘himself and Tegretted having: left Russia. °©~
pay

Dy

is: can-are io Gap.

viens Wy subject’ s brother, ee
The brother is an independent" person who is conservative and probably

eo



--- Page 20 ---
“to try to ‘explain. why he.’

2, as. an’ analogy _ the fact: “that. he” wi

“subject was. the’ baby: of the tamtiy and still is. Whereas he

“was 5 born An: 1918, his brother was born in 1916: and nis sister in 1915. °
Subjsc was more’ “expressive of affection,” particularly ° for ‘his mother,

wheréas | 8 brother. was more timid, shy, and independent. ° When | the’
brother. saw subject getting. the mother! 5 ‘attention, he tried to replace’
subject: This- sibling rivalry. may Continue’ to date; for example, the

‘brother learnéd that Subject was seeing a girl whom he knew. The brother

advised the girl to leave subject alone.

19. Subject denies he is Jealous of: his brother. He admits his
brother has. been Successful but in his own sphere. Subject's new found
philosophy isn c the fact hat. che has been” ufguceedsful, ‘but |
iS ; not. In other words he. seems, to be motivated |

to obtain greater knowledge of himself

20. siibject does not™ consider himself asa Georgian; this ts of no
importance to him. “He regards the flight ‘from Georgia as a defeat and as
a loss of. the motherland which’ he has ever accepted. ‘He feals he was. a.
Georgian as.a child but the most important aspect is: that” he feels he jas

defeated by the necessity of the family’ 8 flight from’ Georgia. .. He offers
Committed’ to. prison; this was. a. : defeat

for ‘him. In ‘other words he was not bothered by. the prison life.but by. the

“fact that he made a wrong caleulation in taking on a ‘bad associate and con--



--- Page 21 ---
“

that’ it was often necessary in ‘Vfe to "shallow" a ‘great: deal ‘of useless

- . Af such people. existed, it meant, that - the: -pos' i
: good. or for evil al 86. “existed: “He dia not ‘Aderit ify with: "any one - “hero ia

: general. . Subject |

‘moristrous acts.

basic character.

-feela that- throughout this 5 schicol- experierice perhaps only:
ce a
*SSOrs. undérstood . hin. These particular professors “theiaght é

"stuff" so that thereafter: certain essential ‘problems could be more easily .

: digested. ‘Subject feels that these professors ‘were superior | ‘and that he

understood. then, whereas he regarded’ the others as apparently idtfotic
or worthless.

23. Subject was’ influenced by heroes whom he heard about such as

Lindbergh, Edison, Hitler, Einstein, and several others. He realized that
bility ‘to act either for

particular ‘but: alvays wished that he’ could have been: ene of them. He did
not actually want t be one. of them, ‘but wanted to resemble heroes in
jays vemains-+ remembers. certain, great men mentioned . ‘ .

in history. He feel 8 _that these great Ben gave him the concept that. a

: certain order was necessary for the level of the. people. However, it :

appears: he was disillusioned: in these men and his ideals- were ‘Shaken be-

ever big these" ‘mistakes may ve, he does: not feel ‘they ‘have reflected his

He feels that his character was basically based by the .
desire to become a worthwhile individual, even at the cost of kehaving © oo

He ‘feels that af the oniy criterion for Judging a man te his-

wrongly.
a



--- Page 22 ---
his life was ‘broken up when she: die. fee found ‘himdelf comple lor
vand all his A1ustons ‘disappeared. | He tried to, ‘find. affecti through
_He ‘feels the Reed for. affection As a big” part of himself but

others. .
: on “the other hand’ "I: am a complicated peréon."

; 26. Subject claims he has ‘tearriea the dirte

a woman “his: Ais ‘Like y to have a good | deal: of ‘meaning to. him, particularly.

He regards women as allogical

gards his relationship with his mother. -
This is enough to

: and to be determined by a paycho- feminine education.
. - tip us off that he ‘should not be exposed to handling by females.

27. Subject claims he has learned from his personal experience in

life rather than from the experience of others. -In other words he. has

educated himself: in the schooi of lifé and as derived little from. ‘the

actual formal school situation. For ‘example, he claims his. inothers . a

opinions. had importance only at the time. she was “rendering her ‘opinions; ,
thereafter ‘they were not influential as ‘far as he was concerned: This
may be important as regards training. It. is ‘kely that he would prefer
to ‘proceed with the task in actuality rather than to learn about per-
forging the task. through the experiences, or training of others.

28. - Subject Join d the French Foreign Legion at - the beginning “of
_was- subject t

aa 8 thie WARS “AS a: foreigner and = ‘as-an~

Beate, ce


--- Page 23 ---
in the current.
with’ normal procedures whieh he: may regard as a waste of tine, but will

ac cept .

“29. “siibject feels that he married because he regarded aarriage as

“ necessery to: build. a family and to" ‘make a ‘home. : He ‘feels his marriage was

a mistake because, even though: he understands. the value of ‘the prineiplea :
{nvolved, principles which were “inculeated by his father, itis ridiculous
to marry just forthe sake “of principles: without -the necessary denitimenta.

_ He feels that at the time he was merely abiding. by precepts of his father

, without thinking of the possible consequences. However he soon discovered,

in: fact,.a family did not represent anything at all , and that créating the
family was aggravating the incoherence and the division of society. In

view point getting married meant building a wall around himself. It also

-" iméant that {nétead of finding a partner who complemented him; all that he
obtained ‘from the partnership was a ° reflection of himself.
He ‘feels that the so-called spirftual intimacy. is a fallacy. He Claims
that, sexually speaking, women are necessary but ‘he fails to say why it

‘is’ necessary to build a separate world with it.-

“30. AS was explained. above, the reason for. his marriage are connected
He does not regard Als marriage as a’ complete
He thinks he was nice, too.

with his family education.
fiasco. He regards his w:fe as very nice,



--- Page 24 ---
: ae false documents business

. only in making money would have found: it’ qui

gang, but rather on the part of one of the

_ oF. forces against one another. . ‘His™ emo’

: ‘belief would give hia certain advantages.

“market was a worthless brarich, teclinically “speaking, or th

esting to know ‘the weaknesses of authorities and to p

- 31. puring the war when ‘subject ,
and created. a ‘gang witch: ‘he led. "ome | purpose
patriate. or Liberate “war. prisoners. ‘The black ~

he” group was ‘to re}
he organization.

“rts ‘oftly. purpose. was to solve financial problems. However, it is true that

‘the black market reached such ‘a magnitude that a
te satiefying and sufficient

person who was ‘interested

in ‘itself. - As a8 whole, the technical efficiency of his. gang satisfied.

him. ‘They had freedom of motion and security. gubject ‘was arrested be-

yhot in the actual functioning .of the
meri whom they were helping. |

cause of a carelessness or a alip

“32. Throvgh this experience Subject learned that it was very inter-
Lay. these’ “weaknesses
sitions corresponded | to a Joy ‘of

being the sole master. of his actions and move 3. He feels that if he were

to find himself in this sort of situation agains he would act in exactly.

“the same way.

33. When glib ject, was arrested by the Gest Pos “he was considered by.

the Germans to be a very important pres. He played. the game and led the

Germans to believe ‘that he was an ‘{mportant prey in the hope that such

Although he realized he could

be shot: for only one-half of what’ he had done and that. it was



--- Page 25 ---
that he was quite capable of attacking a bank..
. planned. Because there were only two on the team they were compelled in

* attack the bank successfully.

because of. his hove ‘for riak and-out of friendship for another fertow, he

agreed to participate in the. bank attack. ‘Apparently the other fellow

: - trusted Subject. ‘because he knew ‘of Subject's war activities and he figured
- that because ‘Subject - chad’ been able to” aceomplish certain, illegal activities

The attack was carefully

view of the smallness of his staff’ to give extra attention to their plan.

36. according to Subject he was “elose to this young ftierd who-
At first, Subject felt that the other

solicited his financial assistance.
He also had the normal twinge

fellow was crazy to dare to attack a bank.
of conscience and asked himself the question "is it right to do hara. by
robbing a bank?” Subject ‘never felt that the two ‘alone would ‘be able to

Consequently, they determined to knock: ‘

over a Jewelry shop first. At ‘each point in the developments Subject ©

“wanted to withdraw from the whole deal by saying "if my mother learned of

this,. she. would die." They postponed the: job indefinitely. However, his
mother died.in the.meantime and his rriend ‘again approached” hin and told
him that now that his ‘mother was dead, there was no longer such a danger.
Subsequently they knooked over the Jewelry store.



--- Page 26 ---
1400000

a

des! rous of ‘robbing bank

-his money around, was arrested, and squealed.

rde: to finance: ‘another Intended marriage.

Subject agreed. that this would be the ‘last: Job. ‘They cased the. Joint very.

e carefully and then committed the act. The: other fellow apparently ‘threw

The police came ‘to :
, and he was arrestedy in his ‘flight.

Subject’ 8 place, found a

- to the ‘Spanish border. ‘Subject’ was fleetiig to the Pyrenees bécause he :

had- learned that his bank deal ‘partner had ‘been arrested and had talked,
and that the police were after him. Subject ‘voluntarily admits. that he
loet control over himself and that he had failed to plan in case he failed
and had to flee. ‘He had not foreseen oF prepared himself fur such a con-
sequence, If he were'to find himself again In the same situation, he would.
Prepare an escape even. if it were only necessary for the satisfactory

planning of the project. -

39. However, the question whieh arises in this examiner's mind is
why Subject panicked in his flight. It could have been that he un..
‘consciously wanted to.get caught and ‘to be punished in. order to relieve
his Quilt. If this is so, -then tmportant consideration should be given
to this aspect of ‘subject’ s personality as regards planning the project.



--- Page 27 ---
TEND

-ane _optimt:

Bore in. co

a He ry tintes: to believe that
Jintees a.man is rr weak -both | physically ana sorally, ‘it 1s always possible-
for him to. get back on his’ feet or at least to hope that this is possible.
Consequently, even when he was. broke, Subject always believed there was vo
possibility to. fight ° ‘and conquer. It is likely..he wili aiwiye have hope

43. As regards ‘his philosophy on the two projects which involved
liberat ‘French prisoners and the bank attack, he was betrayed by

. another. Actually, however, he could not have become angry at these

persons because he felt his betrayal was unimportant. However, these
persons: lost: his esteem because he feels there are certain moral values

Which he holds dearly, namely friendship. This would indleate that he is

i empt of: himself for having miscalculated than angry with the
other -Person for having betrayed! him. However, Subject does’ ‘not feel that
any of his i stakes, ‘regardless of their size and consequence, have serious
consequences as regards his near or distant future. There is. no question

that his ‘mistakes have seriously reduced his circumstances of life, but he

“is optimistic and it is likely he _Pegards this assignient as: a golden’

cpportunity which not only. permits hia’ a chance of success, but does not
censure him tor his past deeds. Consequently, he feels that to be dis
couraged about the ‘future is nonsense for if there is a future, there is



--- Page 28 ---
) le. him prdaise
time he was: “thrown ‘out ‘of school. He is
conv Inced. she wanted this ‘for his good and not for the satisfaction of.
having. ‘a: peefect child. However, it is likely that the mother’ Ss over-
jLieitousness. was actually compensatory for her basic- rejection of

she wanted him to be perfect so’ that she could love ©

tly, itis s{tkely: that ‘she did things for him, but-she did
“things with hia ‘for hersei

80" hat he could

In other mords, she: wanted: him .to- be perfeot
> we thy of” her love. He was not. perfect » probably aid

not. obtain her. love, ‘and consequently is continually seeking the love’ of
other persons.

However, he cannot accept this fact as regards his mother
and denies she did not act in his interest. One of his chief defenses is
dental, that is, simply assuming the attitude that: such, and such was not
: le. when he probably. believes it ‘was true. ‘

Loe. Subject" 3: actions are often: impulsive: and. unreagoned.: such

trrati 1 behaviour usually akes place with) ‘another person despite the
fact. that ' ‘thére: may be Ro particular tie or. affection between hin and the
‘other Person. Subject ‘is unable. to explain why this is so and “intellectual y

’ realizes that any ° explanations which ne might’ offer are not sufficient.

to ‘explain. such behaviour. and hig $ emotional state. In other words, this ;

man' 8. impulsiveness and tehdence | ‘to. behave irrationally and to his om.: i

|

“disadvantage ‘and tn-his. own: disinterest’ amounts toa compulsion which is. i
“sufficient to ‘determine his ‘behaviour but which is unconseious and not. -

i
i
\

iT
1

+
i
y

a

ees

Sree) a


--- Page 29 ---
14-00000

“police. - The. police cam

from what he’ i

ame pa and gave ‘the order ‘to remove all-
things which re ‘there: because the- explosion undoubtedly alerted the
al a: he explained that he had ‘played with a
‘ountain pen which had purst : The police nen. ‘strongly advised, Aim never _
n.to pick up objects dropped by- ‘the enetiys “They. took cognizance of -
declarations arid went. away. Thie® Rea Cross took care of his’ wounds, :

nk he ut 1 ‘be very. different ‘In: the future
“now. However, he feels his material situation will have

improved.: He ‘does not mean financtally but socially. He naively hopes
that the workd w 11 change and there will be no discrimination. He also
hopes: to acquire, if necessary, a nationality in which case he will feel
actuslly be! ngs. to: society, : er; -hé feels that ‘society is 8
anxious. to ‘stamp “and bel individuals ‘and it may be that he would prefer
ic de of socléty. ttian to be @ member of
ts person. lives in the

present, it is very diftteatt for hin to imagine what his future will be.

“51. Despite ‘the fe et that. ‘this, man is motivated by rather. vivid .
ideals, he still strikes the™ éxafiner asa: practical realfst “who thinks ©.
‘and acts In a matter of fact manner. He has experienced a good deal. of.

life ‘and he ts quite sophisticated, ei -



--- Page 30 ---
1.

ea feria cles

ay

“ thought. from ‘a ‘great ‘thinker

; ‘talk somewhat rashly- but he ‘feels thi
fast: ‘and “he is cable to see. Sutekly: the

ee eeat ale

; a tackine in order to: fully understand its functlen. However, he realizes

that, commercially speaking, it, is) sore’ rational to mass" produce the

“machine but the repitition. does: not Interest ‘him. In his opinion the -
. ereative idea and she. prototype have ; muck greater value. “and ‘Ataportanee :

than the millions ‘of, ,books when: are: “publishied yearly.

55. In describing himself subject reveals that he always tries his
hardest to keep his ‘promises. He also: feels that he sometimes appears to
‘ig.due to-the fact ‘that he thinks’

“able to’ rapidly “synthesize
iately.

ind“he gets ‘the. point Bt
at-you are. trying to say before

He is so quick that he wild understé cd

you finish the. sentence.

56. Subject ‘is. unable, to: see himself in terms: of what he’ would. like
to be. In order for “him to: display ‘hims lf, 1t would-be ‘necessary that he
would. be another person altegether. | Howe er. he feels that, everything

"relative, perhaps he should show. more * strength of character, bea ittle

_more compromlging,. more realistic, and Less sentimental. However, this

would - imply that he. would then find himselt tn. ‘an envirenment in-which. .
there was no room fér séntiment -- in which case his Personality would



--- Page 31 ---
" ventions.

attacl u ent to ‘France at this time. Howevér, it is aikely’ ‘he was patriotic

at the time of the War. .Since he has. been branded ‘a criminal and has.-

been deprived of. certain rights and privileges, he now perhaps feels re-
Nevertheless,

Jected and in turn is rejecting. France as his fatherland.

she” strikes the examiner as: a true Frenchman -- he thinks and feels like a
It is ‘likely

Frenchman and 1s éertainly. not a Russian in his personality.
that he identifies ‘the Frencti authorities with the police... "He cannot
tolerate rejecting attitudes. He ts ‘Tike: an outsider who {s look ing in.

Tt may be-hé has ‘the "sour grapes” attitude by. which he” ‘feels that since

He cannot have what he wants, it 1s not too good’ anyway.

60. subject isnot a planner. Despite his interest in invertion

and the fact that he has pulled off: a number of capers, he is.more of an

instigator, . a leader, and aiv-executor. In order for him to be successful

in’ future projects, it is necessary. that someone else plan and then tell

- him exactly what to. do.” .

. 61. Subject is currently involved in the, invention business which 7
he started alone; He is the owner. and exploiter of several patents and
certain persons are financially, and: technically interested in his in- :
He is faced ‘with? a problem at this’ time. He is involved in
the initial and preliminary. phases. with us and consequently: fs put on
the fence as regards his invention business, ~ Furthermore, if he ‘were ‘to
join us, he would. relinquish’ everything to his business partners.



--- Page 32 ---
and he ts, driven by
What this. means is that

desire to. obtain oral. supplies by” incorporation.
he will eat you: up. .

65. subject reflects. superior intelligence, is capable of abstract

“conceptualtzation, and’ is able to deal in. symbols.

66. subject isa naretssistic ‘character who féels that because’ others
don't love. hia, he needs. to love himself. In other words, he is quite in
‘love with himself and acts accordingly.

ss 67. Subject tends to rationalize and to offer socially acceptable
reasons for his individualistic behavior.

68. Subject strives: hief ly. for emotional satisfaction.

69. Subject is ‘ph als ruistic bat at the same time he is selfish. He
will do things. for ‘the community with the hope of getting: something out of.
it. for himself. Both-of these drives “merge ina unitary’ fashion. . ‘He 1s
motivated by both at the samé ‘time. ,

70. Subject dentes nationalistic motives for his actfons- and prefers
to regard them as _being primarily humanitarian. " Subject is act {on-oriented
“and loves to take risk and gets a kick out ‘of excitement and adventure.



--- Page 33 ---
- Likely todo things jn order to get attention.

right.

term: ed by. a vague desire: to help others ‘who

“need -it. - This: combination can mislead him and get him into atfficulty;

for example, his accomplice in the bank robbery. .

"95, subject 1s a rank individualist. He is a non-conformist.
However, he realizes he must cope with the Community , must sacrifice for

the of the community, and. mist not harm others. In this

regard it is unlikely that Subject: has ever committed: “physical assault,
‘No matter what the’ ‘other f

nor is it likely that he would in the future. .
person is or represents to Subject, he is still a human being whom: ado,

Subject respects.

76. . Although Subject its basically an exhibitionist, he 1s not ,
inclined to bragging or to exhibit himself in a transparent or patent
fashion, He is too sophisticated, However, he needs attention ‘and is
This 1s what hé did in
18 schools.. LS

THe : ‘AS was previously mentioned, Subject helped French prisonera

get back to France. during the war. He thought it was the right thing to
do but did not do it Just for France. , He was paid for {t but he gave

his money to help the prisoners. ‘In terms of his hierarchy. of mot ives,

it is likely that this person acts according to what he considers to be
He also expresses self pride in doing the outstanding, © ‘the. difficult,

SBav ae.


--- Page 34 ---
14-0

; w ich,
J put he is: willing to go along out of admiration fo!

“Americans.

_terms of his. character organization.

: ‘fact that people | are treated as individuals rathe

: outlook on life.
” they are personal

to develop himself. 9s an individual.

al arid. baste sincerity
a has political interest
xe the Sincerity of the

likes. He: understands thé united Sta

‘He is not looking for special compensation. Generally; he is
In other

quite’ willing - ‘to do what is asked without rational | ‘reascns.

words; his motivation is typically esiot inal and is wunderstafidable in.

He feels that a person is. capable
He is. inclined to put things: ‘ona : : .
He feels hia early: ;

of doing, anything for love of ‘nothing.
personal pasis. He doesn't belong to any community.
ia have had no effect on his way of thinking or on his way
He likes | the liberty which exists in america and the
r than as numbers.

years in Georg
of perceiving life.

‘Bo. subject’ 8 motives are genuine and are- compatible with his

They. are not. necessarily. original or sophisticated but
and therefore: ‘bona ‘fide. ‘Furthermore, Subject is really
He is controlled in his movements and is restricted
e his freedom-and

on the shelf in Gap.
in his aspirations and consequently is unable to realiz
Consequently, ‘the’ assignment . , 7

represents a unique. opportunity ‘for. him to rise above his’ present ‘re-

stricted level of existence.

81. Subject is a very sensitive person and he attaches _great im-"

_ portance to events of life.



--- Page 35 ---
14-00000,

self, (2): ‘bu

“ventions without asking for advantages.

should be punistied for doing wrong. but should not be degraited f for doing

. right. Subject has always realized. that- he has needed help as regards

Ts not ‘as’ cand it-

‘nis enotto 1 problems. He Lik t
pecausé material ‘help: involves - the implication of moral |

hélp. For example, a dentist in Gap offerfed to help Subject in his in-.
This means a lot to Subject. He

attaches small importance to money and he derives a tremendous satisfaction
out. of helping others or being helped.
84. Subject reflects a tremendous vitality that has, in the past,

expressed itself through false attempts such. as the bank robbery, etc.
He- feels he is not being used ‘as he should © ‘and that there isa. power

‘within himself, 2 creative urge of movement, a power of realization.

‘It ‘is highly emotionally charged and he feels.he 1s capable of. doing ‘much
more: than he has in ‘the past. Although he feels he: is’ a, complicated
person, he. does not feel he is ‘difficult, to understand: .

85. Subject likes ‘to act intel Ligeritly and sensibly. He strives
for efficiency. For exampie, haxtexx if.a: ‘person were to ask hin to open

a window, he feels it is up to. him to decide as regards the proper method. ,

The ‘efficiency plus the. results are his rewards. ‘Consequently, he likes”

_ practical work which involves an ‘intellectual effort.



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

88. “Ang! er imbortant aspect of his relationship + with us appears to
be the. fact that he consciously or unconseiously feels he has "arrived"
and ja- ‘acceptable. to us. In ottier. words he feels “that perhaps a decision
has’ beén made ‘which is in his favor. This reflects his own desire to: be
, accepted: together with his estimation of. the tuations - . : to

89. This individual, despite his past explotts, | 4s not iiecessarily . 2 . : 7,
a hostile person. | In other words he: will not.do harm nor will he hurt :
others who are weaker. than himself. He will act.out of exigency but he
will deliberately avoid being sadistic or wantonly cruel.

ve : 90. - For.some reason Subject exhibits a marked degree of loneliness
; _ and isolation at ‘this time. ‘He: ‘seems to be seeking ecapantonship. :

Ql. _ Subject prefers to work ‘lone as regards technical research, “wut : . 4
as regards the execution of an operation he. prefers to be with someone or 7 :
Part of an organization. He knows he can‘rely upon himself when he is
alone and that others had been ‘unreliable in his: past. However, 1f it is i
necessary for him to Work with two or more individuals, he will accept it. - - : : ‘

92. Subject ‘admits of physical inferiority feelings by virtue of his _ :
7 size and strength but he denies he has feelings of intellectual inferiority. :
He. depends more upon, his mental faculties than upon his physteal. "I have

no fear of an elephant if I have a gun.”



--- Page 37 ---
alize nis: hort: conings and"he ‘hopes his
_coaplemented ‘by training. :

97. Subject relies quite heavily upon humor for relief of tension
and: ‘as a defense: against the development of anxiety and inter-personal
relationshfps... : . :

: 98. An taportant aspect” of this man's personality and history would
appear to be: his -so- called aéeident pronéness. ‘He 1s ‘like the. cat in the
Disney film who, while chasing the mouse and, having his entire attention

“ dtrected to the catching and incorporation of the mouse, inadvertantly

gets himself run over by a truck. His first reaction to being splattered
by the truck is one of disappointment as regards not arriving: at the goal;
i.e., catching the. mouse. He thereupon | acts” upon feelings of revenge en
the mouse for having caused, ‘his unfortunate accident. -In ‘addition, this,

. example signifies that Subject, is iikely to keep his eye’ too much upon the
: goal: and. ‘insufficiently upon ‘the hazards involved in Feaching the goal. It

may be argued that Slibject's philospphy in his past operations are related
in some manner to his lack of attention to such details. His history is
that of the unlucky cat who manages to get himself run over suceessfully.

99. This person can be quite atscomposed by thé surprise of un-—
expected occurrences, .
100. Despite: defeat Subject is able. to pick: himself up, figure. things

out, start all over in a sore systematic way, and continue in his pursuit
of his-goal. Consequently, he does learn by experience. His mistakes are



--- Page 38 ---
this probien, | | Consequently, he needs - a . Berson, of greater: intelligence who”
is able to help him to evaluate the realities of his situation or
predicament. It must be kept in mind that his self-preservation is
stronger than his: desire to solve problems.

102. “subject is Akely to be Joyal to a. superior and may even be-

critical of himself dn relation to. the superior. In other words, he would
like to be as useful as possible in, order ‘to express his. loyalty, but may

feel inadequate An that he requires the pretection of his superior.

103. this person puts no stock in’emblems or signs of rank or
reputation. He regards such signs as identifying labels only and is not
impressed or motivated for glory symbols. If he were..to accomplish an
outstanding feat, he: would not want a medal -- alli he. would want ‘was a ;

_Pemark from. an ‘important figure to the efféct "well done, thank you.”
He feels it ‘is ‘sufficient ‘only for him to ‘know he has “done well. -

“104. subject will attempt to assume leadership on the team but
it ‘may be that if his partner is ‘Superior, he would be a better follower
than he would be a leader of: a less adequate person. He is. more of a
dependent than independent person in terms .of his inter-personal relation-
ships; furthermore, he acts on sentiment and impulse and ‘consequently
his judgment is questionable. This would indicate that he would work
better with a more soher-minded, calculating individual. ‘He is likely

eed



--- Page 39 ---
. do not nec!

r
ee


--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

“gy BERN 6993°.

“Gs BERN 6537 Gu nerdy
“WEROGUE EOD 2-DEC. HESTON MADE INITIAL “conTACT AND auTHiNAN
NOW HANDLING, . WIROGUE GIVEN FOLLOVING INSTRUCTI ONS

Ae BUILD COVER “DURING INITIAL PERIOD. THIS RESPECT, VIROGUE
SAID PLANNED set UP SHG WITH AUTOMATIC CANERA TO TAKE IDENTIFICA-

" TION PICTURES, " SaID wouLD INSTALL POLAROID CAMERA SO CLIENT COULD .
-QUTHMAN AGREED: ‘THIS WORTH, cts

; “PusH BUTTON - AND: TAKE. OWN PICTURE.
: EXPLORING,. as WOULD APPEAR. “PROVIDE INEXPENSIVE COVER.

, 8. WIROGUE TOLD TRY spot PERSONS FOR SURVEILLANCE TEAM, {NTEL

HE

assets cyITH ‘EAPHASIS ON ORLENTALE PROVINCE) AND Px ASSETS.

“TOLD ‘SUBMIT NAMES. ANY LIKELY CAND DATES TO STATION FOR TRACES

“paroR MAKING APPROACH.

2. QJVIN WHO" RES
“ToLD HIN HE KAD
OTHEREPARTS BuROP
INTEL 8 BUSINESS.

SANE . HOTEL ‘as WIROGUE : REPORTED LATTER
LASKAs JAPAN, SOUTH AMERICA, GERMANY AND

jgIN SAID WIROGUE SHELLED AS THOUGH HE IN
i WIROGUE, 14 DEC QJVIN

STATION DENIED ANY INFO

EIS PROMINTED,



--- Page 41 ---
14,0000,

;-
|

: PER MONTH AND ONE IN NATIVE CITY FOR 6080 FRANCS PER MONTH. ALSO”

¥

\

GUTHMAN FOR THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS RENTAL ALLOWANCE WHICH HE CLAIMS. .
“HOS CASE OFFICER TOLD HIM HE WOULD RECEIVE IN LUMP SUM.

aN ‘LUMP SUM.

a AT AS: bec > WEETING VIROGUE ‘SAID He PURCHASED CHRYSLER FoR -

15808 FRANCS. ‘MADE NO MENTION. PURCHASE OTHER CARS. ALSO SAID a a
“RENTED ‘TWO STORES, ONE’ IN: LEGP : "EUROPEAN CITY FOR 14800 FRANCS -

"ASKED:

HAS SIGNED CONTRACT FAR APARTHENT FOR 800@ FRANCS PER MONTH.

GUTHMAN - -

‘REFUSED, SAYING WOULD HAVE OBTAIN .HOS APPROVAL Pay RENTAL ALLOWANCE

4
?
q
3
!

“5S. IN pIscussING Loca contacts, WIROGUE MENTIONED QUWIN BUT
“DID NOT ADMIT TO HAVING TRIED RECRUIT HIM. THEN GUTHMAN TRIED
LEARN WHETHER WIROGUE HAD MADE: APPROACK LATTER CLAQMED HAD TAKEN

_ NOSTEPS,- GUTHMAN WAS {UNABLE CONTRADICT, AS DID NOT WISH: REVEAL - — a

OuWIN CONNECTION KUBARK«

6. LEOP CONCERNED™ BY WIROGUE FREE WHEELING AND LACK SECURITY.

a STATION HAS ENQUGH KEADACHES WITHOUT. WORRYING ABOUT AGENT WHO NOT
\ .

EE)
- REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN Enea is PROHIBITED”

.


--- Page 42 ---
ALTERS.

{LL BEST: SOLUTION.

Latter SAYS HIS covTRa CALLS FOR FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS SALARY. PER:
“wONTH., “SAID HE NOT PAID FOR NOVEMBER. STATION GAVE HIN ONE

PAYMENT FIVE. HUNDRED’ DOLLARS. HOWEVER WISH HOS CONFIRMATION THIS

CORRECT AND AUTHORITY PaY HI¥ IN DOLLARS PER HIS REQUEST. (WANTS
DOLLARS AS BLACK MARKET EXCHANGE RATE WHICH USED BY MOST PERSONS
HERE TVENTY To FORTY PERCENT BETTER THAN OFFICIAL RATE). _

8, “NOT ABLE PICK UP LETTER CREDIT PER REF A. WIROGUE SAID HAD

, _ GIVEN IT 10 KorHur FOR RETURN (To BANK AFTER HARKING, AT CANCELLED,

; _ are a * END OF MESSAGE

cs COMENT:# WIROGUE . ETA LEOP 2 ‘DEC. HAS LETTER OF CREDIT FOR 12,000 SWISS’
JPRANCS." oo : oo.



--- Page 43 ---
s ‘ 10 Bi. bar we .
Youn Snscmmtron 10 pir tH DoLzARS, HE HOT PAID FoR Nov ‘PRIOH wl
RO DISPATCH. O@TAW RECEIPTS “AND CHARGE Paoséer. oe

“rm

Be THEE THOUSAND DOLEAT QUARTERS ALLOWARCE PE ARNON, Yo Accom.

c. FOUR THOUSAND DOLIAR OPS LOAN 10 SRY UP COVER BUSINESS 10 ni

REPAID FROM PROFTTS. ALSO MUST ACCOUNT FOR ONE THOUSAND TEN DOLLAR.
TRAVEL ADVANCE RECEIVED.

2.

TISTSUCTTOHS VERE TO MAKE COEACT AND FOLLOW GUTENAN'S THSTRUCTTORS

IMPLICITLY. 80 REPORT ACCURATELY ALL COMPACTS Of POTENTIAL AERTS AND Sot

MAKE ANT APPROACHES OR CClO@TERTS WITEOUP PRIOR APPROVAL .

3. SESE GOTBAS'S CONCERN AND FBCCHMIRND TELL, VIROGUE RE OH PROBATION

AND MOST TOR THE WARE OR RLS ABCALE AND ‘ROCRARTN. POINT ovr IF mecessany
HE LIVING UNDER FALSE DOCUMENTS. _
: END OF MESSAGE
Par,

COONBINatING oFFicens

HCLEASING OFFICER

. REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE.ISSUING OFFICE Is PROHIBITED.



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

Bln he be

iva ( of re '
ree f SiS a -
spas oS a | EDWARD ©, WRERES
Gooeoinating EXErAES a A Gay/e
S-E-C-R E-P . AUTHENTICATING OFFICER

Ya } REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED. © : Copy No.

RELEASING i

nsterpary Soest aes ear

Ram giveth



--- Page 45 ---
we. +
aE

mile .

ay. nea ann

a |B . Mee
so]

ee

Oe

hee}

vv

“as



--- Page 46 ---
we

capo

PEA VIRILE BALD! TP

L
r

15S 3.08.

PAYMENTS and/or
REFUND DUE

* 8. Tax Deduction Change

REFUNDS DUE
FROM EMPLOYEE

6. Hospitol, lnsurance, Credit Union” ;

7. Overpayment

9. Allowances : 7

10.

£ ASTERISK Denotes other
than Normal Salary

NET PAY

Wes 1315 use previous commons

aL



--- Page 47 ---
140000
4

DISTRIBUTION

case
OFFICER.

OPERATING DIVISION.
CHIEF OF SUPPORT

euocer-
DIVISION

S30" ggg eeineaas mv SECRET Del 293477 r _



--- Page 48 ---
14-00000 7 . ~ . °
. ; i .

St naanin delete PAR a Lapa A La ANN pay
- cba dy tat ‘ vets Pia.
a WON EE tS ee

Pes

am

baer ee neesg ty



--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

2 CHEE CL
jE AND CANCELLED WILL :
. - 7
: !
*DISSEMIAATION SAME aS REFEPENCED CABLE. 7
SRITY 1 SHOULD ADVISE HOFHUIS THAT sch Goo, L
. Ca

Copy No,

RE

REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN


--- Page 50 ---
COST een gree ne Beg fe

lle fra ainoes). Co éh®que-a
5 cdystpie em p-envite -dgaledant 26-2
fo le 29 Hoveabre oor a ’ .
‘KrjReiner pour an montant de douse. ® Rfdnoe ouleses,
le valeur de la dite lettre cst sctuellexent Sfita 11,600.

Cotte lettre a 66 asnulde par ane lettre do Rr.Beiner

_ deat je vous prie do vouloir trouver Lioviginel oi-jointe;

, .., 36 68 Péfre ogslomont A ln conversation  ~
téléphenique da hter, par lagaslle je vous ai denend

of4l 7 avait provision sufficesate paw eouvrir le andeus -
He 3.409. H'ayant pas roca votre cecamieation S$éléphozt gus
au jourd ‘hat, je suppose que l'affaira eat on r2gles
Toutefois je vous ronercie poar votre datervention.  __

. Batretexpe 7° vous desande ée. tenir A ma

' dgepeas tion le moatant da dousa mille frases culasscs

D°a réception do votra soafireation & ce sujet, Jo vous .
forai parventr les instructions ultérieure, me

Ba vou reworeiapt A l*avaneo pour votre proapts

attontion, Jo vous prio d'agrdéor, Measiours, 2*asaurance
do ma ocnaldémation distiaguss, .

x



--- Page 51 ---
REE BORNE BRIO AN SHY

ML AMA

wee atic OR Magee at
we

al ARP MOIS”

ata wae se: nije. oi sttre, -du 13 gazes

Set Se

Ri af 0 ede ide: apne

: wage Mt i
e

e@ vous
6nvoie” eous” oo pli égalosent un’s 26,7280.
tiré sur votre Banque par Hr. P.G.Reiner et. pour om.

montant do. Sfray 3.000.= .-

Yosles vous avoir Lopii ance de garter
ogalemént le montant de co ch®qus & ma dispodi tion.
Au cas, ou il] y aurait uno manquo. go provision J
vous demande de me revournsy le o qes 2? 30410, :

: Au plaieir de lire vetre. eonfirsAtion &
oe sujet, jo vous prio d‘agréer, Hescioura, aos
salutations diatingnésa. ,

|. HeHlofhato

oe
Q/e tap goa &
Leopolévillo

Rape du Gongs -



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

a
- ff

‘Monsieur Georg Fracs REINER
tae . te : :
iv nen 5 ep nad

Lrbsde 12,000,-2, ol ra poze MILLE FRANCS. SUISSES.

a es
a ee a

7 LLL
7 ~~ . ‘ ree hare et tre «wes: "Lh Lye ta ly een Ww
t hiya oo nmianne- vow AM tat ocr Le Pe

Caer pens irtatire sien Sa firirnss

fl atcaee ye. Patife tee bern fn

ae vets 35, este a 0 oes a



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

fy i
ep hae wile fen ee 7

ae -Monsiour Georg Frans REINER : ——

z. Lah wh ‘

r - .
a i’ awed be sa rat acy: er four vapas Se Obed

frais. 12,09.= > +)” DOUZE WILLE PRABCS SvIsses , ‘
wnannnnnmnnngamnnanay Mo

tro he wet tyget Mod etee
aa KEEN -

“” se

: weer chee
+ hee ES OE vias te ab

0 er eS ra a

otter atetefer vo ae |

tae tee Motedey r0ee eae de

sa ec eentbe Vemh oasis aise:

x
3
t
‘

‘

x

N

se

N,

x

N

£

r

N

eae fete

a oe

nay

tye, the, hte,
. 7

Me Bre LD nee ath va ge ve

rae tot ee CTE Le es

OOPONE A com pm

4 a A 9 cc ae

iy

; . . ‘ s 0 .
: 4 herd 06 Viet psctutt ae oad

a
ites!

Sopa te ae ethan sptomerne teon rayne EE
- FT ad Spel hy ae ty meg ante. .

alae L33vrz


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

En . eral Cn . ,

- ( ane ae ae (SG tual ta)
a “yen Con get!

ah. ian to
{he LAM h. ae fees Kas. Foe be
4 \ - (
FAR Uo AeA pAM3e . ooo _

cs G. LA je arene | 1 eeu Qe.

“Phd eaere
oa
en et Os Ft
“Shudd “¢ fo yobs eee ars |
io. G ee f ‘Qo RIAD wh: v Ny ee Am ul .

r
: feo TM fe. t }
ate \oeKewes he ge Mea peels Bal

lone “ ARAL ~# , de ad fel,
Ny “yas 4 = fo

“V2, aug - \ss cae fot - eee est a ot
. , : . ‘ “AO -2 97

a Pow

rr



--- Page 55 ---
oy
pe

as iad

NaS chien Wa

oe Va4G = 14 33 ARIS:

a ws

ee: de et


--- Page 56 ---
"open text and 50% upon the preparation of the 6H text itself.

' Comin cation in ‘covert opera z iting
of &W for. @amo “Tt waa repeatedly exhhasized that the’.

Silly for cnergency. Commo. . :
succées of an GW letter depends 50% upon the unobtrusive “normilcy” of ithe ~
3. Terminal Fraluntion -- |

8. WIROCUE demonstrated that he could adequately prepare letters

‘pearing @ carbon-type secret ink weich vould meet opernt ional requiro- ©

ments. He is a very meticulous vorker and possesses a high dogreo of
manual dexterity--anbidextrously, yet!

bs He quite ‘adequately mastered the doveloment Procedures for his
assigned receiving systen. :

4. The agent's training specifically covered the folloving:
a. Writing techniques: vith a carbon-type ink
>. Scorch development of EY
c. Staniami defense measures for carbon-ink writing ;
_—@. Use of glancing Light in defensive and offensive exantnstion
for SH - j -_ _ .
Relative placeaects of the SW and overt texts ou the lettersheet

f. Discussion of cover letters and indicators.

fered IL77



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000 . 4

DUDLEY G, FOSHEE
8 December 1960

Attachment:

'
Contract - MAYCRINK ,
Diotribution: Oe _
'2.> Leopeldville a
gor :
DATE TYPED © a
. a 1
B Dec 1960 -
|. DISPATCH SYMSCL AND NUMBER
ACLS-149

HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER .
CLASSIFICATION .

SECRET

4



--- Page 59 ---
|

es . _Manaer ag.you may direct in writing, ‘the foltowing}

Mr. Ernest G Maycrick 7 Ste

Dear Mr, Maycriad.} mechhAieeeded

we 7 Bh pfs. a :
-- Effect ge Fe San 1960, all contracts, oral or writies, “ty and between

you and the Urited States Govermacat, sae represented by the Csetracting Othcer,

are herety. te terminated by mutual cocsect of the partiea theret Fi aed in lieu thereof:

‘Ge followicg agreement is subsenuted, ©

. . (a) Basic compensation in an amouat calculated at the rate of $6000 per anmum,

{b) -Additional- compensation ts SB amowal calculated at the rate of #3000 eer
annum for cost-of-living expenses (tantuding quarters}, ettective spon your
arrival at and applicable only to your contemplated parmaneat post. of assignment
L overseas, Quarters will not b+ furnished you nor will You accept. quarters pre-.
vided by a cover facility without Erior amendment of this agroement,
2. Taxes, Montes paid you directly or guaranteed by the Government under.
° ‘this paragraph constitute income for Federal tax purposes, You will be advised ae
to the method to befollowed in reporting and paying such taxes, The method aa well

As the procedures used by this organization to implement fs tax reporting Feeponsi-~

bilities will be based. Primarily upon cover acd security requireme: tee “You herein

7 authorize this organt sation to withHold taxega on said Income if it determines mech
‘Fequlrementa ‘60 necessitate, : .
3. Travel, ? .
4, 2 erational Ex eB EB. You will be advanced or reimbureed furds for neces -
: sary operattonal expenses as specifically approved and Ananctally limited by the

Government, Such fuads will be subject to payment: and accounting ia substartial

conformance’ with applicable Goversiment regulations, ; . a
ez fe 43 4 rm 7 7

r



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

- ‘or  tatemperdis: act, the Government will pay the sum of $5000 te yout benetitarytis) 5 :
Hy
A

“both parties, to the extent deemed appropriate by the Gnlted States Government,

and you agice to execute whatever documenta may be required by this. organist

5. Repsdnent, Mie retegaised teat your faliure to wroust for or refund acy
monies advanced you hereunder atali-exdtie the Government to withhold the total

émoict of suc indettednens, oF “yr portion the Fear! from any monies due you widér

‘the terrne of thie contract 1% aurh manne: ao te deems + appropriace,

oe Negotiated Bese fits, @) wo yu, ds the ‘perforinance: of activities user this’ .

you facur an injory or linese wich fo sot the: revit of your’ gross”
\

Beigence, wilted I mlnconducty oF intemperate act, the Government wil provi

lees any amount pald | to you undor sub-paragraph w above if such injury. or illness

® your death, provided that said benefictaryttes) is-aceepiable to+ the Govers
ment at the time such payment {s to be made, An acceptable beneficlary hereunder

ig an individual to whom payment By the U:5& Government can be made without

conflicting with ite avowed principles and ideals,
(b) Outstanding performance by you under this agrec-

ment ‘and your fulfillment of obligations hereunder io an effictest manner will result

3

in the’ Goverarnent undertaking your resettlement in an area mutually agreeable to | ,

7. "Executions ‘of Docusnents, tr, in the performance af services under this.
contract, you assume the custody of Goverament funda or take tle of record to
property of any nature whatsoever and “wherever situate, which property haa In fait

been purchased with monies ofthe U.S, Government, you hereuy recoghlee and

acknowled e ibe extdtence of A trust refaticaship, either exprees or con structive,-
Pe : PB ;

te evidence tals relationship,

8, Status, You are sot an employee of the United Statea Government under thin <

agreement and’are xot entitled to ary becefite bormally incident te an empisy ,



--- Page 61 ---
filie atrengemenat,monres due

a TE necessary iO priest the sroeur

fle 43. Funds

|

9 unde ratoud and.”

eof ite obtigarion’s undey this sgr cement. ; ra De Soo : ,

10. Cover. do) it is anticipated that you will undertakes cover ventcre in-the

+ arteemeat Such ventur milist beaperowed

~ course of your performances under a

swilt Yoan you $4000 to be secured by a noa- interest bearing ‘Bromisory note, péyable

“Ton demaid. - Said loan will. be doposited toan account ‘a ry loréiga bank anda $3000”

letter of credit will be issued you agains! that deposit. The additional $:000 willbe ~« .

. -volnased from sated account, alts? approval by the Goverameni representative over-—

p

seoing your acth vittes.

. : (e) You will submit to the Gove romect quarterly income and expense

‘otatemeats on the cover venture acd copies of all tax. returns Med in conase tion , .

Be V “therewith Your cover accounts abel! be kept separate and distinct from the bank

+” aecount into which your persona! compensation Payments are mada. 1.

(a) You herein agree that monies loaned you “py the Goverament thal

be: repaid from the profite of tho ¢ cover "venture, in amounts and at periedic intervals

rR ener

“to be establisked by the Government representative oversosiag your activities, After

bald iean has béon completoly repaid and ail other obligations, “gach as local taxes,

q
ote. . bave been made, you may retain any further profit derived fram said cover

venture. However, it io clearly un derstood aad agreed tba your primary obligati on

under this agreement ta the performance cf Govern mental activities,
- . t

LL Seeracy. All information related to ihis agreement conveyed through
oo bo .

fie abies ee maar Tiere

teaiructions, this inetrument, or otherwise, 10 secret and shail BO! be divulged to

. i

"aay Porson, organisation or government in any form or manner, except as oe

: esthorised by the undersigned Conzracting Officer execating. this agreement. It is

l

. " Sgreed that any revelation whatsoever of the above informa toa will cotstinuts and

‘bé'an iromediate and (inal breach of this zgreement and will ‘reeult in forieiture by


--- Page 62 ---
1400000
tpi ba reas es ef chis

(yon of apy aod allonénefiis whl ra ray a

agreement,”

AKT eemert, and La ia your offic fal +

‘12. inst? ructione. Ditiss the term of u:

herein agree ta act ‘te coaformasce wath instrac Sons, oral

; inese ‘capaci ity yee

oF writies Biren: yee bed suthorieed regr

‘sgeatatives of this organinaticn -

13. Vaauidsstaee Commttmects. ‘No promiace or commitments pertaintag: to :

b nefits. other than those expresely vepalnee in writing 1a “this.

Fights, privibeges or

ts etfecdve as of BNovenber 1980, and. ‘shall <onitoue

rin, . Pais contract

oo “l(a) By: see acetal sotlce: t2 you from the ‘Governminat, or.

. (bj. Witkout peor ‘ebthe'es in’ ‘the. event of a breach of tits contract oy) your,
 dolaition of the security provialons hereof” or by your otherwise rendering.
; yourself u umavailable for acceptable service, : . . :

Subject ¢ to the availability ef approprfations, this agreement may be exiended upon”

tae “notice from the Government. In the event of voluntary termination on your part or

“termination for cause by the Covernme nt prior to the expiration ef this agreement

“st any renewal thereof, you wid cot be entitled to retura travel expenses to the

“United States. Termination of thts agreement will not release you from the. odligat wa

¢ any security oath you may be required to take,

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ~

. a .
BY
. Contracting Officer ©
“ ACCEPTED}

‘Ernest G) Maycerick

" qIENEss}.



--- Page 63 ---
pel

OTe ; :
c/so 2 (oR GRAM, rp, ‘NOTAFICO 1812: 12 dec 60)
oy CAF, sf 20° 5 :

Rez DIR a i116 (NOT SENT zor) (at sre} mo
BERN’ 6337 Civ F944 >) ze
t. | BY CHANCE DURING VISIT “GRAHAM WITH INTAGCRITY | LATTER'S ©
FICE 1539 NOURS HCNDAY 12 DEC INTEGRITY 1 RECEIVED PHONE CALL

a . : FROM LEOPOLDVILLE FROM A Fwu HOFHUIS, |

2. HOFHUIS TOLD INTEGRITY A HE HAD KIS POSSESSION CHECK SIGNED
BY GEORG F; REINER FoR’ swiss FRANCS 12,200," ALSO HAS LETTER :
CREDIT, PAYABLE REINER AND SAID REINER GAVE TO HIM FOR SECURITY
UNTIL CHECK PAID. KOFHUIS ASKED INTEGRITY 1 IF HE YOULD PAY
cxECk. WHILE HOLDING HOFHUIS OTHER END PHONE INTE cRITY 1 ASKED
| SRAHAM FOR INSTRUCTIONS. .
UNDER CIRCUS ‘STANCES GEaHAt TOLD INTEGRITY 1.70 STALL

. SAID WOULD WAIT EXACTLY 25 HOURS FOR INTEGRITY: PHONE CALLs
“+ HOFHUIS WOULD NOT TELL INTEGRITY WHY HE HAD REINER*S.

REPRODUCTION 8Y OTHER THAN THE ISSUING. OFFICE 1S PRONIBITED, : Copy No.



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

L ae “>
a CHECK AND” LETTER, | CREDIT. 1D REINER STAYING HOTEL
. tSTRIDs: eo, o ‘ oe mo, ‘y . . ” ; 7 ; mo a 7

_ a 4 “neauest IMNED ADVICE -ON WHETHER OR NOT INTECRITY 4 SHOULD ”
TELL. “HOFHUIS HE BILL- Pay CHECK BEARING MIND ‘LETTER oF ‘CREDIT as ~ !

TRYING. TO. bor wiv DoES NOT: et ; Es
LOCAL ‘BANKY: “WE FEAR sEntous ec if Y" PePLIcaT rots JEOPARDIZING our
| SOURCE IF CHECKS’ WRITTEN. REINER FLOAT AROUND LEOPOLDVILLE OR.
~ NEGOTIATED BY HOFKUIS BY MEANS ILLEGAL PRESENT conco GOVERNMENT
RE GULAT TONS «© ry

cn or HESSAL
 ¢s coset: “*DISSEMIMATION APPLICABLE TO RYBAT SGFUAG cages.



--- Page 65 ---
e677 BERN LEDPOLGA ILLES
O ticm: DIRECTOR OG po
L conn: *c/eD 2 a - .

won C/AF, S/020

OPP ATIONAL |)
“Taal UATE, 7

ne BOR 6531 in gg) #
ANTEGRETY. t SHOULD ANVISE tors GiECK . 1560003; “CASH dock wo HTN

LETTER CREDIT TO REIHER, =. .
2. FOR LEDP. coMTAcT. REIWER, PICK UP LETTER CREDIT AD POUCH BERN FOR
. DISPOSITION. _ Des
. : - po or . me

SPENT -1SSCHINATION SAME AS REFERENCED CASLE.
ay FG, 03 REFERENCE. “POSSIBLY BERN 6595 (IN 15973)

te
ER GRAHAM, FD :
BY DIRECTION .. :
PR HOUCK, AF” : : Bere
cr : par
aden : COOROIMATING OFFICERS oO . ;
aaieaaine orelces . . “aurgenticatima opniciG 7 .
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 13 PRONIGITED. "Copy Ron 7


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

«nu CLASSIFIED MESSAGE

DIRECTOR
BERN,
¢/ee 3.
- cor, “ek, ‘ft 2,'¢

: “WIROGUE 1 Ta ‘LEOP 2 DECs - WILL coNTAeT HAS:
LETTER oF CREDIT FOR 12,020. suiss. FRANCSs. ;
2. “"ROISTADE ETA HOS 1 DEC. :

“ \ .
- \ i
i ENO OF MESSAGE :
|
U
‘ 4
t
i 7
; FA L977.
i “REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED. Copy No.

arma


--- Page 67 ---
a

1B ‘MEMO Ho. 5238 |
29. Novenber "1960

‘ts to ‘confina the
Daniel Mesciur on. 18 Noveuber “1960:

“Austrian Passport No. 546226» cn
Austrian Driver's License’ - .
Lee International Certificate or Vaccination
‘a. Baptism Certificate ~~
e. Business Letter from Arthur Doll and Son, Berlin | >
f. Pocket Litter - Brouchers, Austria, West Berlin
g- General Informtion.on Documéntation Cover Story
hb. Itinerary as reflected ‘in Passport .
i. Explanation of Passport Entries : .
Je Instruction for Signing Documentation . . '

2, “The documentation (above items, a,b,¢,) is to be oged after WIROGUE has
signed them. It is our understanding that WIROGUE will use “subject documentation ‘
to travel from West Germany to Leopoldville, Congo, via Switzerlend and Italy.. .

. 3.. It is requested that the subject documentation be retumed to TSD/IB
. when no longer needed for operational purposes.

ee odes ’
Y

CHIEF, TSD/IB

Distripition:
riginal and 1 - Addressee

>) a¥77

“SECRET RYBAT


--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

Sore Pickavipertoray vaca cn i ne FM
~ “Up NIE BERN STATIOH. . j

SE, .
2 iss
pefée fer mer". SU ie tien
coorol Ae -o7rieges BROGON T far

“gEBCRET , AUTHENTICATING: orricaa *

“. REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING "OFFICE 1S PROHIBITED.” tT, CopyNan |
usi-k 4 3¥7 7 ;

Renee



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

a
=
f
:

a3

i
I

|| 22 Novénber 1960 ©

Rs Chiet; Aerica Divieton
ATTEN, + Dantet Re Mesctur  AFW/2. 2110 1 Balading _
FROM ot . Deputy Director of Security (Investigations -and Support) _ :
SUBJECT. i LETTER ADDRESS = |S _

; 229496 :

H
. { -
1. Reference is made to your memorandum dated 9 November 1960 . .
requesting the establishment of a post office box | in New York City a a
_ . ‘in the name of Clifford N, MIRKINSON - .

- 2. This will confirm advice furnished your office on 18 Novenber 1960
that the requested address has been established as follows?

Clifford N. MIRKiNSON
Post Office Box Sh

Canal Street Station.
New York 13, New York

3. This addvess will be maintained for an indefinite period
and will te serviced twice weekly. Daniel R. Niesciur extension 6284

will be nctified upon receipt of mail,

4h. Non-registered, first class and air mail, bearing the above
' address as a return address, may be mailed by you at any convenient
letter box in the area where this facility is established. Registered
wail and parcel post should be forwarded to this office for secure
mailing. Any mail having special security significance should be co- ~
ordinated with this office prior to mailing. Mail bearing the above
- address as a return address should not be handled by the Central Mail

5. It 1s requested that you advise this office when the above
address is no longer of use to you. Any inquiries concerning this
facility should be directed to the SB/3 Desk of this office, Room I¥az
I Building, Extension 3933. : . “ 1h09

FOR THE. DIRECTOR OF SECURITY: J e ;
iictor R, leh

Jere 233477

SECRET


--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

SECRET

er ‘RECEIET FOR AUTHENTICATION MATERIALS

re To: “TSD/1B are 38 Bveter 1960

ae HEREBY ‘ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF. THE F OLLOWING AUTHENTIC: ATION MATERIALS:

“¢TRANSMITTED WITH MEMO. NO. _— 2 DATED —_ - AND: PREPARED IN ; ——

-“NGeORDANCE! WITH:

yp OFFICER'S SIGNATURE
WI R0GVE o- -
NOTE: Authentication: Materials must be returned to TSD/IB as soon as the intended operational use

has been fulfilled; unused documents, whether filled in or blank, raust t be retumed to TSD/IB
wken no longer needed. :

“TSD/IB should be notified if any of the Authenti ication Materials are ‘destroyed, lost. or for any
o-her reason can no longer be returned.

Dos, (SECRET gare LITE?


--- Page 71 ---
- no, ote Tey why
SECRET oo 4OV toeq
mom Pa: Cater, Finance Division,

SuECR. | optaing Bank Ande fr Ong Pre MM

betwen we Bera, station “and. REISER who: io a-contrect agents. .
3. Your ‘esetstance ‘dn this matter will be greatly spprectoted.

Chief, AF Division

“BECRE®

Hl

233977

i
I

i

j

i

|

t

:



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

FID MESSAGE.
“SECRET

oa OM: birecion

ee

“. CONFs

ere cuir cosco TRaies. NaC CONSTR GN DM'a BEF TAR
UP WITH BEAN STATION. oe : | ;
_ . . \ : i
END OF MESSAGE, 7 a ue

ont
ae N- B Fuel
hak BRORSON TWEEDY, C/AF .
OFrrscen.” peal g Eg c R E r AUTHENTICATING OFFICER i ae td
oO ~

. Copy'No. st

a REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE is PROHIBITED.


--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

"CLASSIFIED MESSAGE

ner ‘pir 12432

BINIG | ETD FRAN 1632 LocaL 23. NOVEABER vq

“wR PAUL R-F A aT

a FLIONT 424. ETA ANDREWS: 2900 LOCAL 24 NOVENBER.

END OF HESS
cs COMMENT  #OISSBIINATION SAME AS REFERENCED. CABLE.

AN

. REPRODUCTION ’BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING GIMCE 1S PROHIBITED. ,  CopyNo.


--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

1 TE 36 hoy 60. a
7 i110 ve p1RecTOR - ZZ aa a a - — =
Lok a FRAME UR, 2. qaseciew wy ci ess| nov 18 17262 60
| ACTION 3, thar 3. ee to
INFO ie cop, fel, op a cfrse 2,- Ges sie: @

nr orn srsiz & fut epg ee

aRY 8324 AND ASK FOR ED

- a oy sare HOUSE AVATLABLES “CALL ILI
iy oR ‘DAVE. IDENTIFY SELF BY TRUE FIRST NAHE, TF AFTER 1756 CALL .
B® FRANKFURT CIVILIAN saisis oR DAVE 525486. _ oe
, ag, DESTRE PRIOR EET, WITH ROISTADE FOR BRIEFING CN CASE oy
"© sepgRe ASSIGNING SAFE HOUSE.
|. exp GF MESSAGE

0 efs COMMENT: eQOISTADE WOULD. REQUIRE SAFE HOUSE FOR FIVE ‘paYS TO QUARTER AND
BRIEF wIROGUE PRIOR TO LATTERS DISPATCH. . :

REPRODUCTION, BY: OTHER THAN THE ISSUING GFFICE 1S PROHIBITED.



--- Page 75 ---
CLASSIFIED MESSAGE . _
. a ms “ROUTING

"FROM: DIRECTOR

-f -CONFL c/a 3 .
“INFG COP, C/EE

BADR OmAmme |

‘OFERATIONAL :
IMMEDIATE, _
9

ESD OF MESSAGE

CS COMENT: *CONF IRMATION UNIT DETERMINED AS THOUGH INDICATOR FUDUST NOT USED. |
**STATEC wtROGLE WAS BEING GROOMED FOR DEEP COVER ASSIGNMENT LEOP LATE NOVEMBER.

ope Hig

OTT as as
car/WEL oe ° 4 tilts
Ar/t, ra at “Ts rm 43 _ BRONSOH TWEEDY
. — orricers = °* c/aP
RELEASING OFFICER? “B-E-C-R-E-T . AUTHENTICATING, orrices
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, _ Copy No.

ALLIIY77


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

CU ukaassifiea wa CONF avi, SECRET

ROUTING--AND RECORD SHEET =

COMMENTS: (Number: each commend to show from whom Po _
te whom: Drow o fine acres. column afte: sock comment): F- : : .

row 610 “omens” (] secret «=O CONFIDENTIAL INTERNAL

yo iNTemNaL (1 UNCLASSIFIED


--- Page 77 ---
| TERS OESR
| can ites inning 7+

' 4 This dneloded -gurvivel, email) af ythe 2
year of such treining ths project failed to materialize, as a regult subject vas
preparing for resattlenent in South America. The A¥/Division took interest in
WIROGUE/1 end efter an assesment decided that vith his peculiar beckground,
. talonta and general mkkeup he could effectively be utilized along-the lines
‘cited in referencs A. On'21 October 1960 the case was transferred officially to
+ ‘the Afrien Division. Lo ; oe °
3. Since that date to the present, every effort bas been made to psycho-
logically orient WIRQGUE/1 for this aeatemecnt. and to propare hin operationally. .
. for ita fulfillment. To insure the security of the operation, prevent any
identification with ODYOXE end/or KUBARK, end to preclude eny wmexpocted .
unoovery of WIROGUE/1's past which would associate him with bia pro-KUDAKK lifo, -
a muyber of basic steps vere taken. ‘These vores a
a. WIROCUE/2 undorvent plastic surgery, which changed the shape of
his noze. . 1 -
- Db. A toupoe had been made for his constant use. This ard tho
plastic eurgery have altered him sufficiently to obviate any -
recognition. ** a . fore Gg

Dietribution:

DATE DISPATCHES

DATE TYPED

i 14'Rov, 1!
OISPATOW SYMEAR AND NUMBER

\CUW=192__

HEADQUAST ERS FILE NUMBER

|) \ 2021-23347



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

os Sue RE
" AELN=192

Pe

CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH |

ww | .
: : Secotyetying cover stary
: “£2 an Austricn Ghd who hoo never had “OUYCRE
vor boen in iBIEIE. (See cejarste cover -

conse ctinnis, nor

THis ‘ogy V111 omsti~ -
tloncd loch whidi mist be repaid “by BTRCUA/] :
an other profite’ efter the loan is paid”

ner of run with vion ve ere dealing, fe isa -

2 b indt Whotbas displayed ‘shrewdness, ctrmiing, ingemiity
pnd inventivencss. He bas a jeculsar. turn of mind which lenia ites]f recarke-

Bly to nefariovs and extra-legal eotivitios, Exeitensnt cad intrigue ore -

(nportent factors in his life, hovreliches it and 53 a result oy te a little

delicnts to hustle, WIECCUZ/] Likes order snd cleer ait chaning of commend.

Fe adeires the Fruseiaa approach and as 2 result vill trko ardera even if he

may diserrec. It ia icportent te his to tsve the trust and omfldence of. hia |

case officer. If in kis om sind he feels dssura! of U:id and 1a confident

of the profeszicna] KUTUSi-type competence of tho CO, he will reeisrocste in
. kind, Hes {nceed s¥are of the precepts of right end vrong, tut if ho is

_g@iven an aosigmmant whieh my be corally wrong in the cyeo of the warld, bet
necessary teccuse hin ceo officer orderal hin to cerry it out, then it ig
Fipht ond he vill dutifully uslertake appropriate action for its execution
withsut pases of consefonce. “In a wort, he evn rationalize al] actiana. (ne
lest thought which may te venful, Fest resulte will rrebebly be cotton if, 9
when given an asaipnonnt, he be pernitted to eccomlish it in kis ova way. = |
Toe latter 1s comoctai with hia ides of trust and confidence.

—

GURLFS BR, RCISTADE

PAUL 8. LEIGHTCS

Attachzent A (under saparete cover)

use eRe vio’s EOITION,

Srevaces roaws

eye Beezea ane 3128
aor SeSOLE



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

‘Dietinguiching merks: tips of forefinger ond thmb =.
. Right hand silesing. Identical fingers left band searred. : ‘

2. Docesmta will reflest travol only in Buroze, wits no indication of ;
FBFRIVE tema. : a F .
i
i 1


--- Page 80 ---
14-0000 - ~~.

wr, SECRET - .
woo rere — _ (Feee Fal tay ; ; :

. 7 eR SIECT CENS Tote se

PROJECT ACTION oo WrRoaie! _

ca

“TYPE CF ACTION

Division

Tutazeent
ra

ap wesewae -

TExTENS (ON

Poul. Sorincer

-————++

CONCURRENCES OF OTHE! ¢ COMPONENTS

APPROVAL
[Teva

"PERIOD. AMOUNT AMOUNT

APPROVING AUTHORITY

eortions.

FOR yg oesceere receious 7 7 SECRET : . rrr



--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

soe Pa *
-y :
“1.
| ‘
t
.
_- covert nep la st
nf operat coupled with’ his.
horibies 2 é i fro
authoritie: re .
'
. '
pret
1
. : - . .
. s

ZALES ng) Sota SPUN!

a,


--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

_
wo < - - ;
ve i
H . :
\termingtion bonus
a “Transportetion te ¢
. iseeotf

stall

‘ .
’
5 1
:



--- Page 83 ---
SECHET

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief of Osgrationa, DD/P

“SUBJECT. L Prog ‘ect: WIROGUS taopreva2)

Leopolevi lle

e rogect . 1s to establish a. long-term ‘deep cover

- asset in the Republic of Cotigo In the fcrn-of a foreign

“national contract agent who will open a snall business
inLespoldville. .

: . hutaority is requested: to obligate $17, 250.
from the 3,23) in fiseal year
1961 and 54,000 in fiseal vear 1962, sublect to the avail-
ability of funds. The funds requested included $5,900
salary and allowance $1,250 travel exvenses: $5,990 oo-
erational loan; and 005, operational xpenses.

D/P. -AP Diviston budget: 4

wr

- 3. The attached vroject ne
the backsround-end concent of the orotect
nied by.a fiscal annex. The agent,
less person who was recruited 4nd trained
eration involving a clack mission to the
AGSENTINELS That project was postponed }
June 196) was abandoned. In the interin
working with T5D at a covert site in cas
from East German docu
metheds for
USSR, in 12 pent the perisd
War II in P. France. He served tn
Legion, volunteered in 1942 for work in ¢

_eensiderable tine in German srisons and ¢
as a. result of beings arrested for force
record ror bur¢léry in Yrance subseg
Ee has had schooling and experience
ing, as a camere teennician and in os

uncer” Project
year and in

CGUE/2 has been
ing information

ate

until World
rench Foreign
any and

Vite


--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

i

 anvented various later saving and “paotene- TO a
tees. ile has -had. practical experdence im- - ae
ocuments .

ind fatrication of d WIROCUE/12 - mo : oo
the U.S; ‘biack” for training an be ee -
L operation. It 1s .con ue
flown’ “black” to.
ced as an Austrian citizen with a
a@rious concerns invest’
—He-will- proceed to. d 3
1 a $4,000 vor rational loan, he w open a ,
9 or-resair shop which it dg cexpected will. give
erree. of freedom of moverent and provide for: covert,
contact, | It-is estimated. that there is a need for techni-
- + efans in‘ the Republic of Congo at the sresent tine. The”

- project nas teen coordinated with the @hief of Station, ~

_ Leogoidville. : - a

Special Staff components concur :
Both CI and FI Staff express

eertain reservations in_view of the vaekzround and adven-

turous nature of the arent, and.empnesize tne necessity

of exerctsing firn operational anc personel control over

him at all times. ~~ : . . .

. kh, Appropriate
in recommending renewal.

5. recommend ay

presented, and endorse the
‘noted in parazrapn 4 above.

fp te Cesar

jor H.. HI
fPchter, vo?/Fa



--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

SECRET
PHOTECT acto vin Sager

Date? Biesctur

Form 680° is attached.

COORDINATION :-

fet Tamme [Gn (ours are)

to dav te

- . ae -,- ; Chief, AF-Divisica

dt fb bo,

Tate

SECRET


--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

SECRET

PROJECT OUTLINE

. oo. rt
~ CRYPTOMM - WEROGUY. _
“ : “ay Ares of ‘Operations and Parpos @ . . . a .
i . x
a 2. Republic of Congo (former pelgtun congo) - enenet in operat icon eupport
: activity. ° .

2. - Obsectives- : ;
5 deep cover asset: 18. tnp Repeeite oF cones and a

abs sh a grinetpne agect ‘in: the" hepubite. of. Congo, in order to
met “tn: “Support . of operational : activities. . . “

no provide « an asset for F ubality support, for KUBARK personel under .
: official cover: : 7 . :

3. Personnel - we ;
a va Pertinent Biographical Information: OO ;
routes - emp Sevens me DOL ORBIATT
piace of birth - Gori, Georgia, USSR , ,

Date of birth - 12 July 1918
Yr “Sex - Male

Race = Caucasian

Religion = none
Marital status - Divorced (wife and 2 children ~ one::son and one daughter)

eo. ‘citizenship - Stateless

_ Education:

1922-24 Paris, Notre Dame, uncomp., change of family. address
1925. Paris, Lycee Mcntagne, uncomp., change of family address"
1925 Paris, Ecole Ccorzile, uncomp., change of family address
1926 “Viroflex, Lycee Hoche, uncomp., expelled for pranks

1928 Feris, Ecole Cemmile, uncomp., ‘change of address
19031 .Paris-Vanyes, Ecole Michelet, 6 mo comp, ‘expelled for.
: fasubordination

SECRET



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

me an — “ -SEGRBT
. 22.)
3933-33, Tend @, Mere fst et Metter, Technical moeineering senso, .
“attended one and .cne’ half years and expéelied :
ety ‘Blectro-Engineering, attendéd one
% naif of Baccaularaute ia electro”

1936-37 Paris,: Ee

“Part Sy ‘School. ‘of Fivtography and Mevies, trained: ‘as cine
".’ Carera. Operator techni jan, lefs after one and three -
je due to oyturéskes of WW foal

1938-39

~ Tarts, +8 anteeréa for French Foreign: Leittoa, ae
, : “Ist Cav. Rees: 1st: Squadron; beh

reining course in Legion, pulse ‘out. ‘to oe
be réass igned® to ‘all-Georgian: unit .

Mar-Aug. 219k Barcares, assigned ‘in Georgian wm
‘Aug 1940. - Faris, discharged’ # at-end of f Frenco/Gerss hostilities :

_Baploynent History:

” “> 1942 - paris, volunteered for work in Germany —

. : : cece Poelitz, worked for EIDRYSR WERKE for one year as “Installation
_ . Lo . electrician
° - Paris, self-emvloyed at photo shop. Portrait [photography .

Berlin, photographer of metals for a factory which produces a
electrodes for welding instruments . ‘
Perlin,. assembly line worker in Berlin factory producing steel
. armmnition belts. Received commendation from factory
. director for lator saving device he manufacture of de-
vice for automtic adjustment of cartridge cases
Muegelheiz, driver mechanics course for the NSKK (Nagi Party
a at Motorized Corp.) Drove trucks during construction of
Do Dobe Atlantic wall by Germans.
oa aa oe 1943 - Berlin, exployed with SCHUPOLIZEI as translator French-Gersan.
: language
1hs-47 - Paris, employed by Architects carre Associated as electrical
“installaticn planner and constructor of proto-type .
model builder’ :
_ 1951-52 - Paris (in prison), devised and sold on the French. market a we
pocket automtic transit indicator. Received cash oe
settlement for this while in prison ~~ ,
1953 - Rion (in prison), devised and gave to prison adntatstrator, :
invention for. maxing cardboard boxes. Device was built -
io and used by prison administrator . ‘
i Dec 1955. to Apr 1956 - Gap, exployed by M.D. as X-ray, machine min-
: "+ “tenance technician and operator
L 1950-57 - Gap, invented, petented and sold.a. calendar device to-the
French commercial market

i ‘ SECRET



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

oo a  SBCRET
. so, -3-

- 1958 =\Ancert, ‘invented ‘and patented.a commercial advertising device,
_ OO s"""" photo-méchanical in natures Models built and sold to

- French advértiaing concerns’ ‘
J.S., devised and passed drawings for
. - «Ment for use in Project’ AESENTINEL
July 1960 - U.S.,- presently vorking on’

“p> 7195960

two piecer ot equip-.

low-cost telephone ahsvering
device : ,

“Occupational Specialities:

Soo ft i
"Mechanical ‘electrical engineering . an oy
- Cine, or portrait photography vot ee
Research and innovation of labor/cost saving devices” .:

ianguages and Dialects: .

’ French’ = native
German - very good - : . a
Georgiaa - fluent spoken; reading and writing good
‘English - speaking and writing fair; reading fluent

i
‘Spanish - speaking and writing poor; reading good si.
’ Russian=poor oO . \
\

Syecial Skills: . : :

Experience in docement forgery . ae
1942-Achen-Herlin, altered ow documents °
1942-BerLin-Paris,

filled in Gervan travel blank forms. Altered old 7
Cermin authorization stamp for travel forms. Made
otner authentications stamps for other people interested
in travel across German held territory :
1943-L4-Berlin, fabricated stamps and cachets for travel documents.
- o Used photo techniques for changing and/or aging pictures.
© yo in documents. “Also reassembled old false passports to

form new onés, a3 well as’ counterfeited German finan-
efal vouchers.

-B. Cperational Information:

1. Gireunstances of Recruitment -

. The acent was first contacted in October 1958 as a result of a lead .
from AEPADDLE. Ee vas recruited in April 1959 by the Frankfurt Station,
for a REDSOX operation. There had been some difficulty in the initial
recruitment, since it could not be resolved as to whether or not he

could work amicably with another agent in the proposed operation. Af-

ter psychological assessments and LCFUJPTER examination, it was decided

to recruit subject.. He was assigned the eryptol AEASPIC.) In April 1959

sxbiect was broucht to the DCB, via a HBRAINBOd > Subject was

‘Srained in tbe ASSENTINAL project for.a black mission into the USSR as a

SECRBT



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

segRet

.. Hember ‘of & REDSOX. tean. This project was post ponea for a year. Mm
“the interin he was “aséigned t “where he was employed at a covert -
‘ pecific informtion from Bast -

0, it was decided that Project AESENTINEL : oS
r ered of this” informtion SR/DOB en- .

During t persone fron. the. eist ~

Subject vas
Was interrogated for ‘several months at
Gestapo ‘Headquarters. : ‘tater. he was-tried and sentenced to death. © For see
some unimown ‘reason hé. was moved. ‘fron jail to jail, concerftration. camp to
: concentration camp. While in prison be resorted to a "ruse de gierre”

and told the Germans his father had invented a motor that could -run.

‘without gasoline. He offered to draw the designs of the motor and was

. . : able to stall long enough to be Liberated by components of the advan--
a. : ¢ing u. S. Army. :
B. ‘th 1946-47 subject and an accomplice committed two robberies of
Jewelry stores.

ve . - ‘e, In 1949. subject robbed a bank of 1,000,000 Fre fr. His accomplice .
so . ‘as apprehended and’ shortly thereafter confessed, implicating subject. my
Subject was apprehended while attempting to cross the Franco- Spanish ‘
border. He was sentenced to ten years in prison of which he served
only five, receiving parole for good behavior. Upon release in 1955, he
_ was exiled on parole to Gav, France where he worked as an architect.

D. To our knowleage thereis no indication that subject is known to
be associated with KUBARK.

3. | Agents knowledge of sensitive matters - has ‘met the following KUBARKERS: |

‘Anthony H. FRIGANZA (P)-. a)
Patrick B, NEWENS (P) .
Peter K. WINSHIP (P) : . oo
Dexter E, ROSTEDT (P) -

Fred KIRKPATRICK (T)

George F. MUNS (T)

Michael RAE (T)

Charles R. ROISTADE (2) Mr. Dan

Paul E. LEIGHDON (P) - Dr. Johns

SECRET



--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

i

SECRET
-5-

‘Subject does not know that he is vorking for KUBARK. He knovs that

he is connected with some intelligence orgaatzation, obey ODIERX. © He
does not kmoW-saything about KUBARK organization nor its modus oper=
- andi. . oF -: . Tet .

:. Wl “Security of meting sites, commin{cations, ‘ete:

“These Will-have tobe vorked out

In genéral it

5. Security:

‘The: agent is very. security conscious and will follow &uy direction
in the interest of secuirty - : :

6. Control:

. Oa this point here are several aspects for consideration. Fe is

- under contract to us and although‘he is not too interested in money, he
does enjoy its benefits and realizes that it will continue so long as
he does.a good Job. ‘The more. important built in control is the fact
that he will be under false documents, and being stateless, he is com-
pletely dependent on KUBARK to- perpetuate his quasi legal existence and
to eventually legalize his status. Added to'this is the control which
stems from the prospect of: resettlement in ancther country. ‘This vould
give ‘hin status as a citizen. Realizing these points, subject is nore
than wilting to play ball with us, :

. 7 i .
7. Prior contacts with ‘any security service:

As stated in 3B (2) above, the. only brush subject has -had in the
Past..was with Gestapo and French police. . These were prior to his re-
cruitment by KUBARK and were not as 4 resiilt of I.S. activity.

8. Training of agent: _| :

. Re -had received training in covert black berder operations, In ad-
dition, he is being trained in small arns and demolition.

-9. Cover effectiveness and the operation of the cover facility:

Subject will open a small photo. or repair Shop, which will cive hin

SECRET , 4



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

Ps

ae

“SBCRET
be

3 degree of latitude in aovensiit ‘and. a cover for covert contact.
Subsect: hai ‘undergone plastic surgery in order to change his appearance,
‘also a tour was made t ‘further assist in the chansing of his outward

§ designed .to preclude any possibility of.
eociates, particularly since he ‘is to

er: facility, as stated, will offer access

required to set . inet . wp in business. The
chnicians™ wily ‘help facilitate his opening an

s.funds.- For‘the ‘purpose of providing
n this cover business, ve will ad-
oan, to be secured with a non-_

" Ostensibly it “wal represent :
ina Swiss bank. Provision will
be made to pay this money back from his profits. After the loan is .
‘paid off, WIROGUE is to keep the profits he may make.

Re will initially transfer $1000.00 to a bank in Leopolavilie. We
. are certain that he will not abscond with the funds, since his docu-
_ mentation will be false and his pay and allownnces total $8500 per
annum, he would therefore Stand to lose a great deal more than he would
gain...

Being a ‘contract agent, there is ample control if he shows signs of
spending too much time in the pursuit of profits from his cover business.

His salary and allowsnces will be paid in part to a personal account
in Switzerland (separate from his business account). This money will
ostensibly also represent his savings. The remainder will be paid
directly at: ‘the station.

C. Security Estimate:

WIROGUE had beén recruited in France and evfiltrated black from West
_ Germany. to SR/DOB. He has-bad no known IS. connections in the past. He
“will ‘be surfaced in West Germany’and will proceed to Leopoldville. He
will be documented as an Austrian .

“4. Background

The need for various technicians to stabilize the chaotic conait tons in
Leoroldville coupled with an urgent need for controlled assets in-that city gave
rise to this project... WIROGUB's particular talents, experience, ability and
training open up 6 wide vartletyof Possibilities,

SECRET



--- Page 92 ---
14-0000

ie

SECRET
-7-
5. ‘Braluation i
There will be a néed for WTPOGUE to establish and live his cover. Thies is

va , anticipated to take several months. Hence he-will become operational in carly .
coe | 1961. However, it 1s’ reasonable to expect that the station will undoubtedly ey :
wo, | place hin covert role mich sooner. WNonétheless, we do not anticipate any FI: . Ts

» take ‘prior Omid igel. ; . .

6. Coordination
© Coordination at Headquarters is being effected with FI Staff, Finance Divi=

erences . .
A. DIR'08762 (our 86554), -wimAr:
B. DIR. 09783 (OUT 86555) “RYBAT- ~~ re nn o .
“-G. DIR O8443 (our 85967) ; Co Lut

.” Hig covert’ training will be completed by 15 November 1960. He will be
briefed on ‘his cover story, documints, contact instructions, etc., 15-18 Novem-
ver 1960. On/about’ 18-20 November he will be flown black to West. Gervany.. ..
_There he will spend 5 to 7 days to familiarize himself with Germany, receive'-
hia final briefing and obtain a visa, then depart for Leopoldville arriving o/a
1 December in Leopoldville. Once there he will require 1-2 months to look over
the business possibilities and establish himself. . .

°:.9. Approval Period and Cost : co

A. Approval is requested for one years starting .1: November 1900. a :

B. Following is breakdown of the costs:

1. Salary at $500.00 per month $6000.00

2. Per diem during travel 250.00

3. Travel to Leopoldville 1000.00

4, Operational loan 5000.00

5. Operational expenses : 2000.00

6. Allowances (flat sum) : . 3000.00 .
Total _ FY P50.00-———

10. Emergency Situation .
In all present and anticipated conditions with the exception of a@ hot war, the .
agent will have clandestine means of commmication with his CO in the ODACID in- : .

. staLlation and with Headquarters. For contingencies an emergency SW system has
been given to agent: for direct commnication with Headquarters.

“SECRET



--- Page 93 ---
ka Sag

SECRET

FISCAL ANNEX
: brojeet WIHUGUE-LOAN

The objective of this project ia to provide a Leng term, aeep: cover™
SUE/1, in the Républic of Congo and adjacent areas in
‘urport. of: operational activities and to. provide

‘may be advanced to “WIROGUE/ 1 ADB's. ‘The loaned funds ‘will be passed to.
UE/1.4n a manner agreeable to Chie: ricd Division and Chief,- Finance Divi-
All.funds ‘loaned to: WIROGUE/ 1. will be secured’ ‘by U.S. dollar, non-interest
‘ péaring “notes, Payable” to ‘bearer on demind. Such noted will be prepared by or ap-
proved by the. Office: of Generel Cosel, It is anticipated that an initial $4000
WILL be deposited in a Swiss bank, ensibly representing his own savings, vy

__ KUBARK, Monetary Branch. : °

‘Accounting and Write-off: WIROGUE/1 will be requirea to sign receipts for
all funds loaned to him. Finance Division is “authorized to accept these receipts
_ @B a charge to expense and to set up the loans payable in a memorandum account _-
without a due date. The notes signed by WIROGUE/1 shall be transmitted to Finance
‘Division for safekeeping. Repayment of the loan shall be made from business pro-
fits. WIROGUE/1 will be required to submit quarterly income and expense statements
on hie, cover business and also copies of. all tax returns filed in connection with
* bis Cover business. A copy of all income .and expense statements. and tax returns
will be. forwarded to Finance Division.’ :It shall be the responsibility of the Chief,
Lo. ‘Africa- Division. to determine whén profits warrant Payments on the leans and to ef-
oo - fect auch repayments.

. For purposes ‘of control and collection, waRoGuE/ will be required
to sign Diank cheeks on his Swiss and African business bank accounts. :

Chief, Africa Division

(Kerk Ettivwve tefeo

Chief, Finance Division

fed: . LzHoy 1
i esa/ ps

SECRET :


--- Page 94 ---
ragp000

ROUTING

~ CLASSIFIED MESSAGE

FRO DIRECTOR |
CONF Y. ciar 3. - :
; INFO ¥ cor, let, ert 2, ef 25

OPERATIONAL
IMMEDIATE |

al 7

INFO” praia: - TOP. | ~ ee, EOR .
me 2 PMR creo 14912 -
: vligte:

; REY: nr (Om 8H

L “cuinuas!. noxsiasi' (xin) BoA PRA 21 OY. wou UE Sirs HOME .

. on FIVE GAYS 10 QHAREER AND BSTEF VIROOUE PRLGR TO LATEERG BISPAICH. FILS ASSIST.

a La Be 00 DOLLAR AUNANG ATOZ ROADS 2/A BB.

XY ¢ vance 4 wa
“oo re ,
RELEASING OFFICER A s-R-c-R 43-43 7. suraenntetine orricer
REPRODUCTIQN BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED. Copy No.
74 va 3 ) $77 °


--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

or rel

"CLASSIFIED MESSAGE _*
SECRET

bi
REC! 1: ene te SEGr.
DAMEDIATE: =

\ © nome DIRECTOR
SF cone C/AF 3

‘wo. peep ri? vie» ofr. 2

“11912, : :
AGP: ee a 301799109,

+" Signal Center: Pla. ref attached cabla-

rs ~ CAR/W, ,
KEE: -- ¢ Ar/W/ BRONSON TWEEDY
myer . COOROINATING OFFICERS C/aP :
RELEASING OFFICER . - gep-c-R-E-T _ AUTHENTICATING OFFICER
“REPRODUCTIONBY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 1S PROHIBITED. Copy He

te 5277


--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

|

Meow FoR: Chief, Security Support Diviston

“be x 2.. Aay aétion portatitag to the letter bos, any letters feceived; shcala ©
be rofered to Mr. Daniel R. Hiesctur, AU/W/2, 2

Gigaa D. Fields
Acting Chief, Africa Division |

bare ABIEIT



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

LESPOLDVILLE

C/A 3

NPETEZ (out 86554 a a. ; =
wrRoguE” ONE APPEARS 35 JUST WHat DOCTOR ORDERED. UNLESS .
SUGGEST HE COME CONGO: WITHOUT VISA.

ay
CAN GET VISA RAPIDLY EUROPE,
can GET FORTY-EIcHT HOUR VISA LEOP ow ARRIVAL PENDING RECEIPT =~
‘BELIEVE LETTER OF CREDIT FROM EUROPEAN BANK IN

LONGER VISA.
AMOUNT ONE. -HUNDRED FIFTY THCUSAND BCF WOULD PROVIDE. PROOF HE WOULD .

NOT BECOME CHARGE OF STATE. ALSO SHOULI HAVE ROUND TRIP. TICKET.

“2. CONTACT INSTRUCTIONS AS FOLLONS: HE TO CALL GUTHMAN AT ~

“HOME (3315) OR TPELIDE ASAP AFTER ARRIVAL INTRODUCING SELF aS

GUSTAVE. GUTHHAN WILL suGG
OF MEETING TO SE TWO HOURS PR:

PLACE WILL BE IN FRONT MAIN POST OFFICE YIROGUE ONE

VSETING FOR DRINKe ACTUAL TINE

2 10 TIME SET OH PHONE. MEETING
£ SHOULD HAVE

200K IN LEFT HAND AND wu: NLIGHTED ‘CIs FAR IN MOUTH. GUTHMAN WILL’

ASK” IN. FRENCH IF TELEPHONE OFFICE OPEN, ADDING ‘HE HOPES PLACE

CALL ‘To CHICAGO, WIROGUE Ox. REPLY TO BE HE NOT CE RTAIN RE PHONES

AS HE THERE To CABLE VIEN
3. COVERS ‘SUGGE STED REF APPE AR OKAY.

OLNCING. HIS ARRIVAL CONGO. 4

, NT SEING GROOHEO FOR DEEP CCVER
2g, SOCUENTED 4S. AUSTRIAN TO DEPART PEPRIME

re a ER 21- 23977

" REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE 5 rnoraned : _ Copy No.
. bet wand bated - :



--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

. 24) REPLACES TORM 38-3 GPO, 1-0-4 BAS (
> UFEB SS ASHICH MAY BE USED.
. i cee we ares meneame inde
1 .
. '
. :
:


--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

SECRET

PART ft COWPERSAT ION AND WITHHOLDING DATA.
SOURCLS OF COMMENSAT.ION PAVWENTS (Checd a8 opps

SCEUD aytotwrsr I coves Faciuity

COMPENSATION PAYWENTS BY covtr FACiLiry
TOTAL awOUNT (Per ecnus) | awounT suazect To-TAd

Bi etEaLY

raat of thie it

C EMPLOYER

}HaS NOT BEEN FILED

PART 11 DEPENDENCY DATA

2. MO. OF DEPENDENTS, [NCLUDING SELF, CLaret> Cw
FORM-S13 08 #-4 (Or equivelent) aTracsze

+ NO, OF DEPENDENTS. (NCLUDING SELF. CLAIMED WITH COVER
FACILITY, . >

DATE OF DEATH . DATE OF DECREE |
ANNULLES

CATIZENSHIP OF SPOUSE RCSIOENCE OF SPOUSE (Country)

14. DEPENDENTS ELIGIBLE TO RE CLAIMED FCR PURPOSES OF FILING TAX RETURNS: WHO MAY OR MAY NOT SE INCLUTED
)

JN NUNBER OF DEPENDENTS DECLARED ASOVE (Omit aelf and epou

> RELATICNSHIP (NO names) YEAR OF BIRTH CATIZENSHIP

1S. REMARKS ©

Toww preraaco ov [restweooee Bx Torereret

PART § CERTIFIED CORRECT
SIGNATURE OF er terat

ale

DISTRIBUTION: SIGNED ORIG. AND COPY = TO FINANCE: COPY - TO CENTRAL COVER: COPY - TO FILE

SECRET Gor

FORM 3132

6-60



--- Page 100 ---
Cr dds
aD ne “chs ®
~ © -

Gedy MO Recent

<< Wed 72

Scoot!

eS a

<n

. “ moll oo

yk hy dyeing

#30 wd cad a
Rows xe MS. » aan

Chin ee ee ott “he ‘tend 55 560-27
we Meg, Aste
Ae ae oe >

“Zoo =—

Taro tt Lay Veron

\ooo = -

“4
——a
guvo —


--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

“yo. HEOPOIDVILIZ

"FROME

 ANFO®

25 20592 ‘60
EC'D CABLE SECT.

ZON! Nia . _
OPERATIONAL |
_ WAMEDIATE

CITED = A37Q9 .
oarta” 7

2s se a am

(ks) RABCOTING OTRER ASSIORONTS REAUIKIEG POSTIIVE ACTIOR. BIS UTILIZATION NOT TO

wa wofexcren 10 UeOP THDHRD MAT HR EVATECE CALL OTHER AFRICAN STATIONS ALCIOUGH
-RAPROT HIM 70, EE RESIDENT 1ROP,
“2. HB 13 INVENTOR, PHOTOGRAPHER, ARCHETECT, FORGER AND

WHO HAS SERVED TER IN FRISCH. ERE THCRNTOUS OBSERVANT, SHOND CLID AND R= .
ibs LATTER PLAYS TXPORTANT PART If EIS CHARACTER.

FORMER BARK ROBDER

LISHES THTRIGUE AND DARING DO.
CARRIES OUT ANY ASSIGHMENT WITHOUT REGARD FOR DANGER. FOR
QUALIFIED AND SEENS TO BE DISCHEST. ASSESSMENT
wpouest", BLICATE TO HANDLE FOR MUST

_ HE LEARNS QUICKLY AND

_ CRRIATH TASKS THIS HAN UHUSUALLY
-QyER WO YEARS 1S THAT HR 13 RELIABLE AND
AVE TRUST. IN HANDLER AND HIS PROVESHIGHAL CH CCHPEDRECE AND WELL RSCTPROCATE
1H KIND. rs a nen ming ats es mt Seth

,

Ti THTTIAL STAGES. .
Be Feo HEMSTED AS AETELAN 1 BELT FRED RICK TR SEIS

coo IMATING OFFICERS .
n
L S-B-C-R-B-T 2 AUTHENTICATING orrices =

@ELEASING orriced.
‘REPRODUCTION BY OTHER aA THE ISSUING OFFICE is PROHIBITED. Copy No.
Jt1-L393%77

ran


--- Page 102 ---
ee _CLASSIFIEDMESSAGE
. . _ ‘ROUTING

fROM: DIRECTOR

CONA, ye
ee

“FO.

: “emp rer onocn rug ‘ABD. GERAH. PAIR ERGLISE. _TRATHED.
{DH SWALL, ARGS DEO AND OTHER PHASES Y BA ACTIVIFT. :
5. REQUEST YOUR VIEWS, AND CONTAC IEVEROCTTONS.
6. ALL TRAFFIC 10 BE SYBAT. a

” END OF MESSAGE,

' GIR D. FIELIS i fe Orricers re

AC/AP -
RELEASING OFFICER 8-8-C-R-B-P AUTHENTICATING OFFICER ~

7 . REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED. Copy Na.


--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

UNIT +
ext os

oct 28 20492 60
“REC'D CABLE SECT.

“erre oig* me
i. se at a
rp ms 287 ay
“IDEN: DAVID ferret DA, OS
DOB: 12 JULY 1918
FOB: TIFLIS, GOERGIA, USSR

' END OP MESSAGE ©

Sigal Center: Pls.. ref attached cable.

uct if:

_ UESTER C. HOUCK

owe
ar/upai
" COORDINATING OFFICERS

[secret | “sviaunriearina onnens

REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED, Copy No.
Ber bgsyr7zl



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

“DIRECTOR. ae £ ,

“Tso

PRIORITY

| mA2monames

1 OPERATIONAL
* TAMECIATE

“FI a ee, wh, sea,

NO. BRI , Cue oe : 6d

* can YOU‘ PROVIDE FOLLCHING:. “SEVERE BIAIK ACSTREN St BURT OR BAPTIS

I
conmaricams AID FILL eT) HOMPLARS? VIEMA PROFERIED. SSVERAL Dull FISCAL |

if
\
STAES" *POLIZSPREASIDM BERLIN" FOR BERLE! ISSUED “AUFENTUALTSERIAUENIS"? |
ss ween‘ar KURIOT Ly KOVEPER IATEST. ; ; o
: ; i

--End of Mossage-

aan c/Atrica West. by phone w/Den Besetur (2
C/ES by phone w/iir. Taoras Lucid OK,
: fh Ce.
ry: Ove’ ak

CG. V. S. ROOSEVELT
mE

COSMO INATING OFFICERS

, _ .  ASSTC, a iasD/Atri
SLEASING OFFICER a sZt c RE vu AUTHENTICATING OFFICER

REPRODUCTION DY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE I$ PROHIBITED. Copy No.

—. Bo:



--- Page 105 ---
14-0890

UNCLASSIFIED ° rn ae) “VCONFADENTIAL a? SECRED) |
pee 7 FIELD DOCUMENT ROUTING AND ACTION RECORD 2
we | INSTRUCTION Routing “dotignatigns ° . :

3 Cosuen. Commnt. are

to be numbered to correscond to th tlined vitt'a tine diaen

the ‘“COMWEVTS* coluen. Each recip
ng ihevca umbered routing.
r routing on't

the document is forwarded to
all be the unit
the central fil

THIS DOCUMENT ROUTING AND ACTION BECOKD 1S TO REVAIN ATFACNED. TO THo BASIC BeCORD.

DOCLWEAT SyuBOL AND NUMBER
$R/DOB/60- Ao

Occ Vint care

| 26 Oct. 60

. “SR/DOB/P.Crookham:cc
“10625

“10

“Chief, AF Div
Attn: Dan .Nesci

DOCUMENT PROCESSING DATA
INDEXED ; :
TABST@ACTED - - 7
FILE nuweeR

bees; 861 “ CsecreT/ _ CONFIDENTIAL . UNCLASSIFIED



--- Page 106 ---
14-0000

: ‘the followin , personalities;
a by. ‘AESENTINEL BEDSOK ‘agent Davi

3. True Name Division/State
Perry Crookham . - . SR
Fred Kirkpatrick SR
Edward L. Ross, Jr. SR
William R, Romer SR.
_ Myron’ Toloczko | SR-
’. Bs Je Johnson SR
Fay Hanchulak SR
Col. Edw. Podworny SR
Gordon Mothes SR
‘Mortimer Love sk
George Fill : $2
Joe Chacho : SR
JT. H. McCormick: SR
C. McCrory SR -
Joseph Betza SR
Roy Petersen, . SR (conteset) -

Geoffrey Cratch °
Janie Cratch.
.Héenry Wynne *
Kathleen Wynne
Logan Phillips
Allie Logan ©

Q. He Todd :
Casmiro Bargin .
Major Aderholdt
“Per Stoen

Paul Belkin -.
Joseph Bukowsky
Dale Haynes
Alvin Naumann'
More Schrade:
Dr. #. Houck §
Glenn Fields ,

_ - SRO (contract) «
_. SR (contract)
SR (contract)

SR (contract)
SR (contract)
SE .(contract)
0. Security
DPD :
DPD

' Om

OS/IRD
Med. Staff

Listed in true naiis and alias, are
a Durvard in ths alias ‘sted. .

_ 26 October 1960.”

—_ Subject is. unaware of the CIA arsiiation of these ‘personalities.
-The period -of time over “which, “Subject was ‘connected: with these’ individuals’
was “from.May 1959 ‘through October 1960. ° : :

Alias .

Pat Cook
Fred Komer
Clint
Little Bi12
Marty Adams
BJ.

Ray

-'Cok, Ed-
Ton

Mike or Max

: Mister George

Joa

Hal
Mack
Joe Bowman
Big Roy -
Geof -
Janie
Henry
Kathleen
Logan
Allie
Hank
Chick .
Heinle
Thor
Paul

Joe

Dale

Al

‘Morgan .

Dr. John

Mr. Glenn fer-L 32977

sw/D0#/60- 2079”

"ATs Pex REO cpt der arraeb tS on tir ales chem tpt PH NCES ss cteentaners cee Bo



--- Page 107 ---


--- Page 108 ---
IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE ne Se ene oo
7 _ c te AMMUNIZATI 24 SCHEDULE a

11S -YouR. RES.
ONS Om THE pat!

OTHER
VACCINES

YELLOW FEVER
LOT wUMBER

YELLOW FEVER
LOT NUMBER

‘ORM NO _ _ SCHICK _
Tuan og G16 use racvious eonssons, on :
: FoRw "2° 616 Use Pervious EDETIOmS, twhe
So : 1 war 36
' :
ne epee Co t


--- Page 109 ---
This Approval is based upon evaluation of information available to ‘this
Office, and is granted. under: authority contained in cst. and CSI-F 10-5.

pater’. 8 Nov 1960

Distribution:

. Orig. to Addressee
1 to Files

SECRET

FO poy ote reeves torreass.

exept APPROVAL AND, SUPPORT DIVISION -

dea

AT 2995S 7a



--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

AORANDUM

: . 1. Subject to your concurrence, responelbliity for the accommo-
"dation mat: ing addreas for SR/OUB agent AZASPIC (David de Paoaskhet),
which was arranged for by your office, wiit be transferred to. the Africa
Division which is now. “athe izing this agont.

- 2, The agent accommodation mat:ing address in Braci! is as ;
foitows: :

fo. , ro Eduardo Catio
| 2 . _ Caha Postal 11744 (Lapa) -
‘ . vao Paulo, Brasil

3. The Africa-Division.cace officer: responsible tor this agent is
Dan Nesctur, 2110 1 Buliding, extension 6284. .

: 4. This office extenda its appreciation: for the expeditions manner
. da’which you have arranged for and maintained this accommodation address.

pe . 5. For any ‘farther ‘information regarding this please contact~.
Dan Nesciur, extension 6284 or Perry Crookham, extension 8331.

' : = ; MICHAEL RAE :
Chief, SR/DUB oy

Jor-rr3t7 7



--- Page 111 ---
-D0000

it
i

be, For ony further informtion, pledee contact Danial R.

Htesetur, 16284,

sorpeenyein ca ennyrgnreectrmen

Chief, Africa Divistoa

_ AP/M/L:DRW:eay237 eet 1960
Distribution; . -
'. Orig. & 1 Addressee
1 = AP/AT
Des AF/W/1

’

4
BE.

i

N

;

4

b

; 7 do! 3077
eS ome


--- Page 112 ---
~ oe
TANDARD, PORM BO ge
14-0000 ° .

Ane
ORT.

Soe Off ce Memorandum * UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Ss 800 (nr, ‘Lewtisther) Be BRB a9 Get 60

_ 7 “FROM : ‘Operstions: Division, Medical Staff

momen ase (Oy ee

"Subject hag been evaluated by the Hedteal Start and found physically
“quali fied for the proposed aodignment,. . .

SENDER WILL CHECK CLassiy cTion TOP Ory BOTTOM

UNCLASSIFIED I I CONFIDENTIAL I SECRET -
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY oS

OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

NAME AND ADORESS

PREPARE REPLY
| [RECOMMENDATION
| [RetuRn
[ [signature

Remarks: _——

_4Q
| BUILDING

“rom wg. ee
16693524] mmoreay oes

FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
FROM: NAME. ADORESS AND Prant NO.

A Kinks Le hy SOL 0B
txctaSsiriep TT [ conriotatmae 7 SECRET

Fonds wi pl Porm D-4 . : (40)
Hair) ry ‘237 Sen mal et 8 8 GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE MES —O- 242531 . !

Nee the


--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

SR/DOB/60- 2X

29 September 1960,

Transfer and-Cuartering arrangements for AEASPIC ~

. ‘SUBJECT:

7 : de Thie is. to confirra. a dtecusaion between Mr. Fred Kirkpatrick,
Lo sR/DUB and your office regarding transfor and quartering arrangements —
for AEASPIC, David Durvard (a), and the ‘interest. expressed by.
' Dr. Lester Houck of Africa Division re acquiring ALASPIC as a long
term asset for that division. .

2. In compitance with a request rade of this office by Africa c

Division, it ia understood your office hag agreed:to the temporary

quartering of ACASPIC in a furnished safe apartment located-at

apartment 307, 5741 Colorado Avenue, N. Was, Washingten, D.C.

This office, with your concurrence, has agreed to lond the use of ! : [
i
‘

i

thia apartment for a period of about two weoks, effective 24 September H
1960, At present ALASPIC ta visited once a week and/or as the need
arises. AEASPIC has hie own salary for food and public transportation.
The game cover’ arrangements exists under this arrangement as

existed when Subject lived at.925 25th Street, N. in his own apartment.
The cover arrangement is that David Durvard (a) is a technical associate
of Fred K. Komar (a) (i.e. an SK/OUB cage officer) seif- -empioyed,
manufacturers commissionsd repreuentative,

MICHAEL RAE a :
Chief, SR/DUD ; :

Air DYdEI2

DN eI a et ANH citi Here Mee HAT wcatitap ne tecracaht actrais A dG matenessy

i
‘



--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

\ | ag September 1960 |

. MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD eo A
xam/ Immunization for David Durvara fe).

. SUBJECT: PI

1

(a) in the company
: atthe offices. -
: ck, 2221 North: |
Virginia. Dr, Bullock indicatad to ‘this -
bo 7” “eae officer hia preliminary opinion ‘that Subject was in Perfect health
Poy “Medical records to this effectwill be for thcoming.:-Mr. Durvard (a) woe

: lao received the first in a seried of immunization shots. preparatory
to a projected assignment ‘in thé West.African theater. Mr. Durvard, -
with his case officer will return to Dr. Bullock's office on 4 October ©
 8¢10:00'a.m. fora second series of immunization shots. Medica!
records other than those reflected in Mr. Durvard's (a) 201 file will
be kept in the Medical File Room (Central Bullding) under his crypto.
A copy will also be kept in AO/OD/MS under pseudo,

FRED KIRKPATRICK

AVI 235077



--- Page 115 ---
1 ON BACK’ IF APPROPRIATE

COMMENTS,

faye

. boRS i TATE |” | orricte:
‘To f Room Sate porricte's
a NO, Leeceuts soswaspes) INTIS

e |. | ~
16. sa
roo. | : | |
s ! ~
7 — a Faerie” >
Riper j | : i
=) I . L
7 ro 7 ~SFILE NUMBER \FAVWARY CODED
TRACE i : ASSTRACT a
REQUEST | | | a ce _ ;
@ ! t INDEX i ves. 23
. [DATE michOFAMES | UOCEMENT DATE TSSSUMENT NUMBER.
| : i HEPA 04890
. i . .
:@ i : ~
‘ i nat



--- Page 116 ---
1400000 - + | GONTINUATION OF i mee al UF AMEONSVEN ARES
a

DISPATCH 7 S E ‘on BaPA-hB50

meAbaURtERS PILE HO:
: : oo . “20233977
: “Cader” of. ties, Rio ae “Janeiro ‘PISLD FILE 0: 10+625.8

_ 12 Oetober. 1960 -

mame moana

Bscaiuarteve isttoatica in called to th.fect that the icttar’ viten the pose

forvarded on 7 October 1960 was postmarked in Europe on 12 August 1960. Even in

‘»_ ‘the light of the notoriously alow Brazilian’ postal system, the Base cannot

“. guch a long delay in“traneit for air mail, Such a delay has been typical of
almost every letter the Base hag received in tha past gix months. The Base has

no reason to disbelieva ALLOMETER=2 in bis repeated assertions that he services
‘the ‘box at least anes a weeke .

Distribution: ;
S$ = Headquarters
2 - Rio
7 ' 2 Files
‘
BRPA-LEQO
wr /-A 335
USE PREVIOUS EC-TON CLASSIFICATION -

fe BEE) SECRET | [om



--- Page 117 ---
-D0000

209 350i, February 1950 - ;
| 25335, February 2959 : ae

« DIR 14843, Maret 1959 :
EROS 5707, Narch 1959 i
DIR 15768, March 1959 :

1959

PROS 3724,
_YART 5577. tsrehn i929
FRUS 3763, March 1959
DIR 17342, March 1959
DI 17554, March
PARL 5

Dik 18ot0, He

Narel:

sar nner ernment so ote emer nem! nner tartan + ere meaner

{

H , : :
. Hy ‘ ' :

i : :
5 fs : ;
H i '
; i ‘ :
i 5 o
i

%
&
a
>
ss
)
N
N



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

regularizo ABASPIC ¢ f od one

‘70 "that- end, vo-are obtaining

rat

P Clearence atotus ‘for his intendod ensignment.
_ Aa tho exact date of trineter fo not yot dotereined, it 19
requested that Mr. Kirkpatrick mainteta contact with Kr. Wellasan

&R's cooperation on such matters as shoto, training, quartering
an @ now phyaicel exeutnation ere eyprocietod, , :

Bronson Tweedy
Gilet, Africa Division

LOU 2BBITT

WERE: — cae eae Peokercguethne Ob esiicat cap aPeacn

gi

:
e
&
2
&
3
a
x
e
ss


--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

“dn tha proséos of ‘bosag trénstecred -
te preety. for: a field ;

oy Aecorttnd’y, ‘dt te poquoted tuck your recorda'be altered ~
_to reflect this change and also, that the. necessary steps cro :
taken to amend his OA (C-73532) ‘to permit une by ‘this Division.

_ 3 ,For further information regarding subject, please .
contest Bdvard 0. Welles, Africa West, on extension 3829, who
will veuporertiy be handling thie case. .

Chief, Africa Division ; !

defo 2 33477 an i



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

i, Occupational Specialty: Mechanicai Electrical Engineoring : . ‘ tt
on : Cine or Portrait Photography

Reséarch aad innovater of commercial ~

labor/money ‘saying devices oo
_ Electro mechanical or: photographical in”.
- nature.. 7 - Los

“See paragraphs 4. 8, 9; 1, 12, 13, 14
of Enipl yment History for examples, —

“Dec. 1939, Paria, volunteered for Fretich
Foreign Legion...» ~ we

Jan. 1949, Tunisia » North Africa, in Ist Cav,
Reg., Ist Squadron, 4th platoon. :

Feb. 1940'= sent to N.C.0. training course in : |
Legion. Pulied out to be reassigned to alle i
Georgian unit.

Mar. ~ Aug. 1940, Sarcares, _ Assigned in ! oe
Georgian unit - : ,

Aug. 1940 ~ Paris, Olacharged after the end
of Franco/German hoatilities ag Private
First Clase.

i. : 3. Empioyment Hietory: 1, 1942 - Paris + Volunteered for work in
: mo, . Germany, :

2. Poelitz, Germany,- Worked for HIDRYER
WERKE on contract for one year as
instalation electrician,

t , . : . 3. 19426 Berlin. Photographer of metals for

fo, . a a factory which produced electrodes for
mo : , weiding instruments "

! 1942 6 Paria Seif-employed at photo shop, '

; : : . Portrait photography, . : : .

4. 1942 Berlin Assembiy line worker in:
Berlin factory Producing steel ammunition
belts, Received. commendation from factory



--- Page 121 ---
14fov00

, . director for labor: eaving device re :
: fact. of device for automat. adjustment

manuf,
of Cartridge cases,

5

3."Beriin:. Employed with SCHUPOLIZET.
or French-German langusge, os

1946-47 Parts ‘Employed by Architects

| Carre Associatad-aa Slectrica! inatailation -
Planner aad constructor of Prototype model’ ~
bullder.. Earned roughly $4 an hour American’

‘acele pius commission work extra, . wo

-8. 1951-52 ‘la Devised and sold on French
prison, market a pocket automatic
Paris: transit indicator. Received cash
settlement for this whiic in Prison,

9. 1953 In prison Devised and gave to Prison
/ da Rien administrator invention for
= making cardboard boxes.
Device was built and used by
Prison administrator,

10. Dec, 1955. Gap. Empioyed by M.D. as X-ray
Apr. 1956 machine maintenance techni-+
cian and operator,

Ne. 1956-57 Gap lovented, patented and sold
eo... ..  & Calendar device to thy ©
wT - ° Freoch commercia! market,

12, 1958 Ambert’ invented ‘and patented a com-
~ / mercial advertising device, .
: photo-mechanical in natare,
, : : . . Mode!s built and gold to French.
: . : "advertising concerns.

. 13, 1959-60 U.S. Devised and passed drawings -
ae Sept-May for 2 plecesa of equipment to be
| used for Project AESENTINEL .

14, 1960, July U.S, At present Subject is devising
& low cost teiephone answering
device. :


--- Page 122 ---
i AL Bxpesioace a0 Forged i Cocuments:

eriin- Faloified: hia own ‘travel documents by use
of pen to change effactive dates.

" May 1942. Achen,

1942 Berlin- Paris: Fitted in German. travel blank forms.

- ‘ : ' Altered old German authorization atamp
rave forms. Then made other

ied stamps for other | ‘people .
ested. ia travel acrosg German-held .

Fitory.

* -fo

ted and used various. falsified. .

tamips copied from old.

Or'varicus péople to.

1 ‘throughout Germany. Used.
Certalo photo techniques for changing .

" and/or ageing pictures in documents. At

_ ame time Subject also reassembled -

1 faleified old Passports to form new ones

as weil'ds counterfeited German financial

vouchers. .

Physical Description

- Subject 1a described as 42 year old male Caucasian, 5'6" tail, of slight op.

nstri t
el documents

-. bulid (136 Ibs, average weight), long face, long rose, dark brown hair,
balding in front, awarthy complexion. Subject 1a (extremely agil and in

perfect health. He ie an ox-French foreign leglonnaire and survivor of :

German concentration camps. :

Evaluation

Subject's ¢ casa officer : agrees with Agency Assoosment that he possesses:

the traits of a born Clandestine Operator and would be an apt: candidate

for any black mission which requires: : ‘ : :

! _ an able-bodiedness :
2. ability to’ assimilate easliy (al owing for his physical features).



--- Page 123 ---
. 3. “innate sense of locational direction ©
4. superior intelligence and reasoning power

bility to: comprehend and: apply: instruction rapidly

be williagness to. undertake an: extremely hazardous infaston

+8. “ability to. improvise and “know how" disturbingly Amaricéa ta :
— character. _. .

se a a Motivation ;

Subjects m motivation is ‘based on ‘personal loyalties rather than monetary
gain. Subject has little rogard for tha value of his Toney, and muat.

be strongly urged to set aside & part of hia earnings. Subject has a
strong distaste for the Communiat regime and hag observed the

effceta of it at first hand. Subject indeed goes a step farther, >

: -aubscribing to the "'Untermensch" theory re tho Russian people.

Language Capabilities

Subjact speaks, reads, writes:
French - native
Georgian - fluent
:German = = good to fluent

English + reads fluently, wilies, fair, speaks fair
Spantsh - reads fair, speaks poor, understands fair

Subject has exhibited good subordination to his case officer, intetligent,
security precautions re his personal habits, and ihe ability to quietiy
fit into an American urban existence. For: “any farther information please

call Fred Kirkpatrick, SR/DOB, Xe 4705,

ode ‘basic techaical ‘ana mechanical applied or. theoretical abilities


--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

- talker who t
“bis listeners. >
‘snd. tends to ,loss over thosa secticns he feels that ire commen to everyone.

the subject - as ied an‘erecit nd diverte- lite.
“his. Lo. the Unit
uentiy been cancelled, dt-the present time the ~

23 Sefterber 1940"

‘The 5 Divsaien
States. (blaci.) to triin for a vissi-a ch. has
Diviel:in is -c:king

arrangerents fcr the re, settlevent cf the subject in Latin arértea, prot ably

ae Mexico. ° How vever, due tc the trcining this azeacy hes given the subsect

& feala he should he ctilized by the DD/P if possiole,

[3e Observing David for some tno hours and Listening te his.stery the

‘unsersi-ned feels there nay ba sora use of
bug obvs ously teld his story m

David is a srocth
‘gatisS.ctica of
parts. of his life

He claborates oa the excit

4. The subscet hay deen in the United Sti tes for some tire, This tize

hee been spont tn tr inins for a specifie 7
has teen en

Recentiy ne
eould weil La
bis ova words he
asstined to hir,

which never cere te pass.
ed in "make .ork" 5 tc pass the tise. This
in his cp,-arent Anpatience and desire to de.zerething. In
sishes to- prove that he is ble of aceorplishing a task

He esra fora ehanee to surveil screcne, to tere clirdestine

pictures, even tc ussassiniie someone. He very nerly cesced to be given a.

pitci: during this: mccting.”

- 5. The subject is a stzteless person. ile 4 is An the United Stetes black

and could te comtetery | bn:
NCO tO setbic
not acarent én this.

snd ac

eéxciterent. The

adventurer, He reletes nis ps

the thrill of d

“Ap.
citizonshig tut ‘4s
e2re to bs love of
ves a very 50 nce of the clussiec]
st exploits in wartime Furcepe as sotiva ted by

2 the’ existing autherd tye, .
fe a

sutife ets

2O(-23%77

west 4


--- Page 125 ---
6. Tt is the unc
gabon a, entein
“ Rave at one til : SEC:
S hss the 2G1 folder at the present times.



--- Page 126 ---
“19 August 1960

: Agent ‘AEASPIC

ls At 1400 hours; 19 ‘August, SR/DOB ease , officer;

Fred: Kirkpatrick and ‘Jerry. Pochron from Defection Coordinators .
: Office of CIA met with’ Clay Calendar and Jim Myers of TSD/IB
re-documentations ‘arrangements and travel routing for possible
resettlement of. AESENTINEL agent AEASPIC. The following
arrangements were proposed by Mr. Caléndar and Mr. Myers
‘for SR/DOB's consideration. TSD/IB suggested that Subject be
sent by black flight from here to West Germany, and there

“ surfaced with an‘altered Greck passport which fSD/IB now has
-available. A suitable cover story would of course be incorporated
re the possession. of a Greek passport by Subject, while Subject -
has no. Greek language capability. Since this passport is a valid
_one, {and was, in fact, purchased by TSD/IB) and is therefore

oo backstopped : in name, Subject could apply at the Mexican Embassy

in West Germany for a Mexican tourist visa by presenting this
passport. Once in Mexico, Subject could request emigration
action upon declaration of intent to become a Mexican citizen and
upon submitting proof of sponsorship by an employer in Mexico
City. -

2. Upon your concurrence, Mr, Pochron will arrange for
Mr. Kirkpatrick to. meet with Mr. Coolidge, the CLA contact used
for introducing agency designees into Mexican private industry.
Mr. Pochron has already talked. with Mr. Coolidge on two occasions
and has passed him Subject's file. From their talks, Mr. Pochron
has assured me that-this arrangement is entirely feasible, Gillete
Company of Mexico City being cited as one possibility.

3. AEASPIC would then openly proceed to purchase plane
tickets in West Germany for Mexico City and upon arrival there,
would be waiting for him: -The time table for this entire operation

- was estimated at about five’ weeks. Of course we did not discuss
Subject's monetary maintenance for the interim period.of travel,
“nor until Subject could begin earning his own living.

AAs 235¢77


--- Page 127 ---
J _

24. Mr. Pochran expressed his concern and the concern
of Mr. Pennington of Alien Affairs Staff about the knowledgibility:
of Subject re pass. Agency. tie-in and. Agency assets. It will of |

-..coursé be our. job to assure Security that Subject is not knowledgable
, and will entail'a minimum of .risk.to-transport and: to resettle in
- Mexico.’ In-view of this.concern; all arrangements offered for
-DOB's | sideration by TSD/IB were tailored to afford step by -
:Step denial or participation by.the U. S, Government. In effect,
‘all items procured by Subject for: resettlement could just-as .
‘easily. be-obtaine he European black market as well as from

. this Government. abject williin effect be briefed and taken by
~German’ Station asget to, obtain his documents ostensibly on the

‘black market. Monies due Subject would be. withheld pending

. destination arrival, The letter head and Supporting sponsorship
documents to be used by. him for ultimate employment in Mexico
would be prepared. in such a manner as to be either legitimate or
forged. In addition it was suggested that Subject be closely ,
handled and advised by someone known to him to ensure the’
security aspect both to Subject and to this agency, ,

5. The meeting was closed by TSD/IB's request to be
"informed whether these arrangements in theory meet with the
approval of SR/DOB, and Office of Security. Mr, Kirkpatrick
was assured that Documentation aspects by TSD/IB could be
accomplished within one week upon ‘authorization by SR/DOB.
With your permission Fred Kirkpatrick will proceed to affirm
Mexican employment arrangements for AEASPIC.


--- Page 128 ---
p14-00000
f

mw

one
or
ot
re

“MBNEAIDON FOR a Chict, cx. |

ATTENTION og sorr

SUBJECT og ‘Bhograshs teal Inforst ion: ‘Necessary for ‘Possible os
u : | Rosettlenait: of s/n. nadsax a at: Tavid. Ter ZIcHyILt (2s. . i

bed

. Le (On a ‘Jay ‘1940, Sh/DCB cas. Cfficer Fred ristgatrict tal
with Jerry Rochron ef your office re enlist ting you

. possible Yosettlenent cf SR/DOB Rédsox ecnt.
(T) inthe region of South or Centml fe lerdcae At th Fey
‘outline cf Mr. Pochrary this office! has pre red the folbowine | hegraphic

information. See Attacloent Ae

on ae area under the
yj available for any

2. Subject 1s livine ‘in the general hash
supervision of an $2/DCu Cace Officer ar:
further debriefing your offica decns necess

“36 Subject remains on a quasi legall: yf baskstonped arrangererit of
Allen Affairs Staff until 20 Cetcter 19: Oe

le Fox any further information ploasa con sntact Pred Hirky
SE/BCB, on extension k7:5 ov 2331.

Ath LOST 7


--- Page 129 ---
24-duna 1960

>: a a S RECORD SO . _ 7

SUBJECT: ‘Blogravhie Irifornation/Case Officer Evaluation. of: .
David TeITZICHVILL, alias David DURVARD . .

cas , _ . : - hose --Bonranhte Information :
. ot, Ty :

Devid sare: HVILI was born 20.) caceabar 1913. in rates, Gooretey where a

he Lived ven ‘his pérente’ aintil 121. Subject -at that time moved to France

“with Hts ‘parents. Sunject grew up. in. France and ‘therefore speaks native

- Fresieh (Perisien). Subject’ does not have French extizenship, however, and -

i
'
mast be ‘classed. as statejess. “Subject ‘earned the first part of his baccolaureat |
at Breguet (eleetro-engineering), then entered the Foreign Legion at the :

i

beginning of Wail. Subject fought in Ne Africa until French capitulation in
In 1943 he wont
:

1940, at which tine he was discharged to return home to Paris.

be —_ . to Germany as a voluntary worker. Ho worked there primarily eg an industrial j

‘electrician. While in Germany he assisted French officer P.0.d.'s to escape, . 7"
"- .Jaiding them with cleverly falsified papers, stamps, cachets and even wsttonayl

It ig interesting to note that unile gubdject attended school at Breuguet, he
_ also attended the technicum for Cinematography. 1% was from these past studies

at the Tothnicum that subject was able to develop techriqucs to apply to photo-
. Mechanical forging of documents, sterps, and cacthets. Subject was betrayed
“to Germans, arrested, and sentenced to death for espionage. Subject was able
to drag this case out by imlying the existence of a lerge British run net : :

of which ho was 8 part. In 1945 he was liberated by the U.S. érmy and returned i

Subject lived there in relative quiet until he, together with a war- |;
Subject and

to Paris.

tine friend, robbed a Paris bank of a sizeable ‘amount of money.

: accomplice were apprehended by the Surété an 11 July 1950, sentenced to prison,
. i but released som. five years lator ‘or good behavior and on the basis of their;

geonel

war record.


--- Page 130 ---
- : _ seeael.

prison in tecanber of 185, subject Lived wor z ‘sed anti
- in cap, Prancos. it kag wile th

Subject is doserited as LA year olc rale Caucasian, Stat tal, ef ol,

20°

a

It 45 interes tne to note that Mle in pricen, subject darented a Féchino |
for makin; cardeart boxes. Thi nach ie was actually beet Zor ane of the prison :

adccintotrations and put Into opetstion at the priscn factecy. Upon disetiarse fron
“T::

paroled to his broticr

ec that subject ‘was contac weit by this agency and
cubsoquently browat to tts  coeniny for isa ag one cf. two acents, fori Project :

ASIN

SthJeet ts presently residing in, his. fess “Cs apartcont and fo. reaiily

{
available fer any interviews,

Subjoct is onceged in his aaa eftice in several technical ciedets which

Could be of value to this bcoriey. Zwo of hfs icoas have been sarse? forward
to TED rer dowleprant/asplottatton, TOD has oxpresond Laterest in another
of his ideas, tha plans fcr wilch have just been comleted, 7 ,
Alion affatra stact of Lantcration/aturalization has exteried subjects!

backstopped residence states until 20 Cctover, 1940,
fe . :

Phyatcal Leseription

butle (136 le. avera e weit), long face, leng nose, bark. -rewn rhatr,:

vgect is oxtrorely ant- ‘ta pervect

daldin: in front, swarthy cozploxion..
healt. fe igs an exsirench foreign lagionnaire and surviver of Cerran

concentration caps,

cvalustion i,

Subject 's case officer agrees uith jsseszent that he possesses the traits of

a born clandestine opcrater ant would de an apt candidate for oxy blac!: mircion

tiilch requires: “png
; ; SEURET

i
i
i
i


--- Page 131 ---
3.

1, able-bodiediess ; 4
12 ability. to aosinilate easily (allowiny: for his Hhystcal: features) |
3. innate sense + af Weattonal. direction —_
Le sipertorintetigenca ahd reas soning ‘power a
“S. ability te Corprohénd and apply instiucticn rapidly
"6. wllingioss to undertake an extrenely hasardoxs rission
Te basic technical and néchanical applicd or theoretical abilities

8 ability to irprovies and "know hows distarbin, Yy ey dvertean in
character. : .

Hotivation.

met dates pe, . : a
Subject's ‘ls ideclerter] nore-than-monetary.

sed: to sat aside a

‘rerard for the value of his monav, ruil moet, he: stroucly vw
part of his eamings. sUyeet has a strong distasis for the Conmunist regmne
and lies observed the efrects of it at first hand. Swoject indecd coes a step

farther, subscribing to the "Unternensch" theory it the 2ussian peosla,
Tanguace Capabilities

—S

Subject speaks, rats, writes:

Fronch + native . °

Geogizn =  fluant.

German = good to fluent

imglich = reads fluently, writes fair, spcais fair

« . bee te oS

Subject has exhibited eed subordination to his Case Officer, intelligent
‘security precautions re his persenal habits, and the ability to quietly fit

into an American urban existenco, For any further information please call
Atuakp  -

Fred Kirkpatrick, SH/u05, £-4705.



--- Page 132 ---
“sou

tna

s titted with

pian}

tise,

v

y€ arent

satisy1ec

Centmet c1ar:

“MaMa
_Mav

i dauil Durvars 7 Sow too

f
17 “Avoncas

Ly dune 4

on

°



--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

oa Sen ee
Office Memarandin ° UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

To. : Chief, Soviet Rissia Division Te DATE: 20 ily 2950 :
APN; + | SR/D03 . : ; _

_FROM so: Mirector of Sesurity:

SUBJECT: SPIC, CI/OA Yow C-73532
Co co . 7 |
: Le. Ta pe memorandum of 14 Septeaser 1959, _
_ “0. nrequested su ion.of the subject's tyventy-four
SEG to “until he re. training avout 2 August 1950. | Your nenorenéwn os
won. ‘ of 5- July 190, iio. 1996, indteates he wil be placed in a safe.
oo - vt house for trainin
: °
phn “ 4
re : ; . ; Chie?, Alton Affairs Ctaf: oe 7

SECRET



--- Page 134 ---


--- Page 135 ---
4-00500

WWTUR GOR uiftes ef ta

Gime a ens af ¢

fT treiy
“ soutmack sees
torre out 2

. Pa “pen joot we fae tentacle’,
bresning wiil be diver,
WHie-7.t, Aree, mui”
ad is Soh oa te
ue

eA me



--- Page 136 ---
. supject: .

ecccealg Covina a”
,

. Chief, Telecommunications , Training and Techniques staff /oc

W/f Tisitaing - Agent ABASPIC -
SR/DOB 60-1990, 29 June 1960

“1. This, will confirm recent discussions held between |
Mr. Fred Kirkpatrick of your Office and Mr. Lee Jungen of ny
Staff relative to the proposed W/T training of AEASPIC. As
was explained by Mr.. Jungen, ‘W/T training of an agent on &

pull or part-time basis, is contingent upon the approval of a”
_ specific project with supporting communications annex. While

we have on occasion participated in “holding” training of
agents without benefit of a definite requirement, curreat
operational commitments now make this impossible. .

. 2. Should a definite requirement for the operational
utilization of AEASPIC develop we will arrange for the w/t
aptitude -assessinent and training. Prior to our initiating
puch action, it 1s requested that a representative of your
office discuss, operational details with en appropriate
Foreiga Division within the office of Communications. This
will enable us to tailor subsequent training in terns of
specific equipment and procedures as required by the project.
In this respect, further information can be obtained vy
contacting Mr. Lawrence Eisler an extension 8137.

~

a fp ai poo
ta 7 hone? A. BLOOM

Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Addressee

i
NM
te
wh
vn
K
1

Office “Memorandum ‘© UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
rr re qrt-u-6o-& 7%
Chief, Soviet Tussia Divisioa/DDP ; DATE: ;
Chief, SR/DOB a : 2 Aug '


--- Page 137 ---
FIELD DOCUMENT ROUTING. AND ACTION RECORD -

2 to be placed in the © cofuen, Commente sre
Ai is to be undertined

to place his. initials in the oroper
forearded to the neat routing is to
be the unit in which the hasic docusent is to

tral file ahall be the next to the fost outing
D TO THe BASIC RECCRO

Routing devia
‘ eapond to- the nusher

TON RECORD 1S TO ROVAIN ATTA

THIS DOCUWENT. ROUTING AND >A

-DOCUMPNT SYMBOL AND NLABER

DOCUMENT PROCESSING DATA
r

o
ABSTRACTED

FILE NUMBER

UNCLASSIFIED

rom ¥O. B64

1 DEC Ss

CONFIDENTIAL


--- Page 138 ---
~ MEMO'FOR THE RECORD

_ 2h dune 1960

!

” SUBJECT: Bi ographic Informa tion/Case Ortiéer Evaluation of

David T2ITZICHVILI, slias David DURVARD

a mo : Blogranhic: Info i tic ct

: Davia rarieicnvat waa ‘born 20 December 1g" in relia, Gesreta, where:
he Lived with his parents until ageLe: Subject at that time moved’ to ‘France
“with hig: parents, Subject ‘Brew up An France: and therefore Speaks native”

. French (Paristan). Subject does “net have French eitizenship, hoverer, and

mst be classed as ‘stateless. “Subject earned the first’ part of ‘his baccalaureat
et Breguet (elect#o-engineering), then entered the Foréign Legion at the
beginning of WWII. Subject fought in N. Africs until French cepitulation in.

1940, at which time he wag discharged to return home to Pa ris. In 1943 he went

to Germany as a voluntary worker, He. worked there Primarily ag an industrial

electrician. while in Germany he assisted French officor P,0, Weta to escape,

aiding them with cleverly falsified papers, stamps, cachets and even uniforms.

It is interesting to note that while aubject attended achool at Breuguet, he - .

also attended the Teehnicun for Cinematography. It was from these past studies
at the ‘Tekhnicun that subject was able to develop techniques to apply to photo-
Mechanical forging of doctinenta, stamps, and cachate. “Subject was betrayed

; espionage. Subject was able

.to Germans, arrested, and sentenced to ‘death f
to drag tts case out by implying the existence @ large British run net

of which he was a part. “In 1945: he. was Liberated by the U.S. Arny and retumed

to Paria. Subject lived there in relative qalet untal he, together with a war-

time “friend, robbed | a Paris bank of 8 sizeable: amcunt of money. Subject and

accumplice were apprehended by the Suréte on u July 1950, sentenced to prison,

, but released 80me five years later tor good behavior and on the basis of their

Fg 5577

war record,

i
i


--- Page 139 ---
ci

8

Tt js interesting to note that while in prisen,. subject invented a | rachine | . ,

- for makin; cardboard ‘bexes, ‘This sachine vas actually built for one of the prison.
: adzdntstrations and Put into opersticn at tho prigon factory. Upen dAochanye from
‘prison in Decoiber of. 1955," subject; ‘Hved,. vor! ‘ed. cos parceled to his brother
“ta Gap, France. It'was witle there that subject vas contacted by this agency and

Le subsequently brought “to this’ country for use as ons, of two agente for Project.

AESLIT DEL, _ : :
stbject ia presently reoiding in his Vash veC. apartnent and is readily _

“"ayatlable for any intervisve.

Subject is onzaced in ‘his sate office in several technical gimmicks which

could be of value to this agency. Txo of his idcas have been passed forward

. ‘to TSD for doveloprent/exploitation. TSP has expressed interust in another

of hin ideas, the plans for which have just bean completed,

“Alden Affairs Staff of Inntz: ratien/ilaturalization has extended subjects!
. backstoppod residence status until 20 Getober, 1940,

inysical Lescrintion

Subject 1s deecrited ag 1 year old rale Caucasian, Ste" tall, of _ Blight

. bubld (136 lve, avera:a o-wight),- Yong face, dong noso, Park irewm hair,

agile

balding; in front, swarthy complexicn, Subject ds extromely/and in perfoct

health. Me is an ex-'rench foreicn legionnaire and survivor of Cernan

concentration carps.

Evaluation

Subject's case officer agrees with Assesmont that he possesses the traits of

.@ born clandestine operator and would be an apt candidate for any black mission

which wires: : ere
mich req Jkt

Or



--- Page 140 ---
14-0009

1, able-bodiedress . A “ i
2. ability” to avsintlate oastly (allewinz: for his phypteal testine) be
3. innate sense of locational direction ; ot
4. siperiorintolligance and reasoning pover :
Be ability to comprehend and apply instruction rapidly

: & willdaghess to tiniertale an extrenaly hazantous. deeton
Te basic teciinical and mechanical applied cr “theoretical abilities:

&, ability to ieprovise and "now how Haturbincly Anerdcan in
charactors : oe

Kotivation

: MCTIVAT ICN : . .
Subject's/Le ideological more than. monetary. ‘hat is to say, subject has Little
revard for the valuo of his money, axl mist be strongly urged ‘to sot aside a :
part. of his eamincgs. Subject has a stron; dintaste fer the. Comamiat recine : c
and has observed the efrects of it at first hand, Subject indeed goes a step ,

farther, subscribing te the "Untermensch" theory re the Russian peoples

Languave Capabilities. i

Subject speaks, rads, writes:
4 it an

French. = native . .
Geogian = fluent 7 :
cerman <= geod to fuont :

inmglish = reads flvently, writes fair, speaks fair

Subject has exhibited good subordination to his Case Officer, intellicent
scourity precautions re his personal habits, and the ability to qgiletly fit

into an American urban existence. For any further information please call

i
i
H
i
}

Fred Kirkpatrick, Si/u0L, 1-li705. SE



--- Page 141 ---
= \ . oot ee
Translater fos French Letters :
‘Nick’ Lotsa
“Uob "yt Bldg.
Freach-Desk, W.8. -X 3657

Aecemmadadicnn Addeess fo 9 Dovid
Mes Myeray wt? eB , £549”

 paommedation Address’ fer Osu
heflers Fé Prence; ;

Eduardo Calle.

LeHers: fs Us, fre Dal |
LO. Be, £028

wash.

JS.A.

ay-A3 3477

a ea gs 8 eS

Robert P. Hozve

\
i
H
i
i

CAMA POSTAL WP YY Capo)
Sao Pavto Brasil’ ~

seth west Shots
ah. ; 2d, 3.6. ,


--- Page 142 ---
14-00000

a def BBKETT


--- Page 143 ---
Fr 00000

=  @

te Calibeeat -

tthe “ewatladt Sos ceses aah ay yS AN oon Re state
: sid bee Sah SOS SER Se CN

Vicia jks aS wet
eel pea USA eee oD

2 aren haa Pretec tes

oes ‘wee eh, ak

ae fer ThE: “ain gee gee. gp te Tg
fo.’ “ed. becToy Bey coma bap es O ptt SE

4

eet roe 5 ye “a deta sete So
Le beteltir! ponte ho oba say Eee ee

; to pct “Leda Llatuns ber ce Zoe! — Ace,
ae. nein olan Meir och AB AR ° IRA. a eS 2
Ot bet Re fC hn ‘ aay soe Pe Es gap (aaa
wie see Net at San oR a), a fete
: Ket he ae a ~ Beh, fat Seas, — ee
a aed; Nay ae . fo% So, >
rer eS ma Vis er) ook ate. Cue - See en “~*
fre Coptic (A. 4 ; ey, Fonte Bl bina A set.
¥ “ay eee Pl, ja. ma a WS Sy ieee

’ aad afew i Ae chews. re Z Ree Oa
B _ EN
fe A. wifrn. a: Ponte we CHAD ayes < .
Lp aS ee oe SR a ~ Bak Sad ow MB

Fine: Lahend, Jatt anet ree hard a Het Cae, e
as ie een fet at ES ops ae ata Or rag: pw
L fd hesvatre pea nereas Las a. 4
ee She or . ee oelaratal wat me se



--- Page 144 ---
. -

: eo ok je

fo Feeney oh Tague Ox Viesratn

REE toy al Ment tm Bln horn dpe ee

W wi wLy a ; ‘ 3 aa-& )

LO for Ea ow beta phe

feet eB po? pgs So eS ag ma gc, Bs

SE UY D YY Mires 2
ee Nite 5 ey .
Aen pin "| ane N

beats Om tenes Con gl Pha O Yay’ eg Hareb



--- Page 145 ---


--- Page 146 ---
a vets eg : ne
; oe ee “rey oF ris ae

37 S. ion a
“aks Pau Sa cases alg
| a

Pia woo
— VIA AIR MAIL
PAR AVION

“ay SY aw |

en mw


--- Page 147 ---
1714-00000

en * sila arie! Qo care
fechas i Tote —_ tl tit”

athe

aa We” ne aces
a doeh OL Met abla ase fo tend fafa

: hatin, Tien b= 2 tray Grn. Lrbwlln Bae a. led due lle. Aa ee
opt ou bot, Ap reica ye a tin Lite Z LS ob, a

tonteed a Para Wares tap enh | feet part “ap aon —/

pa ees oreo, crescent, ee oa 2 ponte ze
Afartit tanmebon? flrns. thr barbeb— pra

Nees fs eee US

Mk be tdnbe pa ” 7 fl. se = Cen are

Pond ft tert thar Rapper ta a wae

eR LOLS

Ane p Etat Pop eS Ot pond athe s.

ndatenden Re-. .

tee.


--- Page 148 ---
14-00000

- (NER Gee eS Ly se
Pf LO tried, Telecaster Ae L fon,
| Oe ie Bored «\ we WR ey eat at

= 832 yee

«HR saheoe 8, cites pha ye

a ye ey te Bincdet =. Gros weiss oS,
: 20: cea so ™: .. i jaf ms a .



--- Page 149 ---
NE a
“Sean. 7 theo» Cable. B
| Coleeso for/ob fot) g

8

Z ' ag Gud
| ff (Angel: MAAR Man:

PAR RAVION



--- Page 150 ---
Ads sy hiregie ere ae
Pad ee ~o e eas PERE Se a ow
Seas 3 pet Wan voted | ‘ba am SE Be me a te
“997 2 Spt AZo. iy oer =<
. 2 tes! RoSraee : Nee we Mast tf
Rcieeetsbictecetisey 4 Lay. Prien Larble Bis. ae plas Scaklsin hp Bet
Le ony Jeb ~Atteeine i _ Kans feaise fed ok Toma
teed, Pa - eS See ead x 2 ~

» Ringed a ge RO
tor
Be

‘at joe feta, an

. ea were! ‘na

KG . . . : —
/ ras De Peed, sate Sates pb. ek
Poet Va btmcsle oss res a Lacie sth tor, Ard

po fo! SPS aaa oa pare Copter nr
Ggke ied “SE wt A

amt Fane pope oS |

- “4



--- Page 151 ---
sm

SESEET

\ re gnjoop/en- eS
. 29 September 1960 . oo: a

" MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Alien Affaire: Staff, OS |.

. Mr. Pennington

SUBJECT: . Traasfer and Quartering arrangements. ir

hoo de Thie’is to-confirm a discussion between Mr, Fred. Kirkpatrick, ©
'SR/DOB and your office regarding tranefer:and quartering arrangements.

for AEASPIC, David Durvard.(a), and the interest expressed by : :
Dr. Lester Houck of Africa Division re acquiring AEASPIC as a long a b
term asect for that division. . 7 7 {

4 2. In compliance with a request made of this office by Africa

Division, it is understood your office has agreed to the temporary 1
quartering of AEASPIC ina furnished gafe apartment. located. at :
apartment 307, 5741 Colorado Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. i
This office, with your concurrence, has agreed to lend the use of H
‘this apartment for.a period of about two weeks, effective 28 September ~ mo
1960. At present AEASPIC ia visited once a week and/or ag the need :
arises. AEASPIC has his own salary for. food and public transportation. :
‘The same.cover arrangements exists ‘under this arrangement ag . :
existed when Subject lived at 925 25th Street, N.W., in-his own apartment. i
The cover arrangement is that. David Durvard (a) ia‘a technicai associate :
of Fred K. Komer (a) (i.e. an SR/DOB case officer). seif-ernployed,
manufacturers commissioned representative. . i

. ; - : : “MICHAEL RAE
ce ; : . ‘Chief, SR/DOB



--- Page 152 ---
" aRORMIDUN Foe FORD

_ 99-1236 (cooltags)’
22 September 1960 -

SUBJECT: - Possible resettlement of SR/DUB Fedsox Agent
sR/D0B/60-2011, 25 duly 1960. ,

vas expla j Mr. Grosé. that the Agency 2 5
lem and that’ they wished to tnvite the cooperati ofthe Company in

- the resettlenent in Mexico.City of aa aséet for vham ve visted to fink

“employment. © . -
_ 2.) «Mr. Gross, after posing several questions, agreed in principle
that the company would be villing to supply such agent with employment
in their Mexico City factory. However, be wished to discuss it with
the General Counsel and also to look into the lava of Mexico dealing
with the period of exployment and what provisions there vere for dis-
ansoclating. themselves with auch man should he prove completely un-
satisfactory... It was then explained to Mr. Groga that the Arency would

_". Like to be able to supply the agent with a ‘reasonable facimile of a
- Gillette letterhead together with a message which would offer him en-

“ployment upon his arrival in. Mexico City. Again’ Mr. Cross approved of
it in principle, but requested that a copy of the letter be shown hin
prior to its dispatch. : . : ~

3. Upon return to headquarters, the undersigned talked vith Mr.
Fred Kirkpatrick of SR/DO3 and explained to him what was needed to
‘satisfy the requests of. Mr. Gross. Mr. Kirkpatrick explained ‘that
within the last 4d hours a different division had evidenced interest
in the agent, and vere picking him up for their use so that there would
be -no-furthér need of the offer of employment ‘from Gillette. .

“0 Be. The undersigned will seé Mr. Gross on 21 September 1960 to
explain the aituatiog and thank hin for his offer of cooperation.

Soe - FRANCIS L. COOLIDGR oo
Fitfg | ee gore BIT
cc: Chief, SR/DOB .



--- Page 153 ---
MEMO FOR THE RECORD

"At 1i30°hrs., 19 September 1960, Hr. Lestér.Houck ond Mis Edvard

.Welleg, both of Africa Division, were accompanied to S8/DOB-covert -:
ceite ‘to discuss: full’ transfer of. the ‘remaining AESENTINEL agent, vt
AEASPIC, to\Africa Divisions = ©. a Se

Sor SR/UOB Wefe Mike Ries ‘C/SR/DOB;. °erry Crookham, -.
: (APSERTIVEL “Project Case ‘Officer) sand. Fred-kirkpatrick,
ou i. Mr. Welles expressed ‘an evid interest-in picidng’-
up-AEASPIC, on contact for Operational assignment in Africa. Division.
. This office agreed to expedite. insofar 48.possible the handing. over

of AEASPIC. and, at the request of Africa ‘Division, to assist in certain.

_ ‘pre-training.. _ . . . 7
SR/DOB has agreed to arrangs for AEASPIC certain clandestine.
training and processing (dexolition, small sms, medical/immunizaticn)
in corsorance with Subject's projected ‘assignment. .

: This action will obviate any Mexican rasettlement procedures for
AEASPIC, ; . . ;

dor bart77

20 Septenter 1950



--- Page 154 ---
urverd

pt

Tay -end Pste:

Bours

ws 2, 3, B 5, 9, WO, 21, °28, 18, 16, 3,
: {iron azelicctle,

Yoen paynicad arse
oa a3eh De:
the tine of ar
entlaren.

gating Ebyeicrea 2%
8 xsy sign Tor

Haen payuice’ = vy required, cc pléncd Forms
89 oa each Dave Sigoszusses ave resuired.
Freriqus
. subsitted
cftics wOL

rocuizensnts for
eead, the

teg.) the ace ismuisatioes
lL arranga for uroperly

7 Fou oulag.
Y poiieal
X

Lee Highway, turn right one block beyond Glebe Road. "Medical Center®
: . sign. Parxing area provided. : Jol: 1339477



--- Page 155 ---
i. Stesep 0

. 20 September 1960
MEMO FOR THE RECORD ee woot

At 130 hrs., 19 September’ 1960, | Mr. Lester Youck and Mr, ‘Edvard
Welles, “both” of Africa | Division, were “accompanied : 0° SR/DOB covert .

Mea. “Hou ‘and Mrs ‘Welles expressed: an ‘avid intereat in n plekding’ |
on contract for. operational assignment in Africa Divisions ©

. Tis" office agread to expedite insofar as possible..the handing over

’ .of. AEASPIC and, at the ‘request of Africa Division, to assist in ‘certain

. Proctraining.: mo

‘S¥/D05. has agreed to arrange for ABASPIC certain clandestine .
training “and processing (demolition, small arms, medical/imnunization)
in consonancs with Subject's projected assignment.

This action will obviate any Mexican resettlenent Procedures for
AEASPIC. _ f .

a
fad fi 7 bpadisk

Jeb- 233477

Ba


--- Page 156 ---
30 August 1960.

-MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ~ :
SUBJECT: Mexican Resettlement Arrangements for: AESENTINEL
Agent ABASPIC., = -

"n° Vo -At'1330 hours, 26 August SR/DOB case officer Fred. =
‘Kirkpatrick met with Clay Calendar and Jim Meyers of TSD/1B :
_ and Frank Coplidge of Office of Security. Contacts. At.this time” = -~
a:name, for AEASPIC was.agreed'on and then.passed onto . « - ”
Mr. Coolidge so'that he in turn could ascertain the job possibilities
for AEASPIC's possible Mexican.Resettlement. The name agréed
on for AEASPIC was Dimitrius I. Difonas, a Greek name to
fit his Greek passport. TSD/IB is ready to draft and arrange all
necessary Greek documentation for AEASPIC as soon as a job
offer through Mr: Coolidge's Office canbe firmed-up, which should .
come about in early September. SR/DOB is to furaish TSD/IB
. | passport type photos with negatives. This has already been.
_ arranged for with Hal McCormick of this office.” _ -

2. SR/DOB case officer, Fred Kirkpatrick with Clay
Calendar of TSD/1B is presently engaged in writing a cover story/
biography to fit the new identity of AEASPIC. AEASPIC is as yet
unaware of any resettlement arrangements. It is hoped AEASPIC
can be utilized by some component of the DD/P, however if not,
then these resettlement will go through as per plan. .

FRED KIRKPATRICK .



--- Page 157 ---
oo)

~~

| 26 August 19%0 0

4a prasentiy’in the Washiagton.area“an indivie~
; guitable for ‘the JH Contingency Force. ©
6né:. tine, Case OF cer of subject ‘and -
adaptable ‘to the’ program, Subject” te
R/DOB-who was“trained for a specifie =~
d 9. His nationality ‘18.

rv "
. eign” " oi has received various ‘training
Be including. a-silitary, while under Agency sponsorship, Sub~ Loo.
“ject is vanvitting and Has good non-B. Ss. attribufility.
: ~ 2 SR would like to see Subject utilised in seme capacity

‘as he represents a Jarge investment in time, training and money.

SR now hag nothing for subject as his intended mission was

serapped prior to dispatch because of the then forthcoming

visit of KRUCHEV to the U. S, Alao, subject's resident. permit
will-expire in October at which time, unless he is continued

on contract status, he will be. re-settled in South Azerica.

3. Attached you will find Bl and Case Officer evaluation
of subject. *

L Moths
Gordon Mothes
wife

Attachment



--- Page 158 ---
24 August 1960

‘MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ~~
. SUBJECT: " Bidgraphic Information/Caae Officer Evaluation of
a David TAITZICHVILT, aliae David DURVARD .

an sic Joformation ~

: ‘Davia TITZICHVEA wae, bora’ 19 ‘July 1918 ‘in Toilet, Georgia;

ived with hi parents until 1921. Subject ac that ‘tims: —

th bio pareota. Subject grew up in France and | :

France “

erefore apeaks sative French (Pak sian). Subject docs nat ‘have
French: cititenehip, however, and must be’ Slasaed as stateless.
. Subject | earned the first part of his baccalureat at Breguet {electro-
engineering), then entered the Foreign Legion at the beginning of
World War Hl. Subject fought in N. Africa untii French capitulation
in 1940, at which time he was discharged to rotuen home to Paris.

In 1943 he wont to Germany as a voluatary worker.- He worked there

primarily | as an industriai electrician. While in Germany ho assisted
French officer P.O.W.'s to escape, aiding them with cleverly
faleified papers, stampc, cachste and even uniforms.

“to note that while Subject attended schooi at Breuguet, he algo |
attended the Techiiicam for Cinematography. It was from these past
stadiés at the Technicum that Subject was able to deveiop techniques
to apply to photo-mechanicai forging of documents, stamps, and
cachets. Subject was betrayed to Germans, arrested, and sentenced

to death for espionage. Subiect was able to drag his case out by .

It is interesting :



--- Page 159 ---
~ ~

implying the existence of a large British run net of which ho was al 7 :
‘‘paft. In1945/he was liberated by the U. S, Army and returned to © ‘
ect lived there in retative quiet until he; + together with a

“Paris. Sd

n ‘8. Interesting to. :

n n thie basis. of their war “rgcord.

ile.in prison, Subject Livented a machine ‘for r making

‘note that"
cardboard ‘boxes. - hia. machine was actually built for one of the ’ te - ; |

prison adminietrations and put into operation at thie prison factory. °

|
Upon discharge from prison in December of 1955, Subject ilved, Te ,
It was while |

worked and was paroied to his brother in Gap, France.

, there that Subject was contacted by this agency and a: "beequently

brought to this country for use as one of two agente ‘for Project

AESENTINEL.
Subject is presently reaiding in hia Washington, D.C. apartment and
t

is readily available for any interviews. ;
Subject is engaged in his ‘safe office {n several technical gimmicke

: 8 - * - - ‘which could be of value to thie Agency. Two of his. ideaa have been

" passed forward to Tsp for developmeat/exploitation, TSD has : : .
expressed interest in another of his ideas, the plans for which have.
just been completed. : ,

Alien Affaire Staff of Immigration/Naturailzation has extended

Subject's backstopped ‘residence status until 20 October 1906.



--- Page 160 ---
1400000 4g

sranoano pose no. 84 oa 3 . * ae
| Office Merorandum + unxitTED STATES GOVERNMENT * >

‘fo: Mr, Shnest Ca Hsyerink | DATE: 20 Yay 1959 -~

pom s+. Special Contracting Cfficer

: “ sunjsct: : Record of nonthly salary paid. subject emplcyee

Balance’ Initah =
Due .- _ 7

“pate |. Gash paid ‘Deposited ‘to
; : Bt so " . . Bscrow account

20 Kay 1959] - * 350.90: «$450.00 -

p{sboo

W4S-0.0¢

20 Ava
20 Avy 1900]

Mow rey.

> 2 Aoayrst

. . so
27 Aw. P| 20.00
160

_

. -.. a Gre

2.3 Si af $4
ax Serbs
Cicf. of
;



--- Page 161 ---


--- Page 162 ---
Be Attached imrato

Reserda 2% ACSI and



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

| Gredis
- oo  Hapatngtes;

. Police oc -
i Y SecuritzZ. a
1 biogrerhical tne



--- Page 164 ---
in

3

feo,
asiington,

1) oe

5]
tare's Xarcemtile Ayoney, ints
a , te Mog Gd

Ca Wé May 1250, ths

aie abe i

: vole
Ager Abert A5 :
Hecital Statass Separated { .

iegidenes 257) F Sureet,
ganca 193

y tee files of
Pieiaty &
-followiay tater ties

ing be
ieginie Es

fperated,

Seb ten
& af tha Jebsject

Ly

Clan



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

EE Wass ing?

4

2 27 Mey ‘1960, tse fileg.of
Cantral Be Benseltor7, vere ogerctud 11
negate: reguits. : t

tat THE Fania ton, Dy c) ne a woes

cel invcrmation on

x wibta Drivers Linches emt
ide et and eirror Consunyy 3282 4”
sent ar thn Sussents

“Gn 22 May 1960, sttenpts, ta! | dereteg ‘bloe a
Subject proved negative at the L

wmeat Building, i
yorke3 ser the coz

gris ooere?,

ede



--- Page 166 ---
a , sR/DOB/61_Z 7%. OT E

7 ° : 5 daly Wo a

MEMORANDUM FOR:, Chiefy Os/aiten Affaire Stal”

ATTENTION: . - Mr. Pennington a

, * sai ving Guartere, Caso of AEASPIC .
a73532 7 |: —_

"SUBJECT: . . €
oo _ - EI/OA No. C

>, 1, . Background: : 7 .
Loo . Subject was brought tothe United States via HBRAINBOW  -
fiight‘on 20 Apr 9 for training preparatory to dispatch.on a black

mission into the USSR as a member of a REDSOX team. CI/UA
Division approved (No. C-73532) on 24 March 1959. This mission
has been postponed as of 17 June iGev.

: 2. In view of the effort and expenso devoted to the recrulte
ment and training of AHASPIC, SR Division has deemed it worthwhiie
to give. Subject certain ilmited additicna: training ‘prior to operational

’ utilization by another component of the DD/P. To faci:itate this end
it is requcated that aubject, towards the end of July, 1965. be 74
permitted to be moved to an SR/DUS safehouso on the outskirts of i
Waahlagten, D. C. Subfect wili remain there unti! final disposition
of his case. Although Subject has conducted bimacif in an exempiary
manner re hia personal habits asd sease of security, final disposition
of Subject can. be better accomplished in a more controlied instaiiation.

3. It is anticipated that fina! reso:vemont of the case of
AEASPIC; f.0. operationai willizatioa -by another component ofthe —
DD/P or resett:cmant, witli be accompiishad by 20 October i9Gu,
the date approved by O5/Atien Affairs staff whereby ACASPIC can © -
Vegaliy remain backotopped in the United States. .

4. it ie further requested that AEASPIC be permitted to
continue to spend eccasiona! week-eed {ree time unoscorted within
the ‘imits of the greater Washiagton. DO. C. area.

0, SL pubject wiiic ntinue to be advised and guided by an
SR/DOB Case Uificer ra Subject's pereona! ‘ife and habits. .



--- Page 167 ---
° “6. Subject. will be actherized co access to transportation
otber than pub:ic and/or occasaiccai rides afforded him n by his
Caso Cificor in an SR/DOB vehic.ec.

7. Sebject'a safe office siil.be terminated and vacated at:
the same time ag his apartment. : :

urther infsema mation please contact. Fred 4 Kirkpatrick,

- B. For any’
SR/DOB on extension 3331.

PERRY E.-CROOKHAM
Acting Chief, S2/D0B

i
|



--- Page 168 ---
on/008/60- 1940
29 June. 1969

_ MEMORANTUM FORD “Office of Conmunicaticns
“aTTeeTiog - : Chief OC/TIT —

“‘supsutt = ¢ W/T Treining. for BIVL0B controct agent aeasPre |

Lote 1.. It ts requested that W/T aptitude assessrent and subsequent
-"a/T training-beinstituted at your earliest convenience for SR/D0B.
contract -agent -AFASPIC.. This: tra:hing 1a. decmed necessary in order -

to-round out Subject's clandestine training for operational utilisation

by interested DD/P componente.

2. Subject to your concurrence, it is anticipated thet, wt .
training will-be given Subject et a sate office located in the dowmm=- .
town D.C. area, and then coritinued: at an -SF/DUB safehouse beginning
1 August 1960. Training ie to be maintoined until Subject faa

qualified operstional W/T communicator.

; 3. Trensportation for the communications instructor to. end from
the training sites will be provided by SR/TOB, :

h. For any further information, plesac contact Fred Kirkpatrick,
$H/DOB, Extension 8331. :

epee eee eee eee .

“PYRRY FE. CROOKHAM
Acting Chief, SR/D0B

PC/ ge
: Distrib.: 0 & } - addressee : : : be.
i . -sR/DOB ; i
: 1 - SR/DOB chrono ok

SeCHET ; Mr hissy


--- Page 169 ---
i
i

at 2 later cite wo
polley vis-a-vis counter:

Sungate. tdiscontinuance of Projoct AESEN

ode. dun
guent U6 con,

RAMTGM FOR THE RFOORD

for 1340"

o 19, SP/XE- Las Anfornad telephonically by a

Jax (acting Chief Siytiv.) that Project AFSSMTISEL

vould not_be-carried out this year(17U0)~ -

"2. The foarib:

3e After due consideration,
one of the tye ASSELTIVEL arente, A

arent, AEAL IC, 1t

thio Aponcy in some sinllar capacitye This office te presently on;
Ce

in finding a job for AL

Ality/practicability of ‘carrying cu} tis-project
wld Of courae-dépenc on the line of Undted States
ng the Scvyiet throate -

is felt

ee

FREG KIRRPATRICK



--- Page 170 ---
; a an fe 7 May 1960"
. 30 Rue Catanis
: ; So, Paris HIV.

peng.e. even a letter from Fatl

the only oné we ‘have récéived. We

t is dn South America eo. Fat

t this was di ow know .

Hurrah}

. How we have waited: -fc
heard here an? there
wrote Atchiko -and-
at. I -.

year's silence. Do you understand? Ore wh
our tl

g the Worst and-with éach ee

who ‘grurtle
olette

x years ‘she.,has ‘not id any vacation and is crushed b; worries,
_ is unerplayed, and “oesn't have a cent. Not only is it not funny, it's also dis=  .. .
~ Misting. ~: We -hoped until the “last.minute.for your presence at Nina's wedding, = st:
which was strictly “ussian... the facade’ atleast, tut also the reverse sidet ~
230 people, an excellent. buffet, champayne, (eruchon?). etc..o. Ceorgian dances and
an atmosphere so woncerful inat the solern Ort lieut. Monestier lost his ‘feet and
danced (dragced on ty Stanko) the Georgian Dance} Ther: are pictures to prove
it which are in the :ands of Nina dnd Bernard. ‘These two are living the perfect
love, with a capital A. fermard is charm every way. The stiers have _
given generously tut we should do the sam:. Victor who had sromised 90, 000 - .
gave 50,000, Aunick mast have loaned her rather 80,000 on iEsti'g pay and Eernard.
loaned 50,000 to your fathercin-law. With Nina gone we have lived on ‘Aunick's | oy
salary with debts more. debts. (vaste?) having stated that didn't have a cent : ,
until. i: sti, angry alter 19 months without leave sent, for nis wife. Aunick
departed for Algeria by. plane asking her father to pay tack the money loaned .
- without leaving us anything to live on, Vic di¢n't-have amy money, tut the day |
” Beter Aunick left, he went on vacation to the Ealearic Islands with Laridge and
a certain Eartaral Nelly, no rossibility of vacation or anyth'ng. we don't
even speak about it, [I had to borrow from everywhere to live until Aunick. .
-‘Feturned, J-months afterwards withont lodginz and not able to rind ( illegitle
“They care to ve here in one room, and they roth working, but Esti has to take
“time off very often for examination, plans, etc... therefore Aunick gives us
20,000 ver ronth. Colette rade a few dresses. Nelly took her reauticians course
. and soon cot her dinloma. She looked for a jot wiicn she could not find. She
was too young (she's 18 years old.) This is just to show you our joy of living.
and the chance in character of. Colette who (illegitle) for nothing and makes
life expensive for + 'On top of everything I dan operation last year.
Since January, Yi has sent two weeks in th ospital an< he's going for five
ronths to the mourtains. Leavin: us to pay the rent, the gos, the electricity,
the water, and if that isn't enough, the taxes. (wnich he forgot), This is our
debt-ridden lite. Wanole days without heat, without ight even without breads
and when will t end?: If Colette only found work, and Nelly too, but nothing —
nothings: I'm lsoking for those religious “nouses where we can ask for “ittance,
but great catastrophes like Frejus and Agacir take up all the possibilities.
This gives you an idea of ry wealmess,: and I'm SC years old. I can no -lonrer work
as I used to.and, as for my frien‘s, except for (illigible) who payed for Nelly's
studies Bribri who is. fi thful tut no longer has rucn money... that's all, The
worst thing is the lack of heat. This gives you a few details on the joyous
life that all cive of us are leading here. As Sor.Nina, she's out of all this,
ro .

Jaye AB3BY77



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

“She has: an easy ifte. ‘and rather fash: onatie fe. - u Y at :
. uni.ck also has a woncéerfu

g ¢: yes “in-law. Maguy and: Loulou; both eare,
ful ones. “With this I have. bothered’ you enough, for ‘this ‘tire but I~.
wanted to pot you-in’ the Swin, again: after a “yeare . .

ood dss" you, have all “tha months without ary news. . Don't’ start. that over
again, oe : 7 he. -:
| The. whole family is go: ng to urite: yous Even lazy Colette but

what wouldn't we do for yous . .

MME



--- Page 172 ---
14-0000

- a aco Vad oa.

od Bo ge pee Ne ees

re Bs Ea

ate fod fe ete

f ote fever _

beds sete |,

Vator oe pore TE Le
ot. Geadacl ares ah Aas | Poses. Ogee BL” Yi

fr! Blind : lat sheer hl OWS he

soos he aes .

oer 2 93977

Pee ee ee


--- Page 173 ---
eek rae oer ” ‘eK

peed cedosl ora

Star Herp hent- frie bee . . alone erent
— Cotten a fat fran 3 arte RAZ
“ned tank

Veet! Boren ald
tes ab icoles a esth olotr at “et Amen ctid dav Alor?
a fe. vee yews aad iaseen ncaetaaaad “pa ‘bol boa flat, A To
alert ton freer 0:
be. Bee

aaa fh beta” bes Pa x 4 fom) | pote a hood
Sg oe wee cote a peer Pept

a Fen. Cone “hae :

: > A pz Pee Piaget a fate
: Prato Steet arene aoe
“be eucpcts oo Ye a ares

yNR



--- Page 174 ---
14-0000,

flaw ay rs j ~ oat Aa fe Br Vapi ;
pen eSfiadat fa. a" Cogeitng y ie aay ie aa Lm,

CH Rx Cons aa pee ta Beto £222: fa poe! oda

Be Pautin. jonien Ln Pe Bete }
One fart that ¥thnea kar i k~ Frode. ades aa =
frome Gcteti _ Cll. sory Aib gp tend poe Pe

ome oon be Joey f iets faa t pt ae aa
fn a La fae Bit po,

: ae RN
feet Jeraatbad ola ants wasnt Ot Bb nh


--- Page 175 ---
-_ 4

- x

tS Fancy

. a” is

. 5 8
abt atti

are a

mee

) ie +

- sata

| er

rm .

ae be itiatn patie teens
Aor, shoes
AL oth ao faa
f.
: ~S
Later
>
oy
ape.
en
“bh
Pare
any
ae :
Jk.
u
Sov,



--- Page 176 ---
fb padi? VIA AIR MAIL -

PAR AVION

67 amr my YY


--- Page 177 ---


--- Page 178 ---
_ . Torta y cn :
: . : oye ote Se ee ree
Loe ew ae POOR peat: g cee tapenade gen : : . .
PWemeyer meneame pe ne . Pe , . 4

: ae tga

= as Fade
7 Bsa

 Taisge dm Val
ay aS SY SE aeey 459 Sy

co ab hs re

Lp VIA “AiR “pall”
PAR AVION



--- Page 179 ---


--- Page 180 ---
14-0000
a

y
4

" . fitout: ch
rer. ate bn Evans ? -® ALR”
ae / .

fot enn Gr!

Fined foviey patna 9 a

eter an} fas fhe Otago

: _— Of Orme'et sole Ad oe bnertesers der



--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

ee AN



--- Page 182 ---
14-0000



--- Page 183 ---
14-0090

30 rue Cabenis. =. --
: ne Paria 14 _

o-That- 1s extraordinary. ; -

: - Itis. no necessary to talk about our life...Taat 1a

‘all... I-‘open“agein-my letter to telling..you your ohcle Keresselids ~ _

is. desd. Atchiko was here and sdid’ he“had written elso and: had a
‘never received an.answor. ee oy. ae

_ Mme Kwinitadze is dead and also Mr Galoblicnvili,one of thia -
- day that will be my turn...will I see you again before.? — _

If that letter dtdnot arrive,I give up.

We are kissing you all of us.

Grandma. . ae

dep RIVE77.-



--- Page 184 ---
; tn ‘south jmerica, As tor Hatheta I resily don't know. if she received your

“letter but I ‘am going to write her'a notes” ‘As for’ the others} I don't know

“thet address. “Be so kind as. to give it to me so that I can carry out your |
orders}}) Time passes with ineredible swiftness and unfortunately life is 80
monotonous$ Apart from Nina's marriage, thich was a. great success and during
which we hed a very good time, there's nothing very interesting, Nina and :
Bernard found.an apartment very near the house at Bd, Auguste Blgnqui almost
; at the corner of the rue do Ja. Santé, the building which is behind the little
, a) station at the end of a long alley=vay. Catch on} As for Mt and Auhtek ~
they are still at home but would like to find a place of their ome —-.-

: “You're exaggerating when you say ‘Hopy the *pisser® which is completely ‘
_wronge You should instead sey Hopy the "biter" for he bites ceneles ‘unfortunately! |

. Yesterday evening the whole fanily was ‘gsthered including Pele and Maguy to.

G >)
eclebrate,t hree: abe alas§ hS summers} The atmosphere was very friendly, and

just this. morning,s letter from “you bright and early. It's an extraordinary

piece of luck that it's etill in one piece as it was pouring out when I shouted
a letter fron you. You can be sure of ‘getting news from the whole family and
I thank you for loving us so sincerelyi My august former husband has just

doi 2HIY77



--- Page 185 ---
ea | _ bu

“caught double pnewonta ogein, he'22 be lstd up at Yeast until: Septesber vhich

: ‘tos: “plunged us. ‘all into (tree trarislation) our ears fa debt -~ ‘a matter of money

: ou should c tainly | be |

“ naturally’ Therefore, I'd. Like to tell you thet your ‘letter makes me very: happy.

ith ‘the nest, beauttful frane. that. existe in this

72 topped this Letter Feoterday. evening when ontite came to visit ne to

. aa ine a hapry. annivereary with a bouquet of flowers. - She stays ‘for dinner

as well as Maguy: and all three of as vent to the. movies to, see an old fila

‘which. was very fonry "You Canit Take it with You? ‘4n vhich James Stevart wes

still young.
Whet else ia there to tell you, you know our life...nothing has changed.

0,1 impatiently await another letter from you telling us what you ore doing .
with many details, It would be really nice if you could be here for the end

_of the years In the meantime I kiss you affectionately.

Coco

Jos 243 7



--- Page 186 ---
“ies wet densced

Sa ibawik
al Aes, bs , fot
aly ; tel 7

yn ava - tes

oo he bere ble, en oe - a
ae Ua | te te 64h an
Jan | ws bona,
: Bee BLUE Mela G
i 7 é ee im
fy al feta ' ‘ ie
net Cm be le les fa Since
aca nT a, A re

= eee”

al eLear k aunt” he ep ut

poe. pe, a) le a : exe cde, tn” -



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

a \ at “e Lar nna de Nua Qn Fe Tres

5 : oe . , we, . fo 4
Ahan aie, Ot nw teres het Fea hk” “é ee + Ea . a \
alauseds . rka de & cet AD ese aoe ets ot

None. aw Bree, ad a Frere “ mee dy aly ee:

en

ee ne

oe DOCU ONS
Bo Laat
oe Ga oe exes , cl chee He fev me eeen awe ‘ .
7a oe 2 Pe Pe Ko
ah dae nes ; en | chev a Moot “4 Cr " leeord ei”
: ; tar Tf. ate mid La at eet eel leur corer —_
7 fk ce fa ey Und Co je
: eVor\ thee. 4 wal cre} bd , Cra bata.
er OM need i ran jap _ ae - vin, on
iho ee US joi Teed PD aie,
ef : {ec throes feck ro ae te “ee ,
7 - te win : o. Es. I Mle Ke Bese Lue,
a |
x if weed oe,
i
—



--- Page 188 ---
epenceleus,

beam! ‘F Cx ah wv

la, ten. - Ca. iu aries

ao af ‘ nN hee eh aa baat
duw (fi, erncote ra eal nee egad
. { na .

ft

. ; ve . Foe ee coef + ae
Tee tome te he La

née treca Aeon de c)

: Pare ie . Loy i y
Tan {Za if et .. eutes oe wl - Lp! . ~f! .
: a . os

Soon awh, 7 eee eG Ae feck Aw Mae lum gay
ot Ls Joke de dike See, Vera coors
Andiata, Lean, Cu Coe - Bulee. UNA

, ° een * eee fe



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

ee ee
Dowie ders ae, aaa oot weal eet Selene:

x Arar san " Acpoay ot Leeks earn he

OTe tis Roe Ba daeen era

th veww flee Tay ree wr ;

da tia te '

ue . wy 5 . ;
Urs whe t ie: ahi. ee pa Avee” Vay”

. fet f = é Toe
eS oN t ae J ak. Meda b Sisces! 7 Tay a anh et
ee das de ee fe BOW tees leat -

VaR ee, LAA WK og Cage .

ONE BE Sa eg bee |

on a _.
Sass dew lunes maya Corot

AV Ce 4 poe. d deta. a : : :
press oR Co BaP

ont. Lope }
4 6 ae ae tAn alt

od acai be Te te trace, eo ;

y- ae
; coun cb Le Mieuabh on



--- Page 190 ---
ay ms my my a ce

sax ens “ere p97 2 oF. ores: =) dy30

oe,

REPUBLIQUE,
FRANCAISE

gv #105
Haven Eduardo

Cables
Cale - pola yl ‘Cate

SAC

PAUCD

VIA AIR MAL 4
PAR AVIONS:

‘SebrOPty,

coy URS
“pe fe)
er “rsa



--- Page 191 ---


--- Page 192 ---
ok via,

: very tad news. ‘His father's condition fa-very bad, ks

_ here is Nina's address: Mme, Monestier, 159 Bd, Aucuste Blanqui, Paris 13.

: expensive

“dest letter a sensati onal - -event occurred, in the family.

‘of. heat and today, after a few days of radiant Sunshine it is raining in torren

re me Paris, 2h Maréh |

= hope | that unlike nyselt you ‘received ny letter. Since the. ra: Ling of ‘the ae

cA fourth ‘daughter. for..

2, AS you | asked re, I gent ther: your address: nd

teh, Sophie, Sern oir) ny

ny y congratulations. :
, Yesterday Lowlou came by for a few minutes in ‘the afternoon to give us: some .
We are afraid ‘it isa tumor

of the lung. Unfortunately, when one says turor, one often mans cancert I hope

to God that I am mistaken, Little (eligible) the cousin of Ramaz had a fine boy

named Christophe; and th=t's the latest news}
The children should write you every day, but if you want to chew , _them out,

Nelly has: been working since last Monday in a very stylish and territly

Uttle shop. The job of sales clerk seers to agree with her, It is a

store for expensive lingerie at the corner of rue Mromsnil and St. Honore,

Iam writing you all. curled up in the corner of the kitchen for we are out”

what crimes mst I have committed in a previous life to lead such. an ugly: -

lifel : . .
Write us quickly and tell us what you are doing. We know nothing, since your’

last letter never arrived! I am waiting impatiently for some news from you, In a

, the meantire, I dss you affectionately,

“Coco


--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

y wees lo ees 2 pet
wey ww : a orn cout Tew One een TD

fH

WI tae

ote

de an, Aan 2 Te : + Leer

ara eet Ben eth dates aot at ae ee ley on
evietueheunl ian os few th

tee, A Cans a ‘; Cane ard. Soplee, leer te.

oe SC th te Co aa ae de tccetede |
flee Scat meee ne

Bes Let A pate eels State”
deve , Zo faved Late . pos bees A Oe :
ute bare Teh teneelle tee pe vm
CL ed a le nee le
dix xoeclers, dupes eo a pee

Titan oa \ TMA ow ct; WER ere riven en

ne deck Put aen iy. deh Cysts eaten, Gehan. :

a ke ed pees bad Corie “last
; \ fe tt WA, Creede ds

A bn Ub om gwen ets. hasty”



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

tina | 3S rae
a t Sa den Na Ana : a ta M vemeE

4 AT fa ne atom

ew ee: elere a he. i whe Ved ex
a fon. ods. Ca en ee Cle Ute _ ne

ia Loe ee a H coc? a SE Howe, :

Ye T achcs parry ced b Cee ans oo re
a } ; Pde.
been de on Cuca Con, bowen tout rhe ©

oe pete ° de ek a dleeus pon
Cute ton LOK The r - ee ve
i dak, tains a. fe en we cst Un ee

dour iver De - acdins eae ) Tan Pte Ou
if oo

Se eee! oe 2
; Boras Sars v ora ef racortk Wome ea:
An vn 4 eee wes le devan | ete Le ew,
a fete end, tts ta wn famcos arr en .
yt Joes wow Pla eile |
Tv ead Naa Sf facta toh ; von

cep we Dg ened ney (Geo ol ohe ae!

ALG perseish rap ve P Red 3} Wo ND
’ f ‘


--- Page 195 ---
wt — “Sugg eiaeman
SONS) TMM

a .
Q | M pee Eduarde Cable
. Coda postal (AAT toga.)
sno pause —
a | VIA AIR MAIL &@
PAR AVION


--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

“an offiecr'a wife is not 80 bad," “One is spoiled} The first month, we were at:

staying and returned only at & o'clock in the afterncons — the weeks passed

Paris, March 25, 1960
Dear "éduirdo,® _ oO
Brerytoty was avery ‘bape to > hear from you agains You Imow ‘that Mit and

Mana have’ ‘already. ‘written: -you as wall aa,. ‘undoubtedly, Nina and. Nelly. Therefore,
oo ta the very last | to ‘wite: you “wat. that doesn't mean ‘that I don't. think of Yous

Itta: almost, a ‘year since you left, Tine pesses rather ‘quickiy: ‘in. spite: we
everything. Bverybody” “mast: have already told you the most important news, So

_ uch the. wree if-I ‘tel nonsense

Last “August 15 I- vent ‘to. meet Tata in n Algeria,” We returned together early -
in October, A whole year paased without our” Seeing each other, but th Letters :
every day, and we found each other as if we had parted the day before, or almost.

It was funny to see Titl exercising his functions as a second lieutenant with a
section under his orders. What a Pleasure to find myself with him there, Now ™
when Bebert and company speak of military service I can Join them. The life of

” the’ sea ‘shores Since I love the heat this was. just the thing for mel THtd lett |
' every morning at 5 o'clock to join his sedion 25 ka from the place where I was

quickly except for the beach — and still we could not, go. very far because of the
guerrillas} In short, apart from ‘going out to lunch, T stayed y80 to speak ty ‘
shuttered up in my room waiting. for the return of Wy lord and masters I tried :
to go swimming. alone ,vut the city and the beach were full of soldiers and I gave
up quickly. You cannot imegine yp think what it's like to eat clone as a woman

ina restaurant dining room full of soldiers. I did not dare to raise ry eyes

from my plate and to feel looked et vhile eating makes you becoma clumsy, Hardly

oo _ A LGSY7T



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

‘a2e

any + omen excopt sone niddioneged | cnes who give me side wey. élances,, There

| was plenty of youth but then too: they looked at ze like 4 China dolls ‘that's

‘enough for my “military” service’, 1 . ns
Tits went back to. the school of fine nate, ‘he's ‘coming along fine, Unless

there Lente, that much We have too saa for the bath rooms if Tit wants-to

* walls around in his ‘shorts he can't do At: (4tts not. that che is accustomed to doing
this sort of thing) and the people ean hear everything that's going on in the :
room. And then again it's very understandable ‘that we want to have a place of

_ our own which ve will furnish as we like and where we will ive as we like, To

’ spend a full day in bed or to eat at one o'clock in the morning, etc,-oand. then, .
too, there 1s also a little friction Dotween Mana and me, Itd like to shako her

. we qf you ean do it by letter don't hesitate. She's getting bitter ‘how can sho
“do. otherwise. She does nothing or next to nothing and she's letting herself Ree
She could be so cute if she did what's necessary to get thin, and despite her
4S summers she's stili woll-bniit, What she needs is a man to take care of her,
to take her. out and pull her out of her comatose or alsost comatose states Tr

; shake her up often but as for ‘ne I am abrupt and sonetines rT say what should not —
be sald, I'd like to find her a partetine Job, something pleasant which would -
cause her to get out, take a walk, see people, ete. Evidently. the house is less
| gay than previously and nevertheless, ve are still here, What will it be like
when only Nelly will remain who is hardly ever here because she goes out with
Ranas, And then there's another thing; people criticise Mama because they seo
her with nothing to do o- I allow myself to criticise, but I refuse to hear



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

Fe, : others do “ate . . .
: Lo o rs.
cer a. wens DRE “s camst next door to us, exactly 1n the buttding
-across the. street. froa the metro: Glactaroe They found an apar tot bit, hold on - “

te -yourselt 16005200" “francs, deposit. It's: erasys It!s their
’ Yoaned then the: “money which they are paying ‘pack ‘at the Fate of 104000: fracas

oa Per ‘months. ther have! received pany fits & and ‘ore © conletaly “furhistied, we see

‘perhaps at. the ent ‘shot ‘like tng a sales clerk betters She's been working -

since Mondays fina: is stil in the sane, Jods | ‘She's witing inpatiently. for

Bernard to nake enough money so she won't have to work,

Mimi is still the same fortunatelye As for me, I've changed professions.
I am a model. Bont laughs Evidently I az - beginning in this career, but I hope it ©
wall work oute ‘One can earn a lot of money and it’s a tiring business but pleasant

and fexining and a lot more interesting than the “Job as secretary where you rest: we
your behind on a chair all day. "I degen at the ‘beginning of November and. Ir worked ©
, until the nonth of March, I've been unemployed since then, but I'a doing a lot
of looking around to find somethings The. mannequin “cabines® are formed only ~
; toward the end of Maye x most make some photo tryouts “next weeks Photography

“brings tn much inores Bé¢ ‘only 12 works out I'd Like ‘At very, mcke ae
“What mre can I wite your we see Louis and nathela quite “oftens nitnete . :
has changed jobs and is now earning 150,900 francs a ponthe Wot bad3 Hurry up
and write us and tell us about the things you're seeings Do you like Brasil?
ed Eduado I am going to leave you, write quickly if you can. I give
“youu a big kes and hope to do it for good one of these deyse. ”
Amick
. Lap AB3477



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

eh ee ira c _
. <o
: / ~
2 Gon
7 air os
meer a Blas eeore
: Ven Vii _« os a ”? ,
Com ft eke ; ~
a” Sam ced eiie Tare celery tee « Peer. tere :
man ee ha on, tt 7 ne
i
Nee Nan oa tay . .
i :
‘,
fle, yo _ aos ae dye wilt
i
mo. ? fine Fad
. eb, cle ga ke.
a 7 . a
laclej
asenns) wet qa . / ante
a v a : :
hen. WIM oer, - lene Pu Ee
rcs in Oa lh.
: 7 Oe, er oe a CAP Ce ching:
| Ore 2 Dh eT ek Ga ret .
- Fa, eA pods
; ioe a ‘ 3 oe ~ Babs.
i :
Is + te, wR, oe eo ; ole, oes -
i ; S
te bee sucha. Pou. Se:
HI 1393 77


--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

vel sapoatte. on, at

. cakes OO Row, . ition an fron ol

. } ‘tha 4 t ac ee oe bras Fe qa
: ms jodem. f gue Uap 7 fe a a

RO Char ae ottenclan Taisen

dle “Ff eel pate.

oset peal 2S -) eae — ;
neha 4 wat Stas te ole ie ite. - eeagee:

haw Pa bey .. Mente Peee aE Caot ool
, Blah ab oe fon tat Sone

oe

5 . a

ro a” “eS

fom ol “yten. eat bre

chow Rok

whe

ae

> ta . Ute | oak

el,
Jean. : errs moe bec che oe 4: teas - ‘
o as Tar F. ., Tou, : te, ma ton - e.

‘Sa 4 etl en a 26 [2 ele: é i

‘ :
f of ye ol. a ley: der Anny Cee seomd,. wile o
é.

«fre ten al pot . oy dope “4

f- Le, fad } een ha erae®
pouart or a a

men, fe a oh Mal fie es Jo

* \
wry es tO anne >

’ | 5
_ o ‘ oe)
oe me we Nor nee Pe as oat . ann re AY r

Paciinenr eo


--- Page 201 ---
Fee fee t rol , Poway anh ene
aaa con ch epee fe la

. Ae :
‘

hk ale re gue : oe . pn
pe Cn map “e

: clea : prata cheate P. oe I an, tele
S omni, eat eles lame“ fines
ef roeny Corban: ape ge ne wycodann F .
ck . Travers if / nen. f bec. ol. bw . .
: pe . My tes ; ta! ct : mete fret
Fee Bee ole fatto Aang peck ale

a

ae : . wok
bron SITE . nat: Far le ?

Tet veFooume eo tt do alin Bah fy.
Cte marche . 4 bron. qa om CL pei _
eee That a ms etiahrt. aa eon fig
nt rr or fore! 50 travel
Eft ft hey de hot ck, Em Po

Bo Coan, ae eee Oo

/ Pa . pe — a. ola, ; Now, wehechnn,


--- Page 202 ---
ne “fatima, Nowe

PS nae, ee ;
Caband fy — ; a ae oe phe = _
a) ‘oben el Oy a

he - fee tot 1

t rot fae lee h

ee : th, 2 ; :

on pte Pee

he tor ca
? — Qa [em fa
Tt a ten Cele!

Db. On tate. aly a hee in . TO

ar. [ts yal aah _ .

OTe g, con i an
tute, o/ Lo Qo ot on ola,

7 eee a

; To Pee ogi
one / im tm ol aft os Aetg oo
Aote, Oa feo a f,,, nolan auf : ef
aw Aen, ; aa



--- Page 203 ---
fo hen pe pe pe

act ee , pepe er ae tac atl:

re ae

he on ak "pine “ear oy
a he a Qak ° 6 eeee Joe af lh |
ta mt wk om A.

Comat Orn feo qa = ah P. ou

fom eh Te eel be Bin ee

Havel « a a

. fm . Pras coon qs tae hn

en oo eT

Met Lor | to) a : 4

/ poe a ve ol, gf. ale...
. / ‘ .

eet, fu . qe sia. ce torr ge

cn ine ee ae

“Bigpaees prt fon neve stant Be Ee Fo Ten errata re


--- Page 204 ---
i
Ie Bebat Mma Smh pegee s

cok ol hhoeotzw txachmnwetT cp owen a
, . we
4 nee ot. tn {rr elon nutio Cfa “ |

Te ont Troe tm ah ae tiene T

pane ove Tr tee to’ brew

+

oy teat one bh pone cle cepa . oe

fo er ee ee ee a

e

poe Perper ga

.
o

) oo

a

Tan gen . ol. fo.ero frame fm mom

Tt, mh we Crees Coe /- ele
| {oF [ered ; vos of athe fiectene eo



--- Page 205 ---
ele 3B mma te ae [Ptah bomen co pe
Mee. en, Sotent . el. he te ate
© flew. Pw oe cle ey ama a ; Pa
Free te the een

ol beth of athe ola T _ Aha! lo ih |

, mm ae . | cu. Pavecth ol. ce ; dowel. .
Nowa Pa by mek clan - ta Simla
qe Ber on of gr “3 } or re
Me t faajeas te inne heed
Je on F a. mo ): an aa ke metre -
can vole” tute ee element : “awe fo cain

mee } ‘eae , oo ala 7 meuchens , om"
pane Gthe tone coup : (e/a pen ef
han ae or Os ppl al

-

|  apuadd. af pe he 2 EF i ba fee

ok


--- Page 206 ---
whi. at te aia al ee a
Te -_ len a - al. bat ole. mon - .

ok Wont Bp Panam le ace
ch lat me ele Mors po

Ce tlaag pe Os A
cle ta ch elem onche pm fine
| i Poe a le, abe, ol prc Gate eg
Aa Poe format . S aaoe fo “Mow ars ,
cole fot le eee phat Fe
Fim ae | fechas le phete tafe ak

ela marche. 7

Eba , om on dat bea cor jf |
te fe tacentts em | Ne vey ens
oun f , bow. . ef Na th. fa .
. Naf hat ° Range af bate ef
0 the mae Fenant  IS0.eve > fe ine.
ed 4 ‘ob fe mal! ,



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000



--- Page 208 ---
B

Q

R. | _

Q | sen a
a

RB

BRASIL

ade

PAR AVE OR

= ut AIR MAIL



--- Page 209 ---


--- Page 210 ---
remia go deeya 138)

My 914°" Eduardo”

Evecybody was very aappy for réceving news from you. I know
that Gran er nave . already written ani also Nina
and Nelly # Therefore I am the last one,but that don't mean

: I am not, tatnklag. te yous. :

.It.is Nearly one yoar -you are gone but nevertneless the time past
very faat.. ryone rust have already told you the princtpai,
aves 10 wec aft icwsenaer. | : ee oo

Past 15 august,i. Join TITI{nusband) in Alzeria,and went
back together. in. ‘the early. days from October.One fatwoole' year

_ without Seen. each otder'dut one letter every single day and
“We met again like we néver ere. séparat or almost<Tnat funny

to-see TITI-{n nis /iLeutenant fonctions,comanding a ‘section.

again.Now when those ‘gentlemen are Speak-

ag. mil fe yl: join them. - an _ .

Poca 0 OffLedr's wife. Lt e@ is not 80 desagreable after all.We are

i)” pampered. Tae first monta wé were: on the beach.I like warm water

“i:and had more as I was asking.for. TITI wag living at 5am every

section 25 lm (16.miles) from where I was

.-n-The resources were fast drained off.Tue.

: cause the fellaghast

ve Ins ic for.luncn that was sll,iwas almost in-

‘ehsed: in my room wafting the. return of my Lord and Masber. I have
trysall right; to going “swim alone,but the town, the beach was.
flooded wita solders.I had given up very fast.

opt I @on't tnink you can imazined a woman alone in a restaurant
le room eating surrounded with solders.Tne felling fron every eyes
4 _ watching you make the People clumsy.There were very few women ~
: woich were looking to me not very friendly. Enough speaking from

my "military duty". . . .

TITI has been return at Ecole des Beaux-Arts. If no one will
Proposing hin a very good job he will he ts determin to follow
the school.Tnat’ will be long. Some time ne is working for some
architects.We are looking for an apartement,we will like to be '
in our own.Few people2-do not undersand why are wishing to live -
this place.Mother and me have sometime few words and we are not :
always agree.I wish to shake her-a little,and if you could do
that,witn a letter do not be afraid.She will be so nice if ‘she’.
only would try to be thiner.I. think ane need a wan-who can take’

. & care of her, remove ‘her from that comdtose spirit. I ‘did ‘snake
her-several time but I am to-abrupt and I am saying what I must
not .I would like to find a job for her,whico will oblige her
to go out side and see Peoples. . “ aoe 7

Tne house is less merry today than before,but what will be
woen Nelly will take off.She already goes almost every days with
Remaz. And something else too,peoples are criticizing Mother tate
because she 1s not doing anytaing.I may criticize but I forbid. to
tne others to criticize my mother.” oe, mo, :

. Tae Monestiers are living not far from here,exactly in tne
“building wno face the subway Glaciere.They nave found an apartemer
but with 1 million six aundred toeusand francs for the key.Crazy
is not? Tne grand fataer loan the money and they repay nim with

10 660 frs a montn.They have reriza receive many present for

. the mariage and they have furniture and everything they need.

NAXKEBXY We see them very often.

Nelly follow an esthetiq's school. but she hes not found
job yet in that line,so she work as salesmaid since monday.Nina
is still working in the same company. She is waiting that Bernard
earn more money to quit tne job.

Meme is always in the same snape,fortunatly. I an mannequin
now. Don't lauga at me.I nope this job will go very good.Fatisuing
jod but agreable and fexinin.Certainly much more intersting Axx
CSARXMERYRIMiEA than secretaryseHave your behind one woole day is
not very funny. I must raxe some pnoto test next Week.It 19 pang
possible to earn more Goney with tnat and I lixe it very much.

: Waat can I say more.We have seen Nathela and Louis.Nathela
now earn 150 000 fra a month.Tnat is not so bad.

. Rush us a letter ani tell us what are you doing? How like
you Brasil.

Wy old"Edouardo"I will live you now and write us if. you can

ais
hia

Joining:
iy

I kiss you very very strongly end hope I Will be able to kiss
you for good some of this days. :
ANNICK .
Wh 2 2 y77


--- Page 211 ---
Very dear "Eduardo"

We wre starting to asking us if you were still on this planet

or on the moon. .

‘Since your little word sended right after your departur we

were witnout news. had never: receivé myar your first letter. and

, Was B ilttle mad after you because Loulou told me that Athico had

news £Pom you ahd you were in-Soutn-America.1 ignore completly

if Nathela nas’ receive your-letter but Iwillwright to ner. I

ignore also-where live the others people and I will be glade if

“you can give ther adress-Already 10 month since you are gone.The

time .past.with an Lncredible, speed.Besids Nina's martge,wnich
was weve well,nothing interesting. .—.

5 Nina‘and 'B ‘rd“nave found an apartement very close from
our house ,Boulévard Auguste Blanqui,corner rue. de la Sante, the
bullding..which ls standing behind the gas-station.You see ?

. TIll and Annick are still wita us but wish to find some place.

tO. BO : Po oo ren ;

moe _ Yestérday-evening the whole family was-together plus Loulou

- and-Magy ‘to: celebret my 45 springs: and just this morning a lettes

.. from “you. It lucky -your ‘letter was still in one ‘p&ce when I

-,sereamed 'S letter from yout. =:° © : : . oo

° - “You can ‘be ‘sure ‘to receive news from the whole family and
we thank you. for gour:love for us. : ot, . so

_ | My “@ugust. husband: had catcned again a double-pneumonta and
. that will keep him until september,therefore that ‘plonge us in ~
dificulties to the neck....and you may imagine wita woich happynesa
‘I have read. your letter. You are certainly the only one to be like
that in our world. God bless you and- za must take account for the
remission of your offences...Alleluia | fo 7

I have stop this letter yesterday evening.Cdile and Magy
were here,we nad diner together and went to tne movie.James Stewaré
was starring. - .

, Waat say next,you Know our life,nothing is ehange-I am ->
waiting impatiently anotoer letter of you to tell'us waat sre you
doing. That will be so nice if you could be here for the end of .
the year .Until them I kiss you lovingly. . :

- . coco 7S

Paris 24 Marco

Dear Old

ae 2

I hope you have receive my letter «Since then a sensationa
event happend .Born march 14 th,a 4th daugter for Atchico,name
Sopnie-As you ask.me ,I have send to him your edress ...and amy.

congratulations. — moment .-..:
Yesterday Loulou stop by us few minakas to tell us that
him father is going very bad and toat can be lung cancer.We are
hoping 1t‘fis not.
Little Manana,Ramaz cousin,give birth to a beautifull
baby ,boy,is name is Cnristopne.Tnose are: the latest news.
Tnois is Nina'S adress ; ,
. Madame Konestier
159 Bd.Auguste Blanqui. Paris 13

Nelly ia working as salesmaid since Monday in a linin-clotn shop
very expensive one corner rue Miromesnil and St.Honore. 7
: I am meat writing in the-kitchen because the heating is

off and today after few suny days it is cold end rainy. :
" Waat erime have I done to live such life.
Speed us a letter and tell us what are you doing. Your first
letter had never arrived. . :
I am wating impatiently news from you and until then
uo , I kiss you lovingly.
ecco .



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000: |

Taree letters from tae Grand-motner

General meaning; I am geting old,the life is difficult, what
are you doing, Nina! 8 mariage was @ success. .
Moralgty: Send- money soon as possible.

Meme Grand oma.

Abs 95477


