
--- Page 1 ---
}4-dgaa0

104-10214-10034 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

fren

i
Pas
Tee Escussination . oe ee 1
Overt movledge af ment iavat yerent 2
Recollections 9 a er re
The orzanizati 5
Why @ coup f ee ©
Internation iL
eee ee ee ee B
16 :
rane Wo '
WwW i
re wee eee tee ee 19 :
State 29 i
Farland replies that he could 6. eee ee eee ee ee ee eee AL Hl
Farleod says the dissidents need guns 22
The U.S. is prepared te assist in overthrowitg Trujillo ...... 2%
Ruooticm asks wist ted the dissidents 25 ,
Acting DCL approves air 2 we eee ee :
Special Group epproves sail arms for 2 f
Ba. COS asks that one weepon ce sent in e Ch ee ee ee ee :
: 7 LTearborn learns of plan to assassinave ceptirg auto 33 i
( Loree Winpy Berry asks for sutmachine guns for Plotwers - + + + ee ee 3s
~ Dearborn asks for whree 35-caliber piswis for disside 3
The plot to Kill Trujillo et his nistress' apartment... +--+ ss 36 ,
COS protest restriction on pouching veepons 36 i
igs guidance cable on policy and objectives ce ew ee ee we i j
Station asks permission to pass three carbines to dissidents 338 3
gs approves passing carbines rn?) i
The carbines are passed to the dissidents ug i
mest for pouch waiver ref pouching summachine guNS . . . + +e s ar t
Sucmachine guns pouched he
7 Pleas 7rom dissidents that subaachine guns be passed to them... - he “t
* -Hos informs the station not repeat not to pass subeachine gums - 43
_ Post-Pay of Pigs standdsm cable - 6 ee ele ee ee ee ee M4 :
Station acknowledges receipt of sutmachine gms pes ; ;
Draft cable (not sent) approving release ce? surmachine guns . ~~... 47 ‘ {
State Bepartesas a ves passing suomacnine guns - 53,

rea carbines 2 ee ee ee ee ee eee BG
vas rot passing subcac s to dissidents 52
tica plans are fi
assassinatica 5L : 4

The whereabo
Special Croup cont
Tae dissidents
U.S. policy ¢
Tearcem and
Critic to. 1
Vice President J
Discovery of U.S. involvement with

Recepitula’ ? arms massed 9 or

wegen oe

tion group 55
red for passing wee eee 5D

wear ect rmettccred somes



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

at

Mites’

Rafael was essacs{natad at
about ten p.m. on the night of 30 May 1961. It was Trujilio's
custom to visit one of his mistresses at kis ranch at Can Cristobal

about cuce a week. Cn most of his travels he rode in a Carysler

with bullet-proof glass and vith security guards riding in accomtanying

cars. > Cepartel from this practice on his periodic trips to San
Cristobal and substituted a nigaly stereotyped pattern of action:
after his nightly walx, he dismissed his companions; changed into a
Khaki uniforn; aad set out for San Cristocel in an unescorted 1957
Chevrolet, always driven by the sare chauffeur.

On the nignt of the slaying, the Chevrolet was intercepted on
a four-lane highvay on the outskirts of Ciudad Trujillo by eight
armed assassins in three cars. Trujillo vas killed by gunfire, and
his body was removed from the scene by the assassins. Trujillo's
chauffeur was seriously wounded, was left behind by the assassins,

and survived. All of the assassins escaped from the scere. (ne was

never caught and vas eventually granted amnesty. Two vere killed

‘while resisting arrest. Tee others ...were arrested, confessed, .

and were later executed teZore caning to trial. About eight or nine

others, wao sere in on or mew oF the plot but did not perticizate

in the actual assessiration, were killed

e in custcdy, walle

vesisting arrest, or by suicide to avoid arrest and torture.

(Mote: We use the term “plotters” to refer to all of those involved
in this attenpt to overthroy Trujillo. “issassins” refers to the
small group that actually did the killing.)



--- Page 3 ---
}4-00000

Toere were reports in Ciuésd Trujillo az che time trut the

U.S. Consulate had teen {9 scme way involved with the plotter.

{
I
d
!
H
i

Eventually, after the surviving plotters were granted amesty,

many of the details came cut. Norman Call, a reporter with the

San Juan Star, wrote an article thar appeared in Tne New PR

nblic

issue of 13 April 1963. Excerpts follow:

The assassination of the Dominican Republic's Rafael L.
: Trujillo was carried out with assistance fron the US Central
; . Intelligence Agency. Arms or the May 30, 1961 Slaying of the
. 69-year-old dictator on a ‘onely stretch of highwayaear his
: capival were smuggled by tne CIA into the country at toe
‘ request of the assassins.

The CIA began shipping arzs to the Dominican Rezublic in .
late 1980, following a series of tals between US Consul Henry
Dearborn, Chief Political Officer John Parfield of the US
Consulate, and Luis Aniama Tio. Also involved in the plot was .
Antonio Imbert, who had been Governor of Porto Plata province.

As Trujillo's political and financial problems deepened,
talks continued between Dearbon, Parfield and leaders of the
anti-frujillo conspiracy. Toward the end of 1960, contact vas
established between Amiama and a CIA agent who... was
named Plato Cox.

°
The key link between the assassins and the CIA in the arms

Shipments was‘a long-tine American civilian resident of Ciudad i

Trujillo, Lorenzo Berry, otherwise know as "dinpy," who operated '

@ supermarket in a fashionable neighborhood where Trujillo also

lived. "Wimpy" was put under brief arrest after the xilling but

was later allowed to leave the country. -
The weapons vere imported in small parts, to be assembled

dater by the plotters, anong the roucine grocery shitments ?or

the supermarket arriving regularly in the capital's port. The

eae en rmnerernenat
Gena.


--- Page 4 ---
gua parts eacered the Repudlic in sraclally-carked food cans,
watch were later tured over to the conspirators.

Plans 2or the intended assassinztioa vere worked out during
the same-yeriod-in.weich the abortive assault.on Cuba was. being
prepared. Eswever, when the CIlA-crganized April 17,.1961, —
invasion at tze Bay of Pigs failed and world attention was”
focused on Washington's complicity in that operation, a post-
ponement of the attempt on Trujillo's life was ordered because
_of tne embarrassment enothner such failure might cause the
,United States. .Bus the order to hole up cane too late. The
needed weapdéas vere already in the han’s of the conspirators; ‘nO
who refused eppeals Wy Déarborn and Barrield to delay the
_ assassination. They insisted on moving at the first opportunity.
Tals came on May 30;-whea Trujillo and his chauffeur drove out
into the coumtry in an-unescorted.1957 Chevrolet for a
rendezvous at a San Cristotal estate, la Fundacion, with
Trujillo's 2)-year-o1d mistress, Mons Sanchez.

It can be reported on excellext authority that close
associates of the slein dictator knew of the US role within
a few days following the killing. . ; .

Dearborn, Barfieid-and Berry had meanwhile been rushed ,
out of the Doninican Republic by-US officials. . ...- .
Since tue ouster of the Trujillos, serry ("wimpy") has
returned to operate his handsomely appointed supermarket,
where he greets customers with calz and courtesy, as if
. Trujillo. had-never- lived...

| We interviewed Richard Bissell (then DD/P), J. C. King (then |

Chief, YH Division), and J. D. Esterline (then Chief of Operations,

Wi Division). King recalls the Agency's role as veing limited to

. monitoring interzal plotting against the Trujillo regime "but,not

pu hing or instigating.” Esterline, like King, recalls that the

gency was not directly involved in coup plotting. He described the,- ‘_

AOR) ENS CTI eee eA At TEN Nr Leh TEED RN EEE IT EEE



--- Page 5 ---
Turnishizg of weaposs esa aynbol--sszething tha
tangible evidence of U.S. Support. Bissell
role. 85. 5. being..somevhet. pore. posi tive t than ‘Anat des

Sete ’

‘and E Esterline. He viewed the Agency's rele as

to aa indigenous group whose intended actions were in the U.S.
interest. Ee deserioed the affair es "a faiziy normal operation
involving neetings, discussions, ang formal approvals." We do not
have firm information as to whether or not any of the weapons
supplied by CIA vere actually used in the assassination of Trujillo.
Both Esterline and King believe they vere not. Bissell, nowever,
has ¢ a@ vague impressicn that oae or them was.

“the Agency ‘officers nost immediately involved with the Plotters
are now widely: scattered. -Lear Reed,-who'was chief: of ‘station:
until October 1960,. tis now retired. Robert Owen, who was chief
of station at the tine of the assassination, is. in Parts....Charles ...

Cookson, the station's operations officer, is in Brazil. Isabel —

: Cintron, the station's adninistrative essistant who vas used as a’ ;

2 communications Link ana in the passing of the arns, resigned in 1964
and is believed to be living in Puerto Rico. Red Holsaa, the head-
quarters branch chief, is in Guatemala City. We elected not to call

back any of these people for interviews. While they might be able



--- Page 6 ---
1400000

Agency activities aimed at replacing the Trujitlo regine were
“assigned the cryptonja EMDZ=ED. One‘ cegnent of =

D was known as
EMSLEW, the cryptonya tor

the operation to rezove- Trujillo by

- violeat action. We have reviewed the voluminous ZMDE=D files. Most

of? this account is drawn from then. Many of the more ‘significant ; Led :

documents vere not put lato the EMDEED files ‘but were kept ina

private file ‘by J. C. King. He zade that file availnble to us.

We also have studied ‘another ‘particularly useful document. The -

Dominican Military Intelligence Service
dnvestigation of the

of the/Trujillo assassination waS a navy lieutenant named ‘Ortiz: -

The Dominican Republic assigned hiz to its e

(saa) officer put in charge

embassy in Ottawa in
‘November 1961 when the Trujillo family's attempt to regain Power

fatled. The New York field office, of the Fal held extensive

interviews with hiss from 6 April through 10 May 1962, The result

7 .O was a massively-detailed, 182-page report on the plot and on the

assassination as reconstructed by the SIM. fron its interrogations

of. the: persons it apprebenced.



--- Page 7 ---
1400000. 7

From the record the course of

>

U.S. policy | with respect to the overthrow of Trujillo. We also can
; ascertain from’ the files the rature and the extent of U.S. support '
ef che plotters, including the passing to trem of weapons out cf the
U.S. Consulate.in Ciudad Trujille. What ve cannot discover from the
files, despite quite massive documentation, is how the coup group

wes organized. The best single account ve find, and it is not wholly

accurate, is in ea book by Robert Crassveller.* The main flaw in
the story is its failure to identify the individuals with whon the
vs. ‘Goverment vas ‘actually working. Excerpts follow:
the plot was organized on the basis of two groups of
conspirators linked together by a liaison that later proved

too fragile to bear the stresses laid upon it. Each group
had its purpose and its separate personnel.

The function of the Action Group wis to assassinate
Trujillo and immediately present proof of its succes, i in
the form of Trujillo's corpse, to the second group, the
Political Group. The latter vould then launch a coup, ;
taking over the machinery of the government and the Armed -

. Forces.

; The Action Group coasistea of eight men. “It appears to
-“have been organized originally ty General Antonio Inbert
Barreras and Salvador Estrelle. . .-. . . They were joined
" by Lieut. Amado Garcie Guerrero, a member of the military
: corps attached to Trujillo in the National Palace; Antonio
@e la Maza, the brother of Octavio de la Maza, who had been
xdled by the goverment because of his involvement in the

is Rotert D. Crassweller, Trujillo: Te Lite end Rises ofa
- Caribbean Dictator (New Yora: MacMilzan Co., 1900



--- Page 8 ---
Calintez case; Euastar Tejeda; Roberto Pastoriza; and Pedro
Livio Celens. The elz neater, Manuel Caceres Tuati, «as in
Mocza os. the sight of the 30th and saw none o? the action.

‘The Political Group bad d.less distinct membership. :t
incluged Luis Amiaza Tis, Modesto Digz, Ceceral Juan Texas
Diaz, and several others. At the very top it had the support
of Geseral Roman Fernandes, Secretary of State for the Arzed
Forces, and his brother Bibin. ....: -

Tne over-all authority appears to: have centered petactraly a : i mh
in General Diaz, ‘probably the only ome wero had sufficleat j :
prestige to comuand authority. .... «

“). ‘fhe Action Group would remain in caily readiness. When
information in the Palace indicated that Trujillo was going
to crive ty Estancia Fundacion . . . Garcia Guerrero in the
Palace would inform the others by personal message. - + + + «

Tae expected messege frou Garcia Guerrero in the Palace
came to the patient plotters at seven o'clocs on the evening
of May 30. They were not fully prerared and coordinated at
this moment, but the emotional and impetuous de la Maza &
threatened. to act by himself if the others lagged... Ia.any.
event, the plan vent into execution. . .. . . Each of then
had his revolver or pistol, and de la Maza also had his om
saved-off shotgun and to M-1 semiautcratic rifles. .....

_. ,The conspiracy began to come apart within an hour. Never
very professionally contrived, the plot vas hastened prematurely
to its culzination by the impatience of de la Maza, and it was
now afflicted with tad luck and ineptitude. Immediately after
_ the assassination, the men of the Action Group were unable to

reach General Roman. .... « See We pany

The Political Group of the conspirecy never took up its
planned role. ‘The Action Group scattered, leaving 2 treil as . iol
wide a3 a boulevard. Trujillo's body vas. left in the trunk of . foo oae 4
ba ' Ge Ja Maza's car, parsed in the garege of Ceneral Tcras Diaz, .. + po ot
3 oe : where the police found it in a few hours. The conspirators: —

& CO ' -were.all hunted dow very quickly, except for Aniana and
. et - Imbert, who maraged to conceal themselves for moaths until - -
the canger had passed. -



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000,

SCR PTAA MD

Toe FoI report of its interviews of Ortiz, the SI4 investigator,
.. gives. an excellent account of way the plot fell wpart after the -

assassination took place. One of the assassins, Pedro Livio Cedeno,

was: cerlously wounded (probably. by | fire from his own caupanions).

.All of the assassins assembled at General Diaz' house after tae

killing. One of them called a friend, Dr. Robert Reid Cabral, to
treat Livio. Dr. Reid found him so badly injured that surgery would
be required. Reid ard two of the assassins took Livio to c hospital.

.

While in deliri.m he mumbled the names "de la Maza” end "Juan .

Tomas.” The police immediately picked up two brothers of Antonio
de la Maza. Neither was personally involved in the plot, but both
knew the details and the names of most of the assassins. General
Diaz, Antonio de la Maza, and Lieut. Garcia Guerrero vere killed .
resisting arrest. Aniama and Imbert went into hiding and survived.
The rest vere caught and interrogated followiagtorture. All
confessed.

” The “iad led to identi fication of Fersons who vere in

” or on the. fringes of the Political Group: General Roman and his
brother, Aniana Tio, General Garcia’ Urbaez, General Guarionex
Estrella, Tomas Baez Diaz, Modesto Diaz, and Miguel Angel Baez Diaz.

Lorenzo Berry (wimpy) was identified as a ccmmmications Link between

: the » plotters and the U.S. Consulate. However, the SIM did not |


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

. discover the

tha

wo. Consulate was

have known th

were fairly widely imowm to personas not actually members so? it, there

% : appears to have been extelians compartmentation betveen the Political

4 < . +
4 and the Action Groups--perzaps too much compartzentation. Thy
é assassination itsel.? «a> well planned. General Diaz vas in over-

4

all charge of the operation, but de la Maza was the one who ata all

i
'
‘
1
i
t
i
i

of the work. Ee took three cars to a local garage and hed the

engines rebuilt so that the cars could reach sveeds of 120 mph.
He had possession of the weepoas from the U.S. Consulate, vlus

Several of his own. Ee and the other Farticipants took the cers

TN es range he

. to the site selected for the xilting and conducted dry rums each

e
&
;
sf
fi

night. Everything wes ready and the assassins vere lying in wait
for Trujillo on the night of 23 May. At the last minute be decided

not to go.to San Cristobal tecause he wasn't feeling too vell. The

3 . assassins continued their cry runs each evening. After the assassizna-
g tion was carried out, essentially as it had been Planned, the coup

4

¢

that was to folloy failed--in Fart because of dad duck, in pert because

of poor Plarnizg, and in part because of too much compartmentation.

’
“oO
t
seveneneperparmamenepentnnres + shricgateninyenn pecan es

Serra

4

ot


--- Page 11 ---
remanence eet m I

Ceneral Rozaa, «ho was. to tate over the goverment after Trujillo's

Hanson aren a

_ death, WaS not.told that the assassination was to be attempted on '"*

May: 30th. frer the belaying, Genera Diaz tried ‘to to telepzore
General Roman but could not reach hin. Diaz then took the car

with Trujillo's body still in its tmnk and drove to Ranan's house.

a
i
!
&
i
¥
i
a
q

He saw'so many soldiers in ‘he vicinity that he gave up and returned

: hone, leaving the car in the driveway with the body still is ¢

_ trunk, where it was later fomd by the police.

What had happered was this: Forrer general ard former head
of the SIM, Arturo Espaillat, happened to chance upon the scene
while the assassination was taking place. He was out for a drive :
with bis wife dnd was passed by a car that he recognized as Trujillo's.
He stopped at a drive-in restaurant and almost immedintely heard.
shooting ahead; vhich ‘he suspected involved Trujillo. Ee drove to
the scene, saw what was happening, turned around, end sped back
into town. He stopped at a eilitary installation and BAVe tie

"Alam ond then drove to the hose of General Roan to alert hia.
“\H@ and Roman then retuned to the

scene of the assassination,
arriving simultaneously with the police. te police found Trujiliots
chauffeur, who was wounded but still alive. Roman end Espailiat
then went to the hospital to

to try to question the chauffeur. Thus,

General Diaz could not reach General Roman to inform Ronan teat

2 ernment ae cee eT


--- Page 12 ---
1400000 |

Trujillo ‘had been killed and that it was tice for Roman to make nis

move to take ove the government. Roman: krew cnly tat there had been

fo poe hat,

og shooting involving Trujillo and ti that Trujillo was sissing. a ata

“not now vkether General Diaz" group was involved-in it or ‘not. He

was reluctant to vO move until ke was sure (Matt Trujillo was dead. By
the tice Roman concluded that T Trujillo must be Gead, it was too late

for hia to act; Hector Trujillo and Joazay Abbes had already taken
charge. ° Roman did -make’a couple of feeble ¢ t: tes at engineering a
take over, but it is apparent that he had no real advance plan nor
any appreciable chances of succeeding.

The assassination itsele and the plotting Preceding it took

place ‘against a’ background: of international activity in. opposition
to the Trujillo regime, with both the CAS and the U.S. taking clear-
cut stands. ‘These are some of the highlights: ,

, &- A briefing paper prepared in WH Division for the Joint |

Chiefs of Staff in August 1960 states that a revolt was planned
_ for Deceuber 1559 in the Domintcan Republic but vas delayed :

pending receipt of arns from Verezuela. The plot was discovered .
and vas rolled up in January. Venezuela brought charges in the \
QAS that the Douinican Republic vas "in flagrant violatioa of

., human right, freedom, and denocrecy” following the mass arrests

in the Dominican Republic in Jamary 1960. A committee of the


--- Page 13 ---
1400000"

“OAS azetgned to investigate thé charges reported.on 8 June 1930

that the Dominican goverment was” gullsy as: charged. ~

b. A near-miss assassination attiexnpt against President

j. Betancourt on 24 June 1960. kilied Gyo: in nis entourage ecd

se ahora eorccnecee

injured hin and several othars. The Venezuelan governzent

ennounced after capture of most of the assassins that the

cPWe Benet AMAR:

. Dominican govermment was responsible for the attempt on Betan-

court's life and took its case to the OAS. On 20 Augilst, the

OAS voted sanctions against the Dominican Republic. Under

.. Becretary of State Dillon, testifying before the House Agriculture

Comitzee*on 24 August in support of a request by President

Eisenhower for a cut in the Dominican Republic's sugar quota,

is reported as having said that it was hoped tliat economic

senctioas would result in the domfall of Trujillo's dictator-

ship and its replacement by a moderate and free regime. The

Unitea States severed diplomtic relations with the Dominican ”

Republt ic on 26 August 1960, although consular relations vere

continued,


--- Page 14 ---
mt

‘ paers/es

MSIE, we think Lt ould be “useful to teenuity the veople

involved, especially since officers of the Department of State

plsyed a very prominent role.
ey

Wasnirngton - Devartzent cf State .

Roy R. Ribottom - Assistant Secretery of State for
: Inter-Anerican Affairs . tb

Frac Devine — Special Assistant to Rubottea

* Joon C. Hill : Special Assistant to Rubotton

J.C. King Chief, WH Division ae cots
<2... Ned Holzan a Chief, Branch III, WH Divisioa

_ Ciudad Trujillo - Departrent of State

cat wt : _ pertinent to note thas King and Ester-
: an E : _ - line attribute U.S. ard CIA invoivement

;
i
| Po Josezh S. Farland "Ambassador until 28 June 1960. Itis



--- Page 15 ---
ya-nonog

PONE er eee 6

PARTON, 1 Fake neler se

PBST ase eaatnrcs:

John D. Barfiela Second Secretary until 26 August 1960.

"Ciudad Trujitlo - cra So a
‘Robert Oven  Chiter of Station from 20 January until
- Charles Cookson . | _ "'< Operations Officer
Key Dozinican Plotters

~ Dr. Jordi Brossa - *. Code names: SWORD and EL CHICO :
_ Tuan Vieint. |. cing, + Code Names: Mr. X, ABC, and YACuATR

with tke plotters in the Doriatcan ©

Republic to Antassedor Farland. Trey

Gescrite him as e forzer FBI eaployse ok

Who considered hinself quite a clandestine.

‘operator. Esterline, who later ferved

uader him in Panama, called his “a wild

man who bugzed the Agency to support a

7 move to assassinate Trujillo.” He had
direct dealings witha number of the key

. «Plotters... ne ;

Henry Dearborn Counsellor of Enhassy until 25 August
1960 and Consul Cereral thereafter. He
used the code name DELTA in corre spondence
with the plotters.

. _ and a consular officer thercarter. Soe!
Be pee te CIA cryptonym: EMDAZE-1 .

lear Reed Chief of Station until October 1960

& Jime 1961. Code name used with the
Plotters: GALGO : .

Isabel Cintron “Adninistrative Assistant. -

SOCRATES

Luis Eaquero oo Code nare:


--- Page 16 ---
‘An Azerican in the Doslnican Republic
with wacn the station had had an earlier
“unheppy experience.’ The consulate
| preferred to have -novaing to.do with hin,-
. but the Dominican plotters brought hin in*
as a@ cutout to the. consulate. Ee took boone
delivery from Lorenzo Berry of three = ' | —
carbines passed to Perry frou the U.S.
Consulate. for use by the plotters. Ee -
Loe held thes for a few days and then gave
Le -. them back-whea Berry insisted they be

. . returned. Berry then passed them to
Cre of the assassins.

Dr. Severo Cabral. = Code ames: HECTOR and PLUTARCO
- Jose Francisco Tapia . ° , :

Aullo Brea ; / : 7 : 4

Andres Freitas Code name: ANDY :
“Luis Amiama Mg , - 4

Jose Rene Roman

| Juan Tomas Diaz | Code name: CRISTOBAL’

Donald Reid Cabral Code name: CIBAO

. Lorenzo D. Berry

“iimpy" - Berry is a U.S. citizen vho
oded Wimpy's Supermarket in Ciudad .
Trujillo. He was the sain ccomunica- .
tions link between the plotters and

the U.S. Consulate. The weapons...
furnished the plotters were actually _
passed to Berry. ‘ : .

Wimpy's wife ~ a Dominican citizen of

. Syrian extraction. She Sppears to have
been even more active.in the plot than

ber husband. It was she who had the

contacts with the Dominicans Lavolved.

2 PINS cena ce ms can ime ean cent eat:

ema teats


--- Page 17 ---
|4-00000

oN

wr?

$8 between the
sCan plotters and

irs.
fros
Consul General's Secretary or the

CIA Station's adzinissrative assistant.

Two documents provide a useful point of éepdcure, from an

historical point of view. One is a semi-oficial letter from

Ambassador Farland in the Dominican Republic to Assistant

Secretary of State Rubotton. The cther document is an internal
CIA staff paper gevealing the relatively passive role that had

been played by CIA prior to 1960.

16 Novemter 1959
eens ond

_ Ambassador Farland wrote an "Official-Informal" menorandum
to Rubotton reporting that "the uxderground is more active today
than ever in the history of the Trujillo regime." He described the

principal opposition Group as being about 2,000 strong.

He said:

: + « + within this group there is growing militant anti-
American feeling based on the premise that the United States
should actively aid the Dominican revolutionary (sic) for the
overthrow of the Trujillo regime. Discussions I have heard on
this subject show an appalling lack of uncerstanding of the
position of the United States ana its adovied doctrine of non-
intervention. .... . This group is in possession of
clandestine broadcasting equipment which will 80 into operation
when the strike is made. CAS has been inforsed and Joins with
me in suggesting that you pass this information to J. C. King.”

Ala ey re seeremems on

i

~ hieente=


--- Page 18 ---
}4-00000

Te

tly
Be
7

a

a plan

i
in the event of Trujillo's removal fron power. The objectives Cs
|

ve : Stated in the paper were to easure orderly

seeuene
eet nein na enna
on

eds

asition in the event : ;
cated or was deposed and to prevent a takeover by

Castro-type forces. The following excerpt reveals the level of
CIA activity in the Dominican Republic prior to that time:

"The CUS Ciudad Trujillo conducts no covert orerations;

i

{

| i
however, his official contacts with Gereralissimo Trujillo ana |

oo wits the Chie? of the Dominican Securt Services has enabled
cs. hia oa occasicn to assess the attitudes and reactions of the
‘Co . Trujillo goverament to internal opporttos activities and to
criticisns- of and activities Girected azainst the Dominican
Bovernzent by exiles and other Anerican governzents unfriendly
to the [eminican regine."”

+ ' 10 March 1960
DO rca 1900

j This is the date of the first draft that appears in Agency files
: of a plan to Yersuade Trujillo to retire.

The originator of the draft
‘Is not show, but it was to be forwarded to President Eisenhower

from General Edwin Clark, a friend of the President from their years :

of military service. ‘The plan was for Clark to approach Trujillo,

a with whom he hed been on good terms in the Past, and attempt to

a persuade Trujillo to retire. It was

oo, = -
OO 17

to be pointed out that there was

CRS RR erento Bie RR Sy eh

.
Maen nn a ees onsen opener

rs

vn

a.
feo

- wtios



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

no cae who could succes

hin, and that to

to preserve his inage a5 El Be

allow asylim to be errange€ for him. Eis fs

wealth already outside the Deminican Republic, and the fortune

i
4
4
:

cen ones = capoeira

inside would be placed in trust, to te eavini

known personages for the Cenefit of the

This proposition received high-level atteation in Washington,
including that of President fisenhower, Secretary of State Eerter,

and Allen Dulles. In epproving Clark's appreach to Trujillo,

the President specified that Clark showld travel as a representative

¢ — of the State Departzent, rather than as a personal emissary of the
t

wxo” ” President. General Clark traveled to the Dominican Republic and

_ met with Trujillo on 27 March. By the time of the meeting it
appears thet it had been decided that the Plen vould te presented
as merely that of private citizen Clark, and that was what

was core.

The station thought it likely that Trujillo recognized the official

U.S. Goverment hand in the proposal,
_ meeting. : a

O? course, nothing came o? the

a 22 March 1960

Ambassador Farlard, in a TOP SECRET memorandum to Rubottan,
rr .

forwarded a plan of a Dominican group plotting Trujillo's overthrow ;

bem vate +o
. epee ee neha ET Dee Ea ae ee MR Me een Ra a poe EY
REIRSON RE pega te aerated

“



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

{ : i '
4 7
mere "Operation Lancet.” It was vasicaliy a if le
i.
al acticn reinforced by the threat :
L
. .
operation was to begin ith the b
who . i i
arrival of a "special U.S. confidential envoy"/would tell Trujfllo rot
decisively; ne will ,
give hin 12 or i8 hours to do it." It woula@ te nade clear that
if Trujillo refused, a border inciéent would be contrived, Wwaica i
would be followed by "collective intervention." Assuming :
H
Trujillo's acceptance of the ultimatua, the plan then outlined steps :
for transition vo an operating representative government. The ary
. ( aN would be reduced in size. A caretaker governzent would prepare for ‘
tame, free elections. Ambassador Farland forwarded the plan with these L
: ‘
comments of his ow to Rubotten: _
a ". . . this segment of the dissidents is psychologically
+ conditioned to a point where it will take any step excent the |
ultimate, and for the execution of the latter they extect |
United States assistance... 1... Hl
"Dick, I think the time has ccze Por certain agencies of .
- our Government, without attribution, to establish and inplement
fo. ° a definite ccstructive Program to influence the course of events .
he . in the Dominican Republic. My conversations with the Secretary .

and Allen Dulles empaasized the problems and the possibilities
of this type of approach. .. 2...”
- f

30 March & 7 April 1960

a , The Special Group considered actions that might be taken fn the

atone

*

liad
a

ane ee ns
Ex:



--- Page 21 ---
/4-00000

Pores

»
event of a flare-up in the Dotinican Republic. Cn 20 March, fearing

it

that Cuba nignt te involved, there was tal

of evacuating U

civiliens froo Guantanazo. There was also discussion of the

seme maaan

possivility o? sealing off the land entrance to the Dominican Republic

April, there was further talk of sealing of? the country if Trujillo
‘Pity

fell, and an appraisal ws wade of the chances of his leaving
? PP

willingly:

“ere Dem ecesntngw ATE EEE 0 7k SERENE EEE DAES PRIA PICONET

wl. it is evident that Trujillo will not consider . ‘
reking any arrangements fer orderly succession to himself, but :
ca that be will either nang cn tu the bitter end or flee the
country on short notice, a la Eatista.”

A . 9 April 1980

State sent a cable to Farland through CIA channels, from which

the following is an extract:

. "Could you, if so instructed, make appropriate arrangements

e 4 within rert few weexs with eppropriste civil and military

q dissident elesents to take over the CODER? You would be authorized
_ to indicate to-them that as soon as they had seized power they
should immediately request United States recogaition, and ask for
United States military assistance under Article Taree of the Rio

in the event of actual or threatened Castro-sponsored

2 threatened insurrecticn incited by pro-Castro
elesents within or outside Dominican Republic...

yO "Weat, if any, aid would be essential to dissident elements
prior to takeover. ...-”

pam yee er ORE SRE TST EEA OREO HOE TOT STS Tee

fae ite ow

i
?
é

4
ra

tenet
tt



--- Page 22 ---
Al April

for re io make

ts
are know: to
overnmental pos
GelLerai, wae is expectin

is +53 8 exchange or Passwords
Secret discussions. . . eee

Cent, a
for purpese

"Regurciess of , + - 7sethi
indicaticas reflact Dominican
poorly armed, loosely o ‘ing liaison with

oe niltiary Gissidents, ¥ ifficults to effect taxe-
(. ~ over of GODR without existence one or rc n
veloments (1

acsittedly

regan

a following de

(1) Clandestine arzs shiments, with

Sabotage rateriel.-

(2) An invesfion to serve asa sizmal to the Populace.
(3) Inplesentation of the dissidents "Operation Lancet.”
(4) Advance psycholegical conditioning by radio.

(5) "Incapacitation or assassination of Trujillo."

(6) A caretur Step-oy-step plan for the reriod preceding
the coup and for the period following it,

Farland stated a need for "minima Sut key coozerasi

S U.S. could nae wo

are prepared to assist

i}
i
|
i
I
H
i

2

2 treet canner i+



--- Page 23 ---
wmarent anc sabotage raterial . . 2 could
7

cooperation. 2...

ioe cette

aon ceases meen wt

enc oili

Deninisan Republic. The Perer refers to the nsed

a
ny
Q
re)
<
a
i
2
ct
o
B

essets, principally to costruct infiltrsiicn of Communists or
Fidelistas. Among things recommended were: placerent of a junior
officer in the enbassy; @scdiguzent of a full-tire officer to the

headquarters desk for the covert ec tica progrem; authorization to use

Jose Figueres in third country operations; development of <

contingency PM -plan in the event frujillo fell ana hostile forces

attempted to seize power, end establishment of a "U.S. Committee

for Democracy in the Dosinican Republic.”

A merorandua written of a debriefing of Ambassador Farland reads,
in part, as follows:

"The dissidents need gms and ammunition fren the United
States. In particular they need a ssail mumber of high-povered :
rifles with telescopic lenses. ‘he Ambassador said that he saw
no problem in the purchase and Gelivery clandestinely of the
@rms to the dissidents. But he said, of course, this raises
the question of whether the U.S. Goverment wants to engage in n
this activity. :

"col. King said that this of course is a policy decision. He
said that CIA could Geliver the arns if this is the group we want . j
to support.

-22-

seneny yer nce mmr



--- Page 24 ---
:
i"

fi
sow
z
|
|

tise na

BG REE a

(Cument: Farland was in Washingtoa for consultations.
Althouga ke is listed as having served as Anbassador unth: 23
June 1950, it appears that he Gia not actually return to duty
in Ciuded Trujilio. Tits successor, Vinton Chapin, wae nominated

13 June, but he never took the post.)
3 June 1960

Farland met with Nelson H. Sith, the Dominican desk officer
in WH Division. They compared lists of dissidents to see if the
names CIA had were those with whom Farland nad been Gealirg. Farland
said, "Those are the boys all right.” Saith's memorandum of the

meeting inclutes this eccrment:

"Farland then told me that the underground opposition are
‘planning to assassinate Trujillo. Ee said that it is placced to
use a powerful bomb which could be planted along the rouve of
Trujillo's nigntly walk and could be detonated by a rezote-
control firing device. He intinated that this plan is pretty
well along and could be executed at any time.”

Undated Working Paver (filed between Papers dated 25 May end 13 June)

The author is not identified nor is there aay indication that
the proposal was approved. Tis objective was stated thus: "fo

precipitate the downfall of the Trujillo regime by 1 August or as

Soon as possible thereafter.” It proposed that the U.S. beccze a

prime motive force against the Trujillo regime. "In the event Trujillo

4
t

ep ee

ee apes oe ante

E


--- Page 25 ---
egy
aoe
et . 1
wikad

0h Read,

erre

refused to ablicate, consideration should be

given to other covert or
over actions designed to effect his removal from the scene.” A

Gzadline of 1 July was proposed for eccmpleting arrangements.

17 Sune 1950

Henry Dearborn, who was in charge in the Ambassador's absence, :
queried State through CLA channels, asxing for con@irmation on
certain points for a meeting he was having wlth a dissident leader,
Dr. Jordi Brosse. He stated his understanding of the U.S. position
as follows:

ri a. Tae U.S. is not prepared to take overt action ageinst
a rs the Trujillo government while it is in full control.

b. The U.S. is prepared to assist the opposition clandestizely
to develop effective forces to accomplish Trujillo's overtarcy.

c. Assistance must continue to be channeled covertly :
until such tine as the dissidents establish a provisionsi
goverment which controls a substential section of the
Deainican Republic.

20 Jue 1960

Dearborn, again through CIA channels, asked Rubottom an@ Farland

if he could make the same statements concerning U.S. policy ina

meeting with Juan Vicini, another dissident leader. Farland replied

in the affircative.

. me
te .



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

r
26 dune 1959 :
: wf.
Dearborn cabled the -results of his first meeting with Juan af Le
Vo
Vicini. He said that Vicini felt that the time to concentrate ou, BA
tcr planiing purposes, was the period extending through the
"incapacitatiod’ of Trujillo; too much planning for what would . :
follow risked exposure. Dearborn suid that he egreed. . i
Also on 28 June (although the first written record we find is ‘
& summary memorsndum prepared on 18 October), Rubottom told J.c. :
!
, King that the Governzent of the United States was orepared to t
- . i
¢ es participate in the overthrow of the Trujillo regime to the following t
7 i
' extent: "to provide a scall number of sniper rifles or other devices ‘
for the removal.of key Trujillo people from the scene. ....." i
a Rubotton added that the U.S. Government was not prepared, at this
time, to send arms, equipment, or paramilitary experts to assist the {
undergound to accomplish a revolt.
s ; 29 Jume 1960 .
° i
: Dearborn cabled the results of his meeting with Dr. Brossa. ie i
i said that Brossa had recommended a temporary standdown on "action
a toward incapacitatioa of Trujillo" while determining Venezuela's ‘
a reactica to the Trujillo assassination plot against Betancourt. #2 :
= 25 - r
i
. i
hi ~ , I
Pian oe nee woe cia es aes wee ee te eee t
:
. i
‘ 13
Be “ie



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

2 OS

a os cata
oN

airdrop site.

hae

1 July 1950

A remoranduy addressed to the Acting DCT recommended epproval

for the delivering of weapons to the Dominican dissidents.

i
H
H
!
i

"It is proposed to procure and deliver to underground
opposition forces in the Dominican Repuslic 12 sterile U.S.
rifles, Mod2] 1903 (Springfield), with telescopic sights, together
wits five hundred rounds of emiunition for same. .
Tt ig plunced to deliver these weapons by air through DPD
facilities  rovided arrangements can te worked out with the

. opposition for their reception. If they cannot be delivered by
Cow air, plans are currently being studied in the CA staff for
delivery sy sea.

"Approval for delivery of these erms bas been given by
: Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom, who requests that
Fn the aras be placed in the hands of the eppesition at the
. earliest possible moment.

i The memorandum was sigred by Rudy Gomez for Chief, WH Division; was

concurred in by Richard Helms as Acting DD/P; and was approved by

C. P. Cabell on 2 July 1960 as Acting DCT. : : :

i Dearborn was informed by cable of plars to airdrcep twelve !
- 30.03 Springfields, with exmunition, and vith sights "fixed and
fy
a sighted.” The cable asked for the coordinates of a suitable drop :
BO .
& f
- site and for a four-man reception teen with flashlights. The cable :
hoo , ,
& . - 26 - H ,
ue RU .
ak
g
4

- A
5
£ ?

co tsbeatia ee ES

TEPC Sa A ln Tn ag SOR EE

a7
2
_ hes ~


--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

shane

#

Wes

BN Sa.
bh

uh

oer

Soar mae

8 July 1960

Headquarters cabled Dearcorn, in rart:

"

- - + imperative
Dr. Jordi Brossa/ what
esployed simultaneously wi
and what is needed in wey of material supsort for implementation
of plan of action. Of particular importance is info re extent
of military participation in preparations. In spite of {Vicins/
aprareaot lacx of knowledge of opposition organization, most
logical that he is actively collaborating with a group that
must have some plan qd capabil
Stable interin gov: nt after removal c? Trujillo. .....
In your cpinion are fisctaif ans/Brossa/ renders of sane group
or if not could the two groups te merged? .. 2..."

n Vieini/ and/or
bi 28 are to be

°

8 September 1960

The Special Group discussed a letter drafted by the Department
of State for delivery to Trujillo (copy in CIA files dated 6 September)
proposing that he step dow. The DCI (Mr. Dulles) doubted the wisdom

of putting such a proposal in writing. He preferred a personal

: appreach. The Group concluded that a rersonal approach would be

best and discussed Willian Pawley as @ candidete for the gob.

18 October 1940

Chief, WH Divisioa, prerared a memorandum summarizing approvals

{


--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

The text states that the sxmary was “provided in response to your

verval request on 13 October 196)..." Ynis is the cemorendim

to which reference is made earlier under the entry for 28 June 1960.

29 December 19460

Tre minutes of the Special Group meeting of this date read,

in part:

. i gave the broad wo-pronged plan
for proceeding with certain lin c activities «irected
against the Trujillo regime. He emphasized that although
~e support would be given to the Figueres gvoup there is no
( - : intention of establishirg a paramilitary force au such... .
’ He also exphasized that the propased actions would not of then-
selves bring about the desired result in the near future,
decking some decisive stroke against Trujillo himself.

".... . It was noted thet Mr. Pavley feels thet

overt intervention in the Dominican Fepubdlic should be
mounted sinultareously with the Cuban operations. . 2...
it was egreed that the plan is worth beginning at this tine
no uatter what the eventual decision on overt intervention
may te."

“ : (Comment: We find nothing in the files identifiable with
: such a "plan." We found no other reference to any specific

plan of about this date.)

12 January 1961

- comma eer :



--- Page 30 ---
14-00000

SEY te

OAD Rete same oe

a

Fr we

AE re ene ea a ERS

ise we

plies of
2 made avetila rv dis

Repudlic. Mr. Parrott said that we beli
securely by CIA, and that the plan woul
portatica into the group

y
themselves. The Croup approved the vroje
ID abe POY

19 January 1951

f
|
{
i

. Cacle from headquarters:
-s

"For Dearborn: FYI and use as you consider adviseable,
authority bes been given Hes for Celivery to internal fron:
of limited supply orall arms and other material oa condition
that introduction of saterial into LomRep te effected by Dons.
«+ + + . Above coordinated with State.”

Memorandum for the record of a discussion of Project EMDE2D by

members e7 the CA Staff and of WH Division:

i

mn a nn ene ee
weet ieee oe eee were ee

"It was confirned (from Mr. Parrott by phone) that the
Special Group now has approved that a ‘limited supply’ of
small arms end related equipment may be provided covertly to.
the Dominican resistance elements with whom we have been
dealing. Taois was additional to the Speciel Group's approval
on 29 Decenmder 1950 of. our Qverational Proposal."

(Ccezent: As noted in the entry for 2g December, we “now

one of the specifics of this Cpera tional Proposal.)

Sree TE et eee tere oe Hace ”

peepee neers serene

a

eure



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

_—
. ?
i
31 January 1921 :
: “Official-Informal” letter fron Tearbora to Devine in State
: Department:
"With regaré to the aelivery of exotic equipsent, ny
friends were o? course deligated that euch a decision had been ,
made. hope that it will not be necessary to play com too :
long the question of actual delivery since they are e2ger |
_and expectant and too great tardiness on our part would only !
lead them to question our sincerity.” ;
H
H
6 February 1952
f Cable fron headquarters:
eo

: . "1. Realize details not now available but Eqs would
¢ bn! appreciate fGissigents'7, reaction to offer of armed assistance
” to include. ‘(dissidents J current plan...

: "2. Also request [Robert Oven's] initial assessment _
{Missidents'7 capability carry out plan of action oace lisitea
armed assistance provided.”

10 February 1951

The station cabled its reply:

"No solid reaction except joy as of 9 Feb.

a . -"Initial assesment is [Brossa and Vicint7 could not
“t carry out plan. But with access fr. Severo Cabral/ he now
appreaching point when will better be able eveluate group’
oA potential for actica. We some weeks away frou being able
ise : make solid preliminary assesszent. :

"Suggest KUBARK coasider sending in each pouch one sxall

OME ae See ae eet eet coin ea one Fee



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

aay
trot

At Me Laie

1a

seks

+ + . a5xed
@utherity on the

Ay

(

Ned Holmen, the headquarters branch chief, met with Juag

Vicinf end Donala Reid Cabral in New York City. Excerpts from his

menorandun record of the meeting follow:

necessity for
eo. delivery of ams, elthough he dia Say that it is cesireable

a and should be a part of the Planning. Ee said that mexzbers of

7 . the opposition could, if they wanted to, obtain small Cuanitities
a. : of ams frog Arny contacts... byt that eny arms so obtained

. would Lave to te used very quickly before their loss is

. ' Giscovere@. For this Teason, he said it would te Cesireable to
. have aras delivered by us that could be stored for use at any
mement desired.

t
: "ee. . Vicing played down scnewhat the
|
q

"Vicini said that the object of cbtaining this Kind of help
gayway is the eliniration o- Trujilic and insteag oF using arms
or grenades ke began to speak of more exotis materiels and rethods

. soe 2 @ PexerDul bx that vould be Planted along the route of :
Trujille's evening walk and co:la be €etonaied

roo a cearoy



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

More Saree tote

Sethe tae ses

me ot

ieee

vie

PEON TI

ronic device... (or)... the pos
ezator's food or oF putting po

ty of poisoning
ules in botiles

tain medicines that the diztator is Imowa to take

"A less exotic and tore practical plan that they put forward
WaS One that they said hed alreacy been planned at one tite
before. They said that ween the dictator leaves his offfee for
his home there are three autcmosiles ia his procession vith the -
dictator himself in the first automopile esd the bedyguaris in
the following two. The idea t 58 been discussed intermaliy
is for several trucks to block eae progress or these cars ata
given intersection at which tine yourg men wo telong to the
acticn groups woulda leap out of the trucks with fire 4aras and
.@renades to finish of? the dictator."

8 varch 1951
2 ferch igel

Headquarters pouched to the station a copy of Holnan's mesorendim
of his meeting, sith Vicini and Reid. On 4 March, the chier of station
cabled his assesment of the plan to intercept Trujillo's entourage
and kill hin vith guns and grenades: ,

“"Vicini idea . . . almost certain fail if applied. that
type attack is precisely what bodyguards appear test qualified
cope with. Their defense pattern and displacement vehicles
Plus police practice detour traffic blocks away fron entourage
wake Vicini idea fatally childish in Owen's view."

(Comment: The assassination vas actually carried out
through a variation of this Scheme. The assassins detected and
took advantage of a Stereotyped pattern in Trujillo's movezents

in which he rode at night, unescorted, on little traveled highways.)

Nerntemeneee eneestememiane e+

i
i
i
i

meonenene


--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

g
‘ oss
ei
iv .
Toe station cabdled :
". . . if oppor ity support. 33 group not to be lost, :
. believe . . . imperativ with amso ready for i
e . inzediate entry DomRep . . - if necessary at air drop sites...” |
: . 5 March 1961 |
As 8 follow-up to that cable, the station cabled a communication }
from Dr. Severo Cabral: "We bave in our hands chance to speedup |
‘ events. Everything is being planned perfectly. Results may be j
: assured as nuch és human fallibility persits...... 7 |
4
3 | :
woh
~ Headquarters cabled the fiel3, in part: : :
7
H "Existing authorizatica precludes introduction ams into | .
d Don Rep by U.S. personnel. 2r prepare contingency plans H
E for possidle alternate delix method, request station ;
s determine additional drop and confirm those sentioned H
i «+. +» Request type and quantity arms desired. ....." i
i ;
g0 . . . :
* Cable from the station:

4
5

Cabral and
at point
ly depends
ssa has told

"Brossa told Deartorn 7 ch thet
group plan try kill Trujilio ty /intersepting his
near fatitopy's Susermarket/. Date mot set and obvisu
on Trujille travel...
us but interesting that Cr
exists but possidly not of

7 March that Dr. Se

29S SCAT MTR OTRO aon, WRT tn atca oY
in

g
4
0
: i)
~
. °
st
| pete sae etree neers sneer aener een ee a a

.BESES Rene ne ae eines te SN i i «nnn entaren e



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

He quarters cabled the station:

"Has deeply interested plan. . . and request urgently:
additicnal details in order make plans tinely assistance.
Uncertainty of plans, timing and chances of success precludes
Has seezing commitcent for such spsicific assistance as that
requested. 2... 4%

13 March 1951

Ecadguarters cabled the station:

: . : "Following elicited frou EMOTE-8 (Andres Freitas):
: Preites speaks for Aniesn Tic group which includes rilicary
pembers . . . in six brigade Eqs end which reve capadility,
- at appropriate tite, of taking over mlJ ttary garriscas with
ams already at hand, and appointing nilttary/civilian Junta
in controh provisional govt. 1... . bet ot following station
action with respect Aniama Tio e@roup: A. Identity military
, o Benbership; B. Assess capabilities as clained; C. Indicate
if assets can be ccordinated with overall e2fart. Eqs viaces
C special exphasis on identifying military mencership Aziaca Tio
group. This important fur vetticg as well as enable assess .
reelistically chances success7ul takeover.”

eo, 15 March 1961

. _ Cable froz the station:
cane

A "Lorenzo (#impy) Berry asked /a consuiste employes/ for

g . small supply fregmentation grenedes ‘for use in next week or so.!
a . By note, the chie? of station checked ba ita Wimpy and

. learned dissident group must do EMSiEW /Kil1 Trujilio/ this
os month or drop it as number of fringe persoz3 with loose mouths

he : are apparently aware renewal plan... .. wimpy asked for five
& : 45 mm (sic) rapid fire weapons or sitiler, 1,500 rounds amo for

ep ene ee sale MA

ce ee ne oe rena tte ted HRT SER Cait cece
vg han tee eon

Te nena

Soe Pa
ee

=
i

ceatth pane ne

H
t
i



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

ry

Headquarters cabled its reply:

Ss exploring possioiliti
advise ASAP. Meanwaile, request y
Berry making request on own initiative or
Dr. Severo Cabrul? .... 2"

‘ . tro,

For issue to several [ot the dissicent group/ Consul

aaa “General Dearborn requests three 28 caliber Smith and wWessca
Special pistols or similar and three szall boxes car ses.
If sending exmmo complicates problez, advise end we will tr,
get from Marines.

~ t
ref . "Chief of Station reiterates suggestion. /to send in each { ' A

pouch one stall size high fire power veapoa/ as Deartora :

increasingly concerned lest mozentim which group has now for i ‘
fassassination] decline result lack tangible or too slow action

. : on arms by the U.S. Goverrment. Also security these people 3
: : increasingly of direct interest US Govern which each day

_ wore involved in /the operation/. Loss of one of xey people .
: thru capture could lead revelation details ODYCKE/EMLEED ‘
. activity. Thus preferable we give them some chance defend
thenselves against SI4."

i
{
t
|
i

18 March 1951

Chief of Station Robert Oven met for the first tine with Dr. ;

Severo Cabral. Ze cabled the results:

tilt AE

we ea oy

LMA es ee atu bees ee FTE ee ree

‘
‘
ry
a
}
é
1
n
ewe tte 8

vm

Roreeuste



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

€
2

"Eis group 2
identity Teujillo's a
week or cnoe in two weeks.
lightly guarded. Group ap
can alert thes to visit.
whLL 59 to ¢. e Q a
or thes in silence, enter apartment and try éo essassination/,
possibly including mistress, in silence.

sinat stoa/ plan new
Stress in capiial
2k: 08s her a
ntly has

"Go do they need Live M-3 or ceomparable mechine guas and
1509 rounds ammo for personal defense in event firefiget. will
use Guiet weapons for basic job... .. . Severo Cabral's final
positicn «as U.S. Gove ent get items here soonest via pouch.
or similar means. Evident he actually worried that delivery; by
other means would caoprosise entire project. Obvicus he can
count oa only one group both receive arms ard do essassination/.

"Dr. Severo Cabral expects and Willing 3 risk chaos for period
Of usde termined leagin after (essassinaiion/ mainiy because for
security reasons his group cannct appre military and hope to

get decisive agreement support before fessassination/.

20 Harch 1961

Headquarters cabled the station:

"Pegret us authorization exists to suspend pouch regulations
against shipment of arms... Will deliver to the group's
representatives cutside the Dominican Republic if this feasible.
Coordinated with State Department.”

* 22 Marea LoS

The station replied, in part:

" . 4. we realize permission does not now exist but

Chief of Statios movs that he at last two Posts received pistols
Via pouch for worthy purposes, so it can te done. Juczing froa
_Yef, WH not prepared take this Step. If this unalteradly so then

|
|

|



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

on snepens enim

but the excerpt dces not fully reveal the contentious tone “of the

i
i
Tre above excerpt is the most significant point in the ‘cable,
cable. On 25 March, Headquarters, in a cable released by the pp/P

(Bissell) undertook to set Owen straight. The cable gives a fairly

complete statement of U.S. policy and objectives and of Oven's

C : —_ replece the Trujillo regize; we wish to avoid precipitate action if
~ piaaning is not well organized, as appears to be the case; machine
guns and armunition will te supplied to demonstrate good will to the

. : a responsidilities. It 13 simarized here. We Support a program to
dicsidents; the requested revolvers are being pouched. Eeadquarters
t

i
|
i
t
i
i

is planning with State ezainst the eventuality of sudden action by

the dissidents that mignt result in the forming of a new coverment

vir above clarifies.Hqs position, Oven should proceed accordingly.

In event major points remain unclear, State Depariment preparing

oreers permit return for consultations.”

(Comment: We do not know vhether On replied to this cable

or not. We do not find a reply in the files. Oven did gO to

headquarters for consultations about 5 April, but we cannot
4 L >

. - 37 -
owe
‘ * It is apparent from the EMDEED operational files that no arms vere
ever sir-drovped or delivered by sea.

are was

i

POs Mat APS! COUNT yy

Meine ecnte tee een / antiereremetatrtee neem pe nt en wert ere

EI ane ce ee

ia hee tie SRE Tee ee en rere ee ee cee! i

o



--- Page 39 ---
web, ee tat TUF

establish that the trip wes a direct result of this cable. Taere

is some evidence that cuggests that the trip may. have beea in
- ‘connection with a request from the dissidents for sutmachine ..

26 varch 1961 / ‘

‘Cable. from the station:

ms "For Dr. Severo Cabral request permission pass three semi-
automatic M-l carbines 30 caliber and supply ammo which avaliable
consulate fvom departed naval personnel. Would need from Hgs
mine 30 cartridge magazines for weapons. Kequest prompted by
Severo Cabral nute 25 March wnich says he canwl hoid group
togetner beyond April 15 withsut arms delivery... .. .-

5
i
5
oH
i
2:

(Comment: It may be helpful to interrupt the chronology

Fah PE RAW A te

at this point. As we will later explain,.these carbines were
actually passed to the dissidents. They were in the hands of
Antonio de 1a Maza, vho worked out the details of the assassination

7 and was the lead figure in carrying it out. They alnost certainly

were taken to the scere of the slaying by the assassins. We have

Se AVERY rs TY 6 MeCN eA

no | evidence that eny of them vere actually fired during the shootizg.
: The little evidence ve have suggests that they were not actually

- used. “Ghese three carbines are ‘the: weapons referred to by various
sources as having teen passed to the plotters by CIA. We find no’ :

ve evidence of any other weapons having been passed.) Co ee =

SLUR FOR PGES MORERONEED 8G Srl ALR MME TS OSE YM GDS ERAT


--- Page 40 ---
27 Maren 1951

Headquarters cabled the station:

“““PYT, ref hardvare /the three pistols the station’ asked be”
pouched7 makes fairly sizeable packege if lumped single shimment..
Request soonest COS estizate of risk involved sending one pactage;
or whether split shipment preferable."

- .- (Comment: We find no indication in the files that these
: é Tey : 2
‘ yevolvers were ever actually pouched. We Suspect they were not,

because the request for them was overtaken by subsequent events.) mo,

, 29 March 1961

Headquarters cabled the station: ; eT

" . . . Has inclined to favor passing Severo Cabral ref
carbines and ammo. Are carbines carried on local installation’:
inventory, thus requiring paper work which may blow CIA's
ultimate use?..How does station propose to pass weapons in secure
manner order avoid other ODACID installation exployees becoming:
witting they being ade available to Dominicans? Require oo
Consul Cereral.Dearborn's_.concurrence... Advise... 2 + + «
Pouchirg . . . nine magazines..." :

AOR OATHS at

. Bl March 1961

The station replied: -
_ °"No inventory problem. No paper work to show CIA in act
_ dm anyvay.- Psan file of? serialjmmaters. Will tardle packaging .
after hours. Only. ccnsulate person wro kmows disposition is
Dearborn. Delivery to #impy Perry oy the station's female
adninistrative assistant or other CIA officer depending on what
steps seems best here. Dearborm concurred in request and in this
message. We cannot enpnasice enough that we must make gesture of



--- Page 41 ---
ra-poapore "+

good will to Severo Cabral now. These items ere not what he
asked for but they are an tnvesment ia operational continuity.
Toe security iis«x in his having these iteas is no greater than
his having similar items delivery which done By more complicated
~and less. cecure cache or drop." . Ce pa teow pane

Headquarters cable to the station:

"/Passing. the three carvines/ approved. Advise Eqs when
. passing.of ‘this equipment completed. .

(Comment: This cable was released by the DD/P (Bissell). )

“T April 1961

_, Cable from the station: ©

PORE CORSE KAA ERO AROMAT EE, we ANE ret AE

.. “ffhe pouch forwarding magazines for the three carbines]
contained 15-bullet magazines rather than 30-bullet magazines
as requested. Pls expedite pouching 9 latter type M-1 carbine
magazines." . .

9 April 1961 oo .

‘ig.

Cable from the station:

"/The station's female adminis.zative assistant] passed
"fie three carbines/ to /f¥impy Berry/ April 7. Wo couplicatioas."

SN ERS CPE be Da UT MO

(Comment:.-The files do not contain an account of how the

carbines were actually passed. As ve will later’see, headquarters
subsequently poucked submachine guns for Fassing to the dissidents...
Headquarters asked for the statioa’s plan for securely passing the
tot 7 os Submachine guns to the dissidents. The station replied: . "Propose .

use essentially same technique es that for /the three carbines/.


--- Page 42 ---
[ie station's female administrative assistant] drivisg own car

will go to lozal susermarket fitnzy verry's] for usual Saturday

- morning Purchases. Then to consulate to get mail. Will get assist:
trom Chief of Station in loading package or Fackages into car ;
trunk with groceries: . tatioa operations officer wALL then : - ; : iol
accompany to administrative: assistant's apartnent, help taxe a
groceries in. If no danger signal given by operations officer,

- [iiopy. Berry] will arrive in personal car, pic« up items fram -

operations officer at partially concealed entrance to acninf-

ee wi ET OA Oey sera ta

strative assistant's apartment and promptly ‘leave. Cover for - ‘ Lf »
his visit will be commercial delivery.") . re

LApril 1961

“1... Ghtef, WH Division, sutmitted to Chief, RI, a memorandum requesting |
waiver of pouch restriction on pouching weapons. "The above request
_ £8 submitted for the following reason: Station Ciudad Trujillo kes

“requested that Headquarters provide four M3 machine guns and 240

cl - rounds of amunition on a priority basis for issuance toa small action

Group to be used for self protection.”

for submachire guns, but there was no follow-up on it from the station.

@

E

g

g

FA

g

#

§

£

a .

i. ce -' (Comment: The entry for-18-March 1961 refers to a request
Tois pouch waiver request was submitted while the chief of station was



--- Page 43 ---
1400000 ©

PU Te Hn Satins pea try ae Le ad bites mene ates

SOMeiacianheu 1a. AERATOR, Ch Wad:

ASN ab cca thn te RHONA eaiyee eR cm nLae 08

23 April 1961

at heatquarters for consultations, I: is provedle that he wade the

Plea in person... As will be seen later, the submachine guns (the-so-

called "grease guna” of Worla War II) were pouched tut approval ‘was

hever givea the station to pass them to the plotters.)

Beadquarters cabled the station:

"Equipment for Severo Cabral {Submachine guns] which subject
of Chief of Station conversations Eqs being pouched . . . 14
April. Prior to Fassing equipment, advise Has what scheme of

Gelivery proposed, .
(Comment: ‘The delivery scheme is explained in comment on
the 9 April entry.)

An extract. froma note sent to Consul General Dearborn from: Sp ae
Juan Vicint:

_ °. ."The three Leica cameras, model M-1 /the three carbines/,
With their accessories, should be ‘in the Proper hands ina day.
“or two... 2. . With the*small emomt of equipment which. they
are receiving they can only take ection at a few specific places
and therefore the probabilities are considerably reduced and .
the tine factor, considerably extended accordingly. With the
| Test_of ‘the equiment (four Leicas, model 4-3) /tke sutmachine |
gens/ the possible places of action are multiplied and the lost
tine greatly reduced.”

1s April 1961 : :
Extract frou a note from SOCRATES /Ta!s Baguero/ to DELTA

-ho.



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

Fa
B
. g.
a
oo
Poa?
of
asul General De .
: “The thiee Leica x. the hands :
7 f the ones that will Whey need sore cameras
£ in orler to doe

hope that the meno

we

eat two days ago migas hel.

‘ -17 April 1951

Note from YAGUATS /Fuan Vicini] and SOCRATES [tuis EaqueroJ to

so “ELTA /Dearborn/:

"The last word, up to the minute in the matter of? cameras:
CRISTOBAL /General Juen Toss Diaz/ says that with the 3 Leica :
cameras alread; delivered i ossible ta do the jp Slugraonic . i
Job. Ye needs to have the rest of the equimment (the k 4-3 . i
Leices) before he undertakes the goo. The ones already delivered :
he sees them as gcod ccmplenentary equimment (defeasi ve) but ke |
needs the others for the aggressive part of the job. It is my :
belie? that the ores already delivered have served a psychological

Purpose also: the ~ iways been in doubt the .
good faith of your people in wash. Toeir feeling was that in
Several months ail they have obtained were promises. How they
see that you actually mean susiness. So, now, all they are doing
- dis waiting for the neavy cazera3."

iT April 196

- Headavarters cabled the station:

repeat not
rts + + most important /the sumechine gy: sf not/be

Passed to Severo Cabrel without additional Hqs approval. Please

. edvise when equipment received and proposed scheze and timing of
delivery." .

pA

sbasratentinee asta:
’
nett en tenes se
i

}

AAP Eamon eet met i oo aah tg ame on ae At tee oe TO Sewer Ble he Te tegen

¥

a “en



--- Page 45 ---
20 April 1961

Headquarters : cabled the station

" Bubsaichine us] should be held | in szatioa ex o-stody Pate
further notice and not repeaz not be pascaéd to {Ainsy Berrz/-
This Hqs decisioa based on dudgzeat that Pillicg vacuum created
by. fassassination/ new bigger question than.ever:view unsettled « - ~
condi tions ; yin Caricbeea area. *

"Request station provide roll: info socnesi (e) Eave
[the three carbires/ been delivered to Severo Cabral? (bd) -
Tetails on an alternate pian to Celiver [Ssmachine Quas,
Which.would involve groumd caching.” an

_ (Commer.t: It might be noted that this cable wes. sent
just three days after the failure uf the Liding at tre Bay of

Pigs.)

20. April 1961

Hote to DELTA /Dearborz/ from YAGIATE and SOCRATES:

7 "The officers that were to do the photographic job are not
only disappointed but really angry at the refusal of the delivery
of the other leicas. They have decided to give up the plan and .-
disperse, because they canmmot take any more risks for nothing.”

20 April 196.
" ‘cable from the station:

"/Sutmachire guns/ here 19 April with no-eatry probiens :
‘whatsoever. Excellent basic wrepping means station's plan can): -:
be sinplifited even mere. ‘he ecministretive assistant, the’
Operations officer, and the chief of station can share "eelivery
direct to drop. Request Has advise vhen ve may begin.”



--- Page 46 ---
nature of this "excellent basic

wrapping" is not further clarified in the file..Nomen Gall, .. \
Bt 2

writing in The Nev Kepydlic, said that the weapons were chipped

to Winpy Ferry in focd cans. ‘THis sounds io us.as if the cub-

_ Paod containers fox pouching. If co, ;
we vonder hov Gall leerned of this. We can state with fair

confidence that. these subcachine g228 were never passed out of

the consulate. As late as tae very day of the assassination, Bop
Oven sent a cable protesting the policy that forbade his Fassing
caex. This souds as if there mist have been a leak fron the
consulate--from one of the very few who kmew of the. submachine ~
guns. We cannot confirm that.the sutrachine guns wore actually

packaged in food containers for pouching. TSD has no record of

having done so. Jake Esterline tas a faint recollection. of .food.

containers, but not in connection wita pouching. )

21 April 1961
Cable from headquarters to the station:

. " /Subrachine guns/ should be held in station custody till
further notice and.not repeat not te passed to {Wimpy Berry/,

The station replied to headmmarters' Query of 20 April ©

“regarding disposition'o? ‘the three caréines:

"4... . filicpy Berry] tas given ftse three carbin.
-to internediary who holding until Severo Cabral picks up .



--- Page 47 ---
00008

(Coment: Tais “iatemediary" appears to have been Tacsas

Stocke>. The significance of this end the security problen it

“posed will become apnarent from ore of the later entries for ~

31 vay.)
25 Avril 1961 _

Cable from the station:

"Foll from Dearbormm: ‘I belleve political consequence o? not
| delivering /oukzachine guns/ so serius I plan go Nashington within

next few days for discussion with Departrent and CAS Hqs:" . :

” 26 April 1951

Cable from the station:

"/Wimpy BerryJ tola Chief of Station . . . Antonio de 1a .
Maza plans try assassinatin between 29 April and 2 May.

- Severo Cabral possibly not yet aware plen. No soifd info ocke-
members assassization effort but. General. Juan-Tomas Diaz. protad’
will aid. Will use the three carbines plus whatever else can :
get. De la Maza asks Berry add the sutzachine guns if possible
o

30 April 1961

Cable from the station:

wr > "Following from Dearborn: April 28 Lorenzo Berry as enissary
uan Vicini and Severo Cabrel called on ze with foll info: . .. .
main mission Berry wes plead with me release sutrachine guns they ‘
believe in Dom Rep and under ny control. Action group has 3 -+
' carbines, 4 to 6 12-gigge shotguns with 120 rounds and some suall :
@ras... . . . . Action entails roudside anoush near San Cristocal a


--- Page 48 ---
and few easitional weapons could te inporvant. .... . I replied
I had ro suiwachine guns unéer zy control aad that any U.S.
controlled items weich mignt t= in Dom Rep could only be released
on specific authori zatioa from iasaington. I pointed out that
. Bince the. three-carcines were sade available Cuban incident had ;
occurred and hoped group could understand this is period of stuey
: and assessment... se 6

2 May 1951 ©

Cable frem the station:

" .-. 2... suggest Has review: decision not pass sutmachine
‘guns. Determinatioa of group to go ahead with possibly inadeq
means could spell end hest pro-US force now vorking toward the
overturow of the Trujillo regine.” :

2 May 1951

‘Draft cadle prepared at headquarters:

“.... . Since 1t appears that E1OT group has committed
__Atself to action with or without additional support, coupled with
fact. that the carbines already made availadle to them for personal
defense; station authorized pass”suamacnine’guns’ to: Berry for
' their additional protection on their proposed endeavor. . .'. ..

» (Comment: This cable was never sent. It vas authenticated

; “by Ray Eervert for J. C. King, and Richard Bissell coordinated 0

. it. Itwas forwaried to the TeCl for release. General ‘Cabell
attached a handwritten buck-slip: "Return to: Chief, W.H. Dive,

“ mmacted vpon.")



--- Page 49 ---
The Director, ata ceeting ‘of the Special: Group, reported ac
nev aati-Trujillo plot, saying that, we never mew (it one of these ;
would work or not.

May 1951 |

Headquarters cabled the staticn:

“Regret Gelay cut release for the subuachine guns/ avaits
bigh level State Departament decision.” : .

8 May 1961

Headquarters cabled the station:...

“State Departzent has disapproved passing /submachine. guns/.

16 May 1961

“cable fron the station:

"For Achilles and Coerr from Dearborn: hamas Stocker called
on me night May 15. Stated hée ezissary fron action ‘group which.
plans execute ‘action against Trujillo night May 16. Stocker's
mission was urgently request-re-to furnisna group with few Bachine

zuns which it understood US agents rave ia Dom Rep...
(Comment: There ‘is an unsigned and alncst incompreliensible
- memorandim in the EMDEED files.. It is dated 17 May 1961 and concerns

a meeting with Mes. Flerida Berry. The trensaittal dispatch maxes.



--- Page 50 ---
it clear that the author was Iszbel Cintren, "ize station's™
oa

séninistrative assistant. Tats is:our interpretatioa of what

Miss Cintra was tr; ying. to says: So; metine. during. the. second .

ott vay, wimpy Berry asked Tacnas Stocker to return the three
carbines Eerry had given Stocker for the plotters. Stocker at
first refused but firally, agreed. [Presumably Berry then passed _,
then to Antonio de la Maza.J On 15 May, Stocker again saw Berry
at the Supermarket, said he had the carbines back in his Possession,
and his group planned ‘to: carry out the assassination the following”
night: The group that: was to do the Job was Rot the group. that
. ; Berry had been working with on tehalf of the consulate. SOCRATES .
7 (Luis Baqvero) arrived at the supermarket while Stocker was still
with Wimpy- After Stocker left, Mrs. ‘Berry asxed. Baquero: if-he-
had givea the Carbines back to Stocker. Baquero said he vas
certain not,.although.he and.the man who had the carbines and.vas..
to ao ‘the job aia not know each other's identities. “While Mrs.
, Berry w was talking with Baquero, the man 1 to whom Berry had last
given the weapons [gresumably Antonio ae la vax] arrived at the
supermarket. Mrs. Berry asked him if he had ‘returned the carbines
‘to Stocker. Fe replied that'he had | not that that, if she wanted’
‘confirmation, she could look in the trmmsz of his car where he -

always carried then.)



--- Page 51 ---
14-06 006,

18 Mey 1952

.., There was discussion at a Special Group reeting.of planning vita
respect %o the Dominican Republic. - Chester Bewles said he thought
that an internal State planning paper outlining an ambitious
yereatlitary plan (and alleging :Specisi:-Growp approval) exceeded
the Special Group's action. Mr. Parrott's notes supported that

inpression. Tne following is an excerpt from the minutes:
"General Cabell noted that the internal dissidents were
pressing fo. the release to them of certain small arms now in
U.S. nands.in the Dominican Republic. Ee inquired- whether’ the
feeling co? the Group remaincd that these arms. should not be
. passed. The members showed no inclination to take a contrary
position at this time.” *

25 Vay 1961
"The agenda of the Special Group meeting for this date proposed .
@iscussion of “further guidance to Dearborn re contacts with
dissidents.” The minutes of the meeting, hovever, mike no mention

of : the subject.

> er Nay i,

“ §he station. cabled: « -

"Depar tent from Dearborn: ‘May 26 I had long talk with -
“andreas Freitas. . ..-. . Freitas made'.no request for arms which ~
indicates group kas accepted fact it mist do with what it has.

* Toe small arms to. which: ‘General Cabell referred vere the sudmachine
guns, which were poucked to the station but were rever ‘Passed t to the
dissidents.


--- Page 52 ---
14-0090,

His caly stetereat on this subjec: was that group bas aras but is
sozewhat contemed wagtner enough. .

ie) stated “action group planning overthroy Trujillo for :
past 3 wens and representing enti-cormunist pro-denoztratic
elements waich ke member remains on brink final performance
gad cetersined as ever. Said he could give me no cate because
stion depends whea Trujillo, follows awaited pattern which
not known in advance. . Group has arrange= ent for being informed
sufficiently in advacce to get into assigaed positioas once -
signal given. He asked if United States prepared assist pro-
United States Dominicans quickly if they succeed overthrow
“Trujillo.

a UUE replied . - ». speed with which assistance could be
given would be increased considerably if ve could have prior
info on such subjects as timing, plans for ection, personalities
involved and identity of proposed junta... + - - ue’ replied
participants were not prepured give tiel: nanes until afterward
and could not give tice for reasons stated earlier. ...--

"Re timing Freitas stressed event could happen any day. and
could in fact have happened 3 times in last 2 weeks except that. .
necessary juxtaposition of forces did not materialize.”

29 May 1961

... ‘Headquarters, cabled the station:

- -: "For Dearborn from State ..... . We must not yun risk
of U.S. association with political assassination, since U.S..
- as matter of general-policy cannot condone assassination. Th?
-last- principal is overriding and must prevail in doubtful
situation. . .. . . You must request and receive further
specific instructicn for any. specific covert activity. At the
present time we are unable to transfer arms to dissidents. ... .

a (Comment: Both Dearborn and the chief of statica sent

cables commenting ca this guidanze cable. Their cables were riled


--- Page 53 ---
in Ciudad Prasillo on 33 May but were not received ia Washington

until the early morning hours of 31 May--about eight hours

" afuer the assassination took place: Excerpts follow.) ;

31 May 1061

Cable. from the station:

"State frou Deartorn.... . If attempt is made by U.S.
friends assassinate Trujillo there will be accusations against
us and best we can dois see there is no proof. Greatest danger
point is Thomas Stocker. He was given small number arms by
-dissident agent to hold several days and has told several persons
dissidents obtained these items from consulate. Stocker told me .
same and I have informed him this cannot. be true or I vould know >

and when he requested me supply arms through hin for dissidents

I told him this impossible. .....

Cable from chief of station:

“Aseune [the 29 May policy cable from State to Dearborn/ is*
final word on present policy on which CIA work here must be based.
This for practical purposes -retreat from -previous policy.

However Hqs aware extent to which U.S. Goverment ‘already
associat?i with assassination. If we are to at least try ‘cover
up track:.' CIA personnel directly involved in assassination
preparation must be witkcrawn now. .... . If assassination

: tried and not successful, icmediate evacuation of the chief of.

' station, the operations officer, and the administrative
assistant mandatory. .....- .



--- Page 54 ---
2) May 2951

Received in Hea2quarters Signal Center at 0341 hours,

* Wa shington ‘tine:

| FLASH SECRET CRITIC CIA CIUDAD TRUJILLO “MEER 1. APER 2.
SOURCE DISSIDENT IN. DIREC? TOUCH: WITH -DISSIDZNT ACTION G2o0uUP (c)..
SOURCE AT 2330 HOURS LOCAL TIME 30 MAY RECZIVED PREARRANGED SIGNAL
WHICH MEANT TRUJILLO HXIZED. BY ASSASSINATION SAME IICET, AMERICAN
CONSULATE PERSONIEL ENCOUNTERED RCADBLOCKS ON CIUDAD TRUJILLO RIO

LEADWA SUPER HIGHWAY AT AB J 0030 SOURS LOCAL TIME 31 Mat. 2
INDIVIDUALS FORMING BLOCKS APPEARED HASTILY ORGANIZED MLITZA ONLY
"PEW OF WHOM ARMED WITH FIREARMS OTHERS WITH AACHETES. NO -
_ CONFIRMATION TRUJILLO ASSASSINATION AS ‘OF 0100 MAY 31. FILED 0600z.

_ [8200 Washington time/

(Comment: ‘The e station's follow-up operational cable
identified the source of Crit‘c No. 1 as Lorenzo (Wixpy) ‘Berry,
who gave the information in person to Consul General Dearborn
~-and- cate of Station Oven at ‘the consulate. At about 0100 hours, ,

"Dominican tize, Andres . Freitas telephozed Dearborn "to ask

: cryptically whether’ we -had-the news." Freitas said he would add

“details vhen he had then.)

1B.

a

te


--- Page 55 ---
gune

Memorandun. for. the. record signed. by J. D. Esterline; in pert

., “The evening of 2 June, it was decited to immediately <<
move out of the Dominican Republic che Station Chie? Cyen, and
Case O-ficer Cookson. It was elso decided that Administrative
Assistant Isabel Cintran should rot retiza to Trajilto. Accoré-,
ingly, an Overaticsal immediate cable was sent to the station .-
the afternoca of 2. June issuing appropriate instructions.”

‘

9 June 1961,

_ Memorandum tor the record signed by J. C. King, subject:
."High-Level Meeting on Dominican Crisis"--in part: .

"The reeting vas held at 1800 hours on 5 June 1961 in Room
7514 of the Departzent of State. Among “hose present were Vice.
President Lyndoa Jcinson, Secretary ‘McNamara, General lemnitzer,
Under Secretary Bowles, Deputy Under Secretary “Alexis Johnson,
Mr..Ed Hurrov, Cilef, USIA, Hr. Arthur Schlesinger, Mr. Richard
Goodvin, Mr. Ted Achilles, Mr. Wis Coerr,. Mr. Morales Carrion :
‘and Mr. Jameson. . . :

“Vice President Lyrdon Johason referred-to another message ~-.
from Coasul.General Deartorn which vas in an alarmist tone as to
the possibility of inplicating the United States‘in the delivery of
arms to the dissidents. ‘The Vice President then asked what :

_ was the timing and authority on the delivery of arms."

(Coment: The message to which Vice President Joanson-

referred is not in the EMDEED*operatiozal files. We did not 7
_ finda copy ina search of Cable Secretariat archives. Jake
Esterline, who appears to have ridden keri oa post-assassination

planning, does not recail having heard of Vice Presidént Johnson's



--- Page 56 ---
V0 =

Guery. Tree record. suggests *:

4 of it but deessnot now

renenver. There is an unsi

sy in the EMOTED file

reeting at State), subdjec

: “OBACED Views. oa, a Passage of : Arzs to Dominican Dissidents.”

The menorandum summarizes State , Deparineat-Consulate involvement

in having weapons furnished to the dissidents. Tse routing and
record, sheet attached to the =emorand: shows it vas originated
by Join Poulter, VH3/DP2H, and was forwarded to C/0PS/aH

(Esterline).. ‘Esterline initialed the routing and record. sheet

and returned the nemoraadia to Poulter. Tais suggests to us»:

that J.C. King, upon returning from the nesting at State, asted:
"‘Eoterline to have a sicmary pulled togetner. -
d. C. King remembers the meeting.at which the Vice. President
asked about the delivery of arms. He does not nov recall the
; specific query. Re-reading his memorandim record of the meeting
leads him to believe that the Vice President's question vas
directed to one of the State representatives. Ee feels that,

ig. it had been directed to ‘cla, he would have mace rention of

.that fact in-his recoré o? the nesting.

A rezoranéw for the record prepared by J.'C. fing of a@ Waite

' House meeting on the Doninican crisis 62°7 June 1961 makes no mention

vs. ~ of U.S. involvement in passing weapons to the assassins. The meeting ©

was chaired by tke President, end Vice President Jonnson was present. |

=~

spo ALR SOE


--- Page 57 ---
The preceding, quite detailed, and alcost unolly documentary
account | of U.S. Goverment involvement with persons plotting
the overthrow ‘of ‘agile ‘carries through the actual assassination.
Early in the report we explained. why the coup chet vas to ‘follow ‘
the assassination never. took. place. Another essential part of ‘the
story is the roll-up of the essassination group and the discovery
Of U.S. -Lavolvenent with them. ‘The ceasulate cabled through CIA
channels on 9 December 196L that tae 7 Tecester issue of the
Deninicas newspaper La La Hacioa carrted.a story :
7... based ca Huascar Tejeda Pimentel's statement
to Judge of Instruction that Wimpy (Loreazo A. Berry)
provided the caliber 30 M-1 Garaad autczatic carbines used
to kill Trujillo."
Wimpy' s involvement with the plotters, including passing weapons
from the U.S. consulate to them, becaze mown to the Dominican
: Military Intelligence Service (SIM) as early as 3 June from-its.
Anterrogations of the captured assassins. The following summary

“is arava from the FBI's report of its interviews of Ortiz, the. SIM

officer vho headea. ‘the investigation ‘of the the assassination.

- Imediately after the slaying, all ‘of the assassins assembled
; at the house: of General Juan Tomas Diaz. Dr. Robert Reid Cabral
_was called to treat the cost seriously wounded assassin. Dr. Reid
was the cousin of. Donald Reid Cabral, one of the key political plotters,

- but appears not to have been in on the plot himself. Since Dr. Reid



--- Page 58 ---
14,00000'-

Be
: @ :
in being called asa Physician learned the

igentities of the ascassins,

General Diaz said be could not allow Dr. Reld

to go. free. General

a

in Reid's house for four

‘Dias forced De. Paid to
‘Of the assassins (General Diaz, Antonio de la Maza, Salvador
Estrella, an@ Roberto Pastoriza).

The other assassins vent their
Separate ways.

Within hours after entering Dr. Reid's house, General Diaz

a and his three companions began to panic. (it might be noted here -
that the assassins were so sure that the coup would follow and they

would all be national heroes that they had made absolutely know

plans for hiding or escape.) De la Maza called for Mrs. Reid ana

ordered Dr. Reid aut of the room. De la Maza thereupon raped Mrs:

Reid in the presence of his cezpasicns. Fastoriza and Estrella vere

highly incensed over the rape. Pastoriza left the house soon after

@ near-fight and a drawn-weapons confrontation. Estrella left after

@ few hours. Diaz and de le Maza left later and were killed in a.

gunfight vaile resisting arrest. Both Pastoriza and Estrella vere
‘captured, tortured, and confessed. ‘The The folloving are excerpts from

the F ‘FBI's report of its ‘interviews with ortiz, the SIM investigator.

. ". .. after Pastoriza lert Generel Juan Toxas Diaz composed -

& telegran ediressed to President Romulo Petancourt o? Venezuela,

which said, ‘We who have killed Trujillo urgently need your help :
in order to flee the couatry. Signed General Juan Tomas Diaz.' lt



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

von

y' an
dito
telegren imnediately the Azerican

ul to code the telescum and send it

3
1s to Zetancourt.

“Reid refused to take the ielegrem on tue basis that he

2 a veately in the plot through
mt Diaz was tryicg
this telegran to
ecaze so incensed that he
und and even went so far as to
ad of Reid's young son. Reid

punched Reid

then said ut the chtixre Reid family
if they wished but that he woule rot deliver the telegram to
‘dirpy.'

"Estre was asked to furcish what he mew coacecning
‘Winpy's' alleged connection with the conspiracy. ¥Futrella
related that 'Wingy' is the one who facilitated the obtaining
of the shotgun and the autemaiic rifle for de le Maza and
General Diaz. Ee was asked if “Yirpy' ‘rey the Purpose for

which these weapons vere secured end Estrella replied that 'Wimpy'
Was aware of the purpose. Estrella further related that ‘diapy'

works for the FBI, the State Deparssent, or some other agency
of the U.S. Goverment. .

"Estrella was asked to explain how he kuew ‘Wizoy' was
connected with the Americans end he replied that he fad heard
from the other conspirators that ‘Wirpy' was the intermediary
between the Americen Consulate end the conspirators. Estrella
Stated that 'dimpy' was a friend cf Gereral Diaz, Antonio de la
Maza and Luis Amisca Tio, and that 'Wimpy' rad been the inter-

mediary through the American Consulate vnen these three discussed

their proposed coun with American authorities.
w . 4. the source mentioned that during the interrogation
ef the conspirators she mentiorz that United States officials
were involved, they were all asked to identify the Us
officials, but none of the conspirators were able to identify
these officials by nace and mentioned only that they vere high
functionaries of the United States Department of - Te

only nace of any fmerican official which was disclosed during

2d States

te ne
. a

i
i

the. e490)


--- Page 60 ---
14-0000"

ed ts sead to

eource noted
se Diaz tore

“(

. + the source coxm:
2o Gid not telieve

at
of State was in any way invols gant
the su th WAS
Slaply a meth give his
approval to rogators cpinion

at that time

this plot,

ne lied in
plot would have seen much better organized and

the coup would have succeeded. )

«2 June 1961, the iavestization

identities of all the individuals
f involved in the plot, many of wnom had keen arrested and

( ata interrogated. The only ones not accouns ‘ere Luis Antama

st Tio and Antonio Imbert Harreras. As previously related, General

cuan Tonas Diaz, tonio ce la Maza, and Lieutenant Amado

+ Garcia Guerrero were xilled vnen resisting arrest. (At this

: point the source related that if Geseral Diaz, Lieut. Garcia,

. Ge 1s Maza, Aniama, and Invert had been captured, and made to

ee talk, it is certain that many many more prisoners would nave

. been taken.)

d@ for

"As far as the source is aware, the only individuals who
were arrested as a result of the assassination of Trujille, who
were brought before the courts were Tavares and General Roman.
As far as the source is aware, no other individual arrested in
efore any Dominican
s

apes

u

connection with this plot ves brouzkt bi
court. ‘Winpy,' the North American, wa
before a court to be aeported; 4
wes rot to be molested in any way an
aware, no action was tskea against

yg fthti tae eames core TTT May aaah a Be eth Lie F



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

for "expenses" by CIA. Avier amnesty was grunted the plotters in
December 1941, the Berrys returned co Santo Soningo and resumed

Operating their eupersarket, They, especially Mrs. Berry, continued

to involve themselves in political intrizves.

_ They were staimch, .
Supporters cr the conservative Antonio Inbert/vessin y Yeesin faction
and were involved in the actions tast led to the overthrows of the
governments headed by Juan Bosch and later by Donald Reid Cabral.

‘ _ To recap: ;
( a. Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom told J. C. King
‘ : ; on 28 Juse 1960 that the U.S. Coverment vas prepared to partici-
pate in the overthrow of the Trujillo regine to the extent of
providing a small mmter of sniper rifles for the removal of
key Trujillo people from the scene. General Cabell, as Acting
PCI, on 1 July 1960 approved delivering 12 Springrield rifles to
the Dasinican dissidents by air drop or by sea. The rifles
were never delivered.

b. On 10 February 1961 the chie? of station cabled a

Suggestion that one sxall-size, nigh-fire-pover weapon be

forwarded in each pouch. This Suggestion was not acted upon.

- 599 -

ee ee nt
|

i
H
H
i
|
i

ceantiaenineamnamamiitiodeemeemtietend

pe

me


--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

c. On 17 March 1951, tre chief? of station cabled a request

of Consul General ‘Dearbon for the _Poucking of° three B caliber...
Seith ast Wesson § Special pistols for delivery to key members

of the dissident group. Headquarters was preparing to pouch
the pistols -but apparently aid not do so. ‘There is no indication
in the EMDEZED operaticral files that the pistols were actually
pouched. The request for pistols appears to have been overtaken
Py a. subsqte nt request tor suopachine gus.

a. On 26 Hazch 1961 the station cabled a- request for

permission to | pass varee semi-automatic MeL carbines plus

 emmunition to Dr. Severo Cabral. The carbines and ammunition

vere in the consulate, having been left by departed naval personnel. -

‘The station requested that headquarters pouch magazines. Head-

. ‘quarters approved passing the carbines and ammunition -and* “‘pouched’~

the magazines. The cable authorizing passing the carbines’ was
released by the DD/P (Bissell). ‘he station said at would file
off the ‘carbines’ ‘serial numbers. ‘he station cabled that the

carbines” were’ passed to "Wimoy" Berry by the station‘ 8 ; female

administrative assistant on 7 April 1961. , Berry, at the request

of the dissidents, Gave tke carsines to S. Thomas Stocker for

: temporary safbkeeping. Berry later recovered the carbines fron

Stocker and gave them to Antonio de Ja Maza, who reportedly kept



--- Page 63 ---
them in the trunk of his automobile. It is probable that et least

one of the caroines was taken to the scene cf the assassination

“ by de la Maza, but we have no evidence that itiwas actually used
‘in the shooting. Ortiz, the SD{ investigator, ‘told the FBI ‘that
the assassins who were apprehended and interrcgated spoke only
of the firing of a sawed-off shotgun, revolvers, and pistols.

e. While at headquarters for consultations in early April
1061, Chie? of Station Robert Conn evidently prevailed upon
headquarters, to pouch four M3 submachine guns and ammunition
to the station. The submachine guns were pouched and arrived
at the station on 19 April 1961. Headquarters cabled the station”
on 17 April that the submachine guns were not to be passed to

; the dissidents without additional headquarters approval. . Despite

"" yepeated pleas from the Chief of Station and from the Consul
General, Washington continued to refuse authorization to pass

them. We think it is safe to conclude that the. submachine guns

‘were never passed to the dissidents.

A final, and rather sorry, footnote: We do not know the

motivations of: men-such as: Jordi Brossa, Juan Vicini, Severo Cabral,.
Aniama Tio, and Antonio Imbert. The SIM interrogations of the plotters

it captured revealed that they were not greatly notivated by a desire

4



--- Page 64 ---
1490000

to live ina free ard ae 2 haha Most of them were seeking

vengeance or personal 1. Geaerai Pecaa, Wao wes to have taken over.

and fom an interim goverment, aanitied that ke had had no intention ‘

of permitting free elections. He had plazsed to establish himself
as the new Dominican. "stroman" replacing Trujillo. “General Juan
Tonas Diaz was bliter over having teea publicly disgraced by Trujillo

and then cashiered fron the arsy. Antonio de la Maza also had a

‘personal grudge. His tro-ser, Octavio, rad been killed by tke

Trujillos to conceal his aad their participation in the slaying

of Gerald Murphy in the Galindez case. Most of the others also

had personal reasons for wishing Trujillo dead. Loe


