
--- Page 1 ---
14-00000

104-10237-10120) , | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

- SECRET

LY .
of 2 |
pt?
Vee

| 7 28 June 1964

Bis request, 2nd Lt. Oliverio
Aatoaio TOMEU Vasallo was recontscted
ous wee 64 oe bis place ast gatas
'  @ane. provided additional details.
; on Cabice: and (Ana Gloria de.

and ides: tiried Osiel GONZALEZ aad one
"G0Co" as possible leads to Jose)
MEABEEA Gobel, > —



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

SEGRET

1S Ame 1964

SUBJECT: Recontact of Cliverio A, TOMEU Vasslio. (301-2839206)

1, At. 1730 bours, & June 64, the undersigned was advised
at Ais residence that a Mr. TOMEU (Subject) had called the | t
Security number given him (351-6161) and left the mescage that :

be would liso to tals agnim with Paul Stroud (the undersigned) . .
engtine after 1£09 houre, & June.

2. Upoa arriving at TOMU's apartment (Apt. 303, 1028 .
Wahler Place &3, High Potat Apartment House, tashington, D. C.), .
2830 hours, $ June, TOMEU indicated to bis two daughters he would

like to have some privacy aad they and hia vite, Caridad, left
the apartucat. .

.. 8. OME apologized for sot having recelled the name es
- We VAROMA") as that of An? Gloria de VAROMA! He reiterated .

thet, while im biding to escape capture by the Cuban Governneat i
@absoqueat to his infiltration, he knew only the first nazeo of
the persons with whom bs came in contact, but then adced he xnew |
(Mga Gloria de YARONA, in whose house be wae hiding, because she... ~
Wee the Sister of ‘Carlos de VAROMA), one of his infiltration team

wenbers. (This los de YAROKS may be ideatical wits oue ey dane
‘Gariog Baucsl de 7Ancua » 401=2893E3; or cne(Carloe Attire: :
' SWABOHA Arjoua, 201-283203,).0 oa

: 4. Om several cconricns, according to TOME, he was seated
- O€ the table ta Ann's bose with several other people, Cue of
| | Chese fadividvals, knowa to TOMBU only as “COCO,” was ceacribed
. @6 the sceretary to‘Joce LLARUZA Gobel.) There wae not, hovover,
aay diocuesions in which TOMEU recalls LLANGZA cr hie political cede
@gupathies having been discuesed. Acoerding to TOMKU's recole i
. Leetion tt was “COCO” who wae aveceiated with LLANUZA, and he ‘
wee ect avare of any reletioaship. betrce= Zens and (Li4AntaA), pe
Githougs TORE had so infersetion ag to what finally sappened
{ Price ) Bi deziltration team mate, he cuagested
that 1f Carlos cr “Anm were available they msy be able to
Sdentagy “CoCe" end provide data en hie acceseability for
ecatast. ;

«8. Ome Cael COMRALES, foruer Chief of the Ravana Fire
Departnenat, was identified by TUMZU ae ancther possible lead

. sat PRES]

oat REET mare cea iatin A Stent mama gate ett

Ae 8c ee a

eo
—

5


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

0 not ap ta

SECRET

~2-

who vould know \LLANUZA.) TONKU xffirmed Gsiel vas previously
with MENUYO Gutierrez in the Second Front of Escambray. Osiel
was usder asylum in the Brazilian bmbessy (sic, Argentine |
Enbassy?), when TUMEU gsined political asylum. then Osiel
finally received hie safe conduct from the inbassy, he went
to Puerto Rico and, TOMKU postulates that Osiel is now again
with MEWOTO in either the United States or Puerto Rico,

6. Two snap shots (to be returned) were provided by.
TOMEU of himself and six other individuals who were in ssylua
at the seme tine. He identifica these, in the photograph ia
which Monsignor Eduardo KZA Masvida} is seated, as, fro |
legt to right: (manuel VILLAMANAN, Oliverio TOMKU, “Kile DIAZ >
(believed to be in US), Publio RUIZ (U3), Jorge Del VALLE
(Mex?), and Ouiel GONZALEZ (US or Puerto Rico?).

7. Upon completing the debriefing, Stroud and TOMEU
“exchanged small talk" for a while until TOMKU finally stated
that he still wizhed there was something more he could do to
belp free Cuba, and asked "What do you think I should do?"
Stroud replied that no person could really make that type of

Gecisioa for another individual, and countered by asking TOME.

what alternatives he had in mind, other than remaining in the
VS Army as o career military officer.

TOMEU replied that, of course, he was once an

3. .
agriculturalist, but that there were fer job opportunities in
Which be could apply his past oxperience. His sister had also

esked hin if he felt he and bis family would want to live with
ber in Spain or Mexico, but he didn't think too much of this.
iden, He then stated that he had been asked by Manuel ARTIME.
<@ take & job ae an instructor, Without indicating eny
association of even awareness of ARTIME's activitios, or of
ARTINE's contact with TOMEU (aa indicated in TOMEU's 201),
FOMEU was asked what he thought of ARTINE's proposition, .
TONEY stated that he would no longer follow Any Ban an 28
individual. or as a leader, because a man's Adeals, outlook,
and objectives change vith tine. For example, the people of —
Guba followed Fidel because of the ideals he advocated, When
Padol too: over, hic eeconplicinsnts: gradually becawe quire:
GSaferent from the ideals he had espoused. TOMEU continued
by saying he would “no longer follow a man, One could only
trust his ideals or an organization which followed those
ideale, since a good organization would-be lane likely of:

being controlled by a single man." When saked for an example ,

Of the type of organization he had in mind, TOMEU replied ho
was most favorably inclined towards the ideals and goais of
the JUAZ, (The JURE or JAC is an organization crested by
Manolo RAY. Rivero around s nucleus of former. 26 duly Movement.
leaders, See nemo and attachsent dated 23 July 1963 from Johe
fugh Crinmine, Coordinator of Cuban A : ARA, Department
af State in TOMKU's 901-283206.) a

+. giluse 1
nciuded irom avtematiy

Gowngradins snd
dactassiticsiies -

ee re



--- Page 4 ---
SECRET

1
~3- : {

to. @. It should, perbaps, be noted here that in an inforsal

{ exchange vith tres. Donald HEBSTER, TOMEU's supervisor at the
Defense Language Institute, Anacostie Nawal Annex, 4 June 64,
Ure, VEBITMR volunteered the information that. "el of the other
‘Brigade students here’ have told se they think very higaly
of TOMEU, sad that be is x very brave man, becauve he end his
family were very wealthy in Cuba and he gave it all up to go

5 Aiuto exile and fight the Castro Regize.” : . :

L Pun, I. |


