
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000 ms

ey
lousy: SLELCE COTHELLL ON ASS? NALIOUS STAVE RLOHLNS

NILE TATLE/NUIRER/VORUNE 3 _ bases, LYE
7 ee la_l: LEH

2. .
INCLUSIVE DATES:

_ GuUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:

et . | ROOM: .
DELETIONS, UF ANY: YW/KD AGEACY Decesie:

ware NE i
aT R PRINT rT NAVIES

EAN

ee

RE vil EWING OFFIC

ee oo a eo

oe

NO RUCUMENTS MAY Bk COPTch om REMOVED ERO THES FILE,



--- Page 2 ---
14po000

nN _ “nol OH Boee ; a D

—

_ oe 4 Faewcsy 197.5

a . so ; : : (date

Review-of 201 File on U.S. Citizen ae i

In accordance with: the DDO's notice of 9 Deceaber 1974,
I have -reviewed. .the 201. file on ~TSAAC ‘S$ (surname)
(201 number “indicated bel wand have: determined that 1 can
most accurately, -be categort ed. as indicated below:-

“FF shoura be closed. non o a wo “

aa J. vssetne collaborator. OI Code Al. : . .

[ } potential witeing collaborator; date opened . | a. .

or Code Ad. ; . - - 7

cI ‘former witting collaborator (relationship términated). . ,
(Or. Code A3. . co oi ‘
on
potential, witting: collaborator never contacted (security .
— Teasons,: derogatory informatfon). OL Code .A4. : : : .

ounterintelligence case (i.e, tavolving. a foreign
llige ce or ‘Security Service), or Code. AS.

es

Signed Ken.

Caietarsy

4,

This document is a permanent part’ of this file.

201- LEU

. . £2 IMPDET © ow
~ ; wites  SEORET, ‘CL BY _954979
T- Te cA-L : :



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

5 :

"SECRET

ee |

MENORANDUM FOR THE RECORD - ae oon
paneer: reene Records ‘of Ray ‘Murphy | oe, at

wo as “The attached documents are part of.a large

“collection of records held by. Ray: Murphy during his
. tenure as an official of the Department of State.
-He transferred all of his records to CIA upon his
-retirement in the mid-1960's The. documents of that
collection which did‘not mest the retention criteria
of the DDO or the Office of Security were destroyed.
While those which were of utility have been retained
-and accessioned as appropriate to the DDO records

system. ©

> oo 2. The attached records concern : .
Pot LO “Harold ISAACS - : - ,

. Lo ke is the subject o 20 ~Q018446 “= and should
“be classified to that file.

5, paul Hartmigre .
C/CIRA/RS |

“Attachment |

rr ae

\). “arrond COPY :
nia oo [coin cor | £2. IMPDET 7

aF —_ SEGRET CL BY 006593 -


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

~ copy: shrus “ . , 47 ; . .
te + STE wo 7 / Ri ’ Dagan fared
: *. a . . . . 7 7 . . a.
oy | _ ° a o _SOUPSE: Ne¥ VAGS2S, Gow fork: lity,
‘ i | : os setober 22, 1938 ~ Page 12
So : : quadeRts” CHIsIs; “gapen pRaPARAs

to. 4 oo ; | By ienea Chen

ove. There ere, numerous Anerioon jourasliste of
: different politiodl color ang dhadea of opinion. who, are
“oooperatiag™ {a thie. way aita Jepmiess. tnpertalien, but -

‘whoever hes followed” tho writings of ‘uerold Tousen, .

sloxander vuchaaa, Prank Bless ‘and Wilbur Burton ta The —_ me,

* Chino Press, ‘The China weekly Review, rela, -: Pacific affetra,

Now International, to., realizes that these swerioaa ~

ete ett

Trotakyiet jouraslists ore: tho most vietous and siost @ao-”

gerous of the whole lot of reeotionory journalists,

d1atog bebind a barrage of Marxist purasoology (whieh

uf
4h
}

‘noua of them hea yet. learned. to montpulete with ‘raoslity),

thase people are energetically oonduoting o campoiga of

lice against the coamudfet Interdetions], the Chinese

Comaunist rerty,. the soviet. Union, the chinese Soviets

Ve Seecnenane coreg em

end ‘the: Chiaess, ted aray, 2 gampaies anton atas. to unger= Poe Bs
fine tho ‘goat idence. of the outside world in ‘the chinese we Es

| goviet movement and the Ked tray, 7 - Do :
: . . eS ne

Vel anes,
pede 1EYYG.

4 Warr cy fe XAAZ~ PS 0s She


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

aw 4 , ee
sux commmist achrersres FILES,

Date . Qh BBAIST, _ L

SOURCE! DAILY WORKER -

Filo No. LOE... eaaeer
X ¥202. Chena

been reissued,

a . has a a
i+ partly to cash in on the Kate-China
f { Versity Press, 35° pp. $s racket, an arty because any
eed ~~ . stick is useful -to Big. Business
: o By ROBERT FRIEDMAN : pce the liberation » .bound
: . a i The presses are powee. forth ‘asses, eo
: anti-Chinese books these déys Ot} Isaacs now says ‘he no longer.
1 * 1B Pace which bids to match the loves Trotsky, whose intraduttion;
' . 2 anti-Soviet tor=at AIP the ‘old [has been dropped as a Nability, Tne:
: hina hands’ who served Western | ead, “he is an open defender oly
' jalist it mtion against the:
Trotsk
” attack-on
hinese Communists of the 19:

: at hi Supported|
so . 3a chiang X; isshek despite the fact?
: f wo. A that he was to become the butcher;

- fe ay way ven tO! the Chinese revotution, ane see
Hl Fs One book which deserves, even ‘oid because they allegedly cringed
3 ler the cynical and ppportuuist before Chiang wheu he turned,
: . fr of capitalism, some spoeisl (ne! workers in 19:
iDrize for raapeability is Haro} D, ” .
. Isaacs" “Tragedy. of the Chinese This nansense;
: + jRevolution.®
: }

Trotskyite ‘tract (com: fall
- . introduction by Trotsky ji
a - tealling the defeat’ of the. Chinese \Ch

. L Workers in 1997 9 “betrayal” by
and ‘the Chinese ‘Commu-|the

t
Papeete 0 thoorn the victory |
gf the Very samé' Chinese ne ie go abr

might
ironic in

i hie ATT ga Te AAD 35056

-

a out every political x
Published frst in 1938° as an ory onthe chance that ‘today's j 7

lors. -
Meanwhile,

ing Socialism,

nee "in hys-

he tomorrow's enemy,

view of the fact thard

its -today on Taiwas H

the Chinese peaple
ut their business build:
unconcemed “by.
forthe tragedy of: |

fo

201 WL



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

. - COPY: ME:S8 . .
‘ . : Enclosure Ho. Ll _. -s |
wt Cour. . fo Der toh No. 39 ? Ken
“40 “J anaet shir BS
1 Ta Yong Yi Ping Hutung:

. , os Felping, China. . oe
~ - -Oet. -S, 1934.

Mr. f. AL Bisson
/136 Claremont Avenue - . . .
Mount Vernon, Ne Ye oo . oo ee . : :

Dear Mr. Bisson: :

tl . I have seen the correspondence exchanged between .
- MR., Olaas: and” yourself. regarding. the contributions - you .- ~
; Collected for the China Forum. A draft for the sum in

. full Bill be sent to you this week. .

I do not know in the name of whom or what Miss Smedley

- spoake of the China Forum. Sinoe she was not tn China at
the time the Forum Suspended, nor has she corresponded
with moon -the subjéct, I consider 1% necessary to place
“pefore you and the other contributors an. account of the
circumstances in which the Forum ceased. publication.

. Binoe you apparently gathered the contributore together
in a meeting to hear what Mise: Smedley: had to. say, I
would appreciate it deeply if you would gather them onoe

“wors to-hear my account. The enclosed 1s a copy of a
letter sent by me last May to the Chinese Communist Party.

- It has been published tn China tn a Chineée translation

.and copies have been sent.abroad but has not been pub-

- lished in English as far .as-I know. I do not know the
names of the people who vere’ good enough to contribute:
to the Forum but their interest in the. matter warranta
placing before them the atory. of what happened to the
magasine. I trust, out of aimple fairriess to me,. you
wilh be good enough to give shea this opportunity. 7

oe oY greatly ‘regret’ ‘any ‘Anodnveritencé” r ‘embarrasement
to which you have been put in this matter. . I ao hopa,
* <howéver, ‘that my letter will enlighten ‘you. and your
- friends and enable: ‘you to. appreciate the difficulties
which have: arieen.. I know of'no.project to revive the
-China Forum‘ at ‘the. “present time. Should sich occur, the
 Yesultant. publication would be of a Considerably different
Oharacter from the one'I edited, as will be obvioue from:
the facta given in ay letter to the C. Pp. I think | people”
who are interested in supporting the revolutionary move=
ment here: should know these facta.

‘once again, I appreciate all the trouble you have
gone to in this matter.

Did you ever, incidentally, receive the artiole:
°Fascisam in China® and the newsletter which I mailed to

July 13 inet?

POTS remengs 3 pe 9S WE

af

dene

to

Youre sincerely,

enol. “7. (Hagold R. Isaacs)

(Copied by RD) ~~

H)r AVT os Te YARD BMS POI BS SL


--- Page 7 ---
14-00060

! . C.C.P, congern=
jinx the China Forus - :

1 \ . corr

|

To the ) contra Committee of the Chinese Communist Party:

The two-year period of my extra-organizational cole
laboration with the Chinese Communist Party bas come to
and the China Forum whieh I founded and edited dur
hat: time, has been forced to suspend ‘publication.: In

- ‘the intarest. ‘of ‘our. vhole movement ag well as in my per-
gonal intereet, I coneider it necessary to record here -
-and publiah the hietery of the Ohina Forum and. the ctr

cumstances of ite euspension. You refused. me the oppor
tunity, to lay ‘the matter before the membership of the
party even when I offered to do.eo in _your own. organs and
not, through the colums of the Forum. ‘hen, wrongly, I

“permitted the Forum to go down in silence, you turned

around and in your orgsns and near organs in China and.
abroad you proceeded with the usual slandere of "batrayer*
and *counter-revolutionary®, In so doing you didn't have
the courage or the aisple honesty to state that you pre-
sented the China Forum with an ultimatum and forced its
suspension because in’ reply its editor raised. questions

‘whioh are being placed before the whole movement today
| by the International’ Left Opposition. Nor did you state
* that’ you. deliverately smashed the Forum for this reason

despite ay repeated and extendéd offers to continue pudli-
cation as before-on.a ‘gtraight entisKuomintang, anti-~-
imperialist basis, leaving thase various problems to ‘de
thrashed. out first privately among ourselves. In other -
worde, you deliberately forced. suepenston of the-Coina ..
Forua despite: the fact, on your, own admission, that its
lose vyas'a serious low to the revolutionary movement in

~ China, that it.-mean’ the disappearance of an organ which

for two. vyeard you had conéidered an extremely valitable

. inetrument in the hands of the movement. Here, aé in the

broader Ledues which 1éd to our differences, your biind
anoe to false policiea was once ‘more demonstrative
of your Teadiness to place your factional interests above
the intéreata of sae Chinese Revolution.

In going baok over the history of the Forum, T think
‘thé vicious character of. your action becomes evén more —

‘“-evident ghen I start with the fact that from beginning to

end I functioned mot as a member of the party but aa a-
wiliing eympathizer- who Was prepared to throw all hia
energiés into a job he saw he could do - edit and publish
an organ in China which could help mobilise the forces

of this country for struggle against the Kuomintang and
the imperialists by exposing the regime of terror and
privation which they have. in-common imposed upon the

.masees of the Chinese people. Permit me to recall at

tion for time or labor. You gave the Forum financial

aid but I never received a dollar from you that was not
put into the paper. I refused your offers of compensa~
tion and earned my living elsewhere. Your only. claim on
eo wag my full-hearted loyalty to the Commun’ st ideal and

— { our

thie point that { never accepted any peraonal =|

Lat Abe



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

oe
our Common dedication to the atruggie ayainet a regine
of bate and misery and oppreeston. In the end you for
feited. this claim by ceasing any longer to be in ay eyes ..
bonest or-effective leaders of this atruggle.

Although you helped the ‘Yorum finanotally, the part
you played in building it up from the day it started in
January, 1952, to the day of its last appearance in Janu-.
ary 1034, was. insignificant. My repeated requests for on
cooperation in sattera of circulation and material for ~ .
publication wént largely. unsatisfied throughout ‘that tise.

.. You nevér supplied me with the reports I..so frequently _—

- and urgently sought, ‘particularly on trade untona, atrike
. gtrugglee, the Red Armies, the Red districts, etc. Svery-

' thing the Forum.did and became was the fruit of the work

‘of a tiny group of devoted collaborators (the most im
portant of whom had no connection with you whatever) and
myself who had to depend almost entirely on “our own re- ‘
souroes for everything we did and published, At every
crisis in the Forusi's existence, when it was banned by
the French authorities in Shanghai at the very outset;
when it was hounded and persecutdd by the American and
Chinese authorities in the susmer of 1933, when through
‘Beitieh police pressure it was thrown out of every avall-
able printing ship in the city; when the pasudo-Fascist
Blue Shirts again and again threatened the printing plant
which I built up partially through personally contracted -
loans «= it was invariably through my own initiative, with
the help of the little Forum staff, that we pulled our-
selves up by the bootstraps every tims and carried on to
a point in January this year where tho Forum waa flourteb
ing and growing daily in circulstion, prestige, and in- .

- fluence deapite the many formidable obstacles in its way.
The formation of the China Forum Readers Association, .
which in the brief ‘space of three monthe spread to eleven

a . . eities in five provinces, developing into a mighty poten-

Leach. 0 tal -wéapon ‘for the revolutionary movement, was the prod-

uct of spontatieous action on the part of the Forun'a .

Yeadere, later eponsored and led by the paper itself.

All these ‘were the Forum's own achievements, not yours.

By your arbitrary and ‘criminal action you shattered thea
in the full stride of their growth. Because to my bitter
disappointment. I had not_nor could I secure the resources i
_. v0-oarry on myself - owing largely to the difficult ‘consi- |
. thons of work and the isposaibility of getting revenue |
from the paper iveelf - all that had ‘been aohieved and

was to be aonieved was ground into the dust.

Il.

From almost the very begtaning of ay active , work -
which [ date from the time [ began reporting events in
China ina ‘Communist way ~ a number of questions presented
themselves to me in increasingly forcible form. These i

’ arose originally from my discovery of the gross distor= i
tions and exaggerations which I found to be characteristic |
of Communist propaganda tn Chins and abroad. I define

. propaganda as the skilful, clear, accurate and wholly
_ truthful reporting of the facts linked to an incisive,

purrosive


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

-3
purposive interpretation and & plan of action for deale
ing with the facte ina Tevolutionary way. I learned —
SGie feu thu aade ‘and wurk oY Lenin and hia Bolshevik a
comrades who taught ue-that the truth comes from the

‘masees themselvea and that only dieneter can result froa.

telling thea lies. [I.have.naver learned to the contrary
that it was my revolutionary duty to work in any other
way although [ soon found that the present day Communi at
Party prees makes a practice of dietingutehing between

propaganda and truth.

Bxamplea of exaggeration and dietortion most strik-

' - dng to me vere naturally those which applied to China,
‘ because here I could cheok allegations with known facts.

I firot wrote these down to tne ignorance or inoavacity
of individuals. [ felt that Communist editors abroad
would publish accurate facts about China if they could
get. then. Accordingly with a friend I tried to set up.
an independent mail news service and sent weekly bulletins
to papers all over the world giving brief, sharp, faotual’.
accounts of what wae going on. ‘This wag in the fall of _

“4931 after my return from the area of the great Central

China floods of that summer. I searcely understood then
why thie service failed to secure any reaponse from tha
Communist press abroad. after about three monthe I had
to suspend it for lack of support. It simply didn't got
published except in a few organs which were not official }
Communist Party papers, including the New York Militant.//
-It wasn't long before I began to perceive, witha
deeper etudy of international events and the history of
the Chinese Revolution, that a consistent thread ran-
through the distortions and exaggerations which I. found
Dot only in brief casual. reports of-ourrent eventa but
in the solemn. pronunctanentoes. made by delegates before

plenums of the E.0.0.1.°{ discovered that these departures - a

from the truth vere mado Necessary by the official premise

“that ever gince the. catastrophe of 1927 .a mighty, upeurg=

ing revolutionary movement has been marching forvard in-
China to the ‘very brink of seizure of power under the

‘ leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, I discovered

that these exaggerations were necessary because the pren-
lee-was falee and along with it all the basic tenets of

the policies being pursued by the Communist International |

and the Communist Party in China. I cannot begin here to
give a summary of some of these distortions (which fT
verbally cited to you by the dozen) ranging from partiou-
lar incidents (the. wilfully false picture given of the
cotton mill eatrixe in. Shanghai in January, 19234, even to
the point cf transposing it to February to heighten the -
impression given of the vorkera' role in the Shanghai war)
to bigh flown generalizations like the statement reoently
made before the Plenum of the &.C.C.I. that the C.c.7. has
won over the majority of the Chinese working class and

tbe peasantry. ;

ta denying the footual truth of thio premise, whence
flowa the whole policy of the Communist Party in China, I-
deprecate not a whit the aagnificent militancy and courage
of Chineee workero, striking again and again and fighting

’ against

co



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

“dy the yellow "labor lesders® and "mediators?

“+

against terrifio odds in defense of their very Lives;
nor the noroio struggles waged by peasants all over the
Oountry; nor the fight of the Red Armiea againet the .

‘Kuomintang, -I. morely respect the cold, indisputable fact} j

that theao. struggles ‘are defensive, not offoneiva, that

“they are Leolated, desperate and unorganised. With very

few exoeptiona ~ a few small strikes here and there and
the larger: exoeption of. the Hed. army =: they are without - .
organised revolutionary leadership. Moreover the dévetop= po |
ment. of this leadership, the task of the C.P.; 1a ‘prodegd=
ing at.a tragically retarded pace owing to the. falae :
policies. ‘and inept tactics of the party.

Tn denying: tho presence ‘ofa mighty revolutionary
upsurge (i.e., a Vaat, organised march toward the. seizure
of power) I respect facta made ‘etal Clearer perbeps when
compared to the facta and figures of the monster mass move~ —
menta of the 1¥25-a7 period. ‘Tha: tragic errors of the
Comauniot leadership in- 1927 were: iprimarily reaponaible |
for the decapitation ‘of that great movement and because
Ro lessons have been drawn from those eventa to this very.
day, these exrore, monstrously acoumulated, aré atill ro-
6ponsible for the tragedies of today, ,But for the purpose
of our comparison here, let us for example take the single
faot that in 1926 in Greater Shanghal there were 257
etrikes. [n 1932 there were 82. Let ue Temember that
on the eve of the workers' seigure of power in’ Shanghat
in Mareh, 1927, there were more than 800 ,000° torkors,
handiorafteren and petty traders out on the streets fights
ing with arms in hands for demanda of a far-feaohing pos ,
litical character. A olose oheck for the qatire country
in the latter half of 1933 showed me that Yeas than one- -
thirtieth of that number were; engaged in strikeo and other
disputes during ‘any given month and that almoat invariably

+: the demande were defenaive: demands against wage cute and
- locKouta.

Moreover, the lack of cohesive ledderahip -:

often in departments of the same . factory or in’one or nore
of:a group of factories = or even sometimes lack of aven

“tha, most ‘elementary organization - hag in almost evory a 7

case led to deadening failure and relatively. one betrayal
of the :
*‘Kuomintang...In 1935" the” shooting of thirteen atudents -
by Britian police in ¢ ‘hanghai was the touch-off for a
general strike which paralyzed the oity and whioh wae
peconded by vast sympathy strikes which broke like a
series of tidal Waves ovar the entire country. In Janu- _
ary, 1932, when the Japsneee imperialinta used the Shanghai . te
International Settlement as a base for opetationa which _ ae
coset the lives of tens of thousands of Chinese, not a
aingle strike. ‘Anterrupted the normal course of the pub-
lic or other avrvices in that settlement. In the factories
there were no strikes tut a large sonle lockout to whioh
the overwheluing majority of Shanghai's workers submitted

without protest.

The dogged, peraistent strugsle carried on by amall
‘seotions of the rank and file workers in isolated instences
in recent years io tribute to the magnificent fibre of

; Chinese



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

ah rn

Chinese workers, “It is not evidence that a revolutionary’
seizure of power is on the order of the day. It 1a evi-
dence, along with the heroto sacrifices of thousands who

: have lost lives and liberty in Ciinese revolutionary
etruggle during.the last seven years of Kuomintang re-

action, that. tt is vossible to fight the monatrous white
terror whioh Chinese Communists freouently cite asa

‘reason for the insufftoiency of their work. Yet. it 16
largely because thio terror hag not been fought effectively

that the Kuomintang regime, desvite the. fact that it is
rotting and orumbling, oan still keep the lid down on the:

boiling, simmering hatred of the people it rules. Unless -
_ the martyrdom of thousands of China's finest workers,
' peasants and revolutionary intellectuals is to be in vain,

we must turn resolutely away from the folly of calling to
ineurreotion when what 18 needed is painstaking education,

-, organization and the sponsorship of day-to-day struggles
of the masses for demooratic denands, the. slow building up

of a varty and mags organizations and a wovenent which

“will be able’ to command. the forces capable of. carrying out

an insurrection.

In the case of the widespread but isolated and in~
dividual cases of peasant uprisings, and thie includes
the Red Armies in Kiangsi, theese struggles await the
leadership of a strong working class movement before they
Can have a sucoessful issue. The Red armies in their re~
stricted and Surrounded -areas end with their meagre re~-

- sources have. fought heroicelly against the Kuomintang

attacks upon them. But until the Kuomintang is shaken

from its bulwarks in the tmperialist controlled working -
Olass. centres, their prospect of revolutionary triumph
remaing necessarily dim. No revolutionary purpose is_ .
served by taking refuge in the fiction that these armies
have vroletarian leadership because individual workers, |
eundoubtedly leaders of superior quality and courage, have —
been torn from their fadtories-and their fellow-workers ~~
and sent down to ocouvy key positions in the Red Army .
distriots and in the. Red armies themselves. Indeed, this
common practice of extracting the most conscious and’ pro-
gressive working olass elémente from their working olass
environment and sending them down to the Red districts is
a good index to the oriminal transposition of emphasis
which has helped paralyze the working class movement in
the cities. If the White Terror doesn't carry off the-
workers' leaders as they arise, the C.P..does and has done
so in hundreds of cases. This helpé in no small part to
explain why it haa also been impossible to mobilize a ,
genuine mass unti-Japanese movement in the fact of mili- -
tary aggression and why the White Terror of the Kuomin- -
tang has succeeded, by filling mass graves and innumer=
able prisona with the martyred dead and living, in doen-
ing the anti-imperialist movement or efforts toward the
organization of such a movement and paving the way for

, the ever increasing enoroschments of the imperialists.

The varty has not yet grinned and directed the deep and

“bitter and often inartioulate batred of the masses of the

péovle for their oppressors and this inoludes large eéo-
‘tiona of the lower vetty bourgeolote who could be won by
aucceseful sass pressure from below. This 19 beoause the —

- _. | Party


--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

a

Party hao failed to tranalate the realities of everyday”

evente into its program and tactics... ws +

I cannot .here go into the many-faceted problena and”
iasues which flow from these facts with regard to the  -
i

volictea and tactics of the Chinese revolutionary movemen
Nor extending to:the international scene need I go into -
the terrific effects of the Gernan catastrophe nor the
‘storm of questions whioh: has been directed at the-C.t,
leadershio whose responaibility in the disaster has be-
come nakedly clear to ‘unnumbered Communiats. ‘and Communist:
symosthizers the warld over. Nor into the whole set: of -
taplications which arise from the polioies.of the 0; ley
with nartiocular reference to the late develonments in
Soviet foreign polioy, the Litvinov-Roosevelt agreement,
the forthcoming mooted entrance of the U.S.S.R. into the
League of Nations and in a enaller but equally oharaster~
totio way, the forthcoming association of the U.S.S.R.
with the Institute of Paoifito Relations which hopes to
hold ite naxt talkfest in Yosccw, These probleme, with. - : :
their many sveocific links to the Chinese questiona,: WETS meee
the basic questions over whioh I soon. began to take issue

with the offtotal views of the Party and the International. .

\ Ill.
i But precisely because’ at all costs I desired to oarry
“on the Forum's open struggle agoinst the common enemy ~
Jagainet the Kuomintang and’ the imperialists - I sedulously
‘avoided bringing these issues into the coluins of the paper,
.. dnoreasingly against my better judgment. 1 leaned over far
: - backward ‘in this respect. This expressed itself in many
of the. current lasues vith which we had to deal.

“SY ask you_to recall. ‘the whole uvbil) fight whiok thie. coe
Forum waged on behalf of Paul. end Gertrud Ruegg in the y : ; °
epring and sumeer of 1933 during which tise I repeatedly
‘warned against the emvhasis whioh was being placed on. the
. . Slégal® agvects of the case and the ‘negotiations’ with -
-' the Kuomintang to the detriment of mass pressure ‘and the -
a dapitalization of thé cage for political nurvoses. You
'. gatd lip service to the need for mass. vressure - vartiow- =
-larly here in China-= ‘but in fact the “‘legalities® and .
futile negotiations remained the major pillars of the de~- .
‘Yense,, Until in the very end I finally rebelled, I vasn't : : a
even permitted to give Ruegg his honoursble ahd rightful: oe
-title - secretary of the Pan Pacific Trade Union Secre-
tartat. Yét, although I felt the struggle for the Ruegga
wae being seriously handiocavved “by the tactics being pur-
sued, I carrted on the fight with all the energy at my
: command and you will recall that it was I who oreated the
| looal defense committee. and was chiefly resyonsible for
the uidesoread press vropaganda and the considerable
sympathy which we aroused. Yet the strictly non-political
attitude whitch Ruegg wae forced to assume at the trial
‘(in contrast to the highly rolitical at«itudce of his
Prosecutors) waa An my opinion one of the major reasons

for



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

a |
: . \

‘for the fate to whivh he and his wife were condemned.

; I ask you. to recall the whole neriod of the organtsa=
tion and activities of the China-Lesgue for Civil Righta, |
from Decenbér, 1932, to June, 1933, in which I took. an

_ active pert. I.gave full vlay to thia hybrid League and '
its work without. once publishing the baéio oritioiana |"!
- 7. '. whieh I oftem:volced’to you ‘and whioh in. the end were |
wholly confirmed by what Rasnened after the Kuomintang
-murdered Yang:Chien in June that year. me :

: “NE ask you to recall. the views I set forth in August |
an and Séentember,. 1933, on the subject of the "anti-War Con-
_ g¥ess" whioh at your specific request I did not. publish,
Instead, to my regret, I published the foul rot of Mare
ley & Co., without freely giving play to the true facta
about that faroicnl junket which had convinced -me that -
_ the volicies which gave it birth do not. one single whit
“advanoe the international atruggle againat imperialtoet |
war. . ot

. On one occasion ~ and this at least I can take dome .
fort in‘ I passively resisted when you requested me to
write and publish a slanderous attack on Ghen~Tu-hoiu
when he was condemned to. 13 years japrisonnent by the
Kuomintang. ‘Your request was sneoific. I waa not to:
deal with the issues which hed brought Chen Ti-haiu fron
. being the leader of the C.P. in 1927 to being leader of
an .- the Chineee Opposition in 1933. I was only g, String to=
"gether a vile series of labela in an effort to explain
: _ Why the Kuomintang even imprisoned the. leader of. the
-. ">, Left, Opvosition. ag you know, that attack was never
“ -, a eritten or published. . : - oot

a on So “Again in December, 1933, upon my return from Fukteén
: ~ . 7 . you specifically demanded that I set aside the Tesults of
se 1 .o- mY Own versonal investigations in Foochow in order to.
* write on your behalf (but over my signature!) an utterly
baseless and slanderous attack on the Left Opnosition. -
. You will recall that you charged at-that time that. the
"Trotekyiete" weré prominently identified with the new
OR governzent set uo in Nikien by Chen Ming-sbu and Taal’ .
: ' TPang-kai.. You lumped.the Left Opvosition with the Third
“., - Party and the so-called Social Democrats among the petty
_ bourgeois satellites of the Fukien militarists. It was
<8 much to satlefy myself on this very point as to per-
form a mission for you that I went down to Fooohow and
Soent-tro weeks there and learned through dircot contact
with dozens of people prominently concerned that the Left
Onxosition were stoutly snd clearly onvosad to the Foochow
“regime. I_haven't place bare to discuss the relations of -
the 0.P. to the short-lived Fukien Government or the char~ _
acter of the “negotiattone’ which were going on down there...
The. iswortant thing here 1s that on ‘ny return you démanded
that I write Slanders which flew in the face of everything
I myself hed lenrned.. It 1a interesting, as a eidelight
on. your methoda in factional strife aa you conceive tt, ;
_ that your representative in Fooohow sent back a report,
through me, ironically enough, that one of the sost prom
inent of the youthful peeudo-radicals in Fooohow, tu .

Chi-~yusn

L



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

-3~ .

\

Chi-yuen. to be exact, wad A leading *Trotskyist*. It so
hanvenvd thes 7 sad net cas Sat seversl lengthy interviews
with Bu and by the time I left Pooohow I underatood bis:
position and his personality exceedingly well. He was as’
much a Trotskyist. as Wei Lan-fang ie! Yet you actually
demanded that I ignore my own knowledge of the man and in
my artiole on Fukten set him down as a "Trotakyist®. I.
waa faced on the one hand by your demands that I erite —
falsehoods to suit your policies and on the other by my
.-deeo desire to set forth: the actual facts about the Oppo-
: sittvon!s attitude towards the Fukien regize. But once
fade _ ore, ‘to'vreserve the shreds of our relationshiv, I drove :
vg middle course and did neither, leaving the whole question... :
. aa Tee . r ae

out of my artiole. =~ S :
Despite the facts that these issues weighed more and
more heavily upon me,. despite the fect. that events in
China and abroad were pressing themselves sore and more
imperatively on the-concernsa of every sincere revolution-
ary, I still tried to. keep the Forum balanced on its
ribbon-like path, concentrating on the anti-Kuomintang,
anti-imperialiat struggle, and in 80 doing fulfilling at
least a partial function as_a revolutionary organ. i
deeply felt, however, that I’ was betraying ry readera by
' avoiding thess 4saues. How could I write of Germany and
avoid all the implications of that disaster? How could
'. I write of america's reoognition of the U.S.S3.R. and still
fail to say that. the Communist International had virtually
: ‘ been murdered ‘at Hashington? -How oould I warn against the .
ao . dangere of imvertaliet intervention in the U.S.S.R. and |
nea still not point out. that Soviet foreign solicy was in
: - fact. dally heightening the danger of such iatervention? ..
Yet I.eomehow did 80 ‘and sought in whatever way possible
‘to retain some basis for our continued collaboration.

Nevertheless, abruptly in January of this year you.
forced ‘an ultimatum upon me and subsequently forced the
. break in our relationship because I could not and vould
not, at your demand, ‘devote the China Forus to policies
; which I could not and do not believe compatible with the
, interests of the Chinese. Revolution and the international
_prolétarian ravolution. I could not, at your demend, set
aside the convictions to which I had literally been driven.
‘by the stinging lash of catastrophic, events in China, - Lot 7
Germany and the world over. Partioularly ay deep inter- : a
. est in Chinese events during the last three years made it :
' {mpossible for me, finally, to give active support to
policies and tactics whose disastrous effects sere being
a thousandfold confirmed for me by the tragic events of
‘every swiftly-vaseing day.. I could not ignore questions
which strike at the roots of our work and the whole struc-
- ture of our hopes for a revolutionary future.

. Despite the fact that these ‘questions are rocking
the entire International today, you denied ay right to

yaise


--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

- become a stereotyve

_ back tome the

‘ganda purposes a cert

‘ exaggerations!"

- “take uv cudgels. against ‘Sgounter-revolutionary 2
That waa to bs the main ‘point. of my reformation = to raise .
‘no questions myself and ‘slander anybody else who did 80."

-to unorthodox as well a

. Dubdlish.orthodox news. an u
‘the right to coment and oriticise.

offered to disousa these questions with me verbally if in

-e '
raise them in print. You deaanded more. You demanded
that I attack anybody who did 80 - primarily the people
you oall “counter-revolutionary Trotskyists’ - the only
peopite who are fscing these problems today in a fearless,
revolutionary ways: You denonded that the China Forus
roe for the volicies and vulgar faction-
al Slanders which I could neither then nor now be party ~
to. In reply to.my questions on China you simply quoted |
des: and half-lies I've been so used to |
Féading in Inprecorr. You even ‘declared: "For propa- .
ain amount of exaggeration is necee-
eary...4 and went on anasingly to Say: *put we know the —
true. facts and we base our. poliofes on thea, not on these
A new slant on modern-day b.4. tadtioa!
Facts, you @aid, are curious things. They have tobe —
turned around and around and around and examined closely
until their true nature becomes apvarent. The trouble ie

-you turn them eo far and so quickly that they turn into

something like a dizaily turning top of. fancy — or at
best wieh - fulfilling misrepresentations.

_ To my questions on Germany you. quoted Heckert,-
Piatniteky, and the 2.C.C.I.'e famour resolution deolar~
ing that the collapse of the German party and the slaughter
of the German workers were based on the past present and
future correct policies of the 0.P.a.! ‘ou declared I had

“no right, to offer critical comment on the dangerously

opnortunistic foreign and domestio policies of the U.S.5.R.,
most notably on the entry of the U.S.S.R. on e atraight

_ “nationalist basis into the disgusting corridors of in-

peridlist intrigue. To the contrary, I was to lovingly
famingly fondle and hail the polioies which have meant
disaster in China, Geraany and elsewhere and are rapidly -
leading: the U.3.3.R. into the vacuum of nationalist 1280~
lation from -the world wide proletarian movement. This I

vas to do, to begin with, by, publishing Stelin's face on ;

the. front page and colurins of the customary, panegyrics
to his infaliibility. | Above all and before all, I was to
Trotskyism*.

Ia-reply to your deaand that I submit to an editorial
board in-order that these editor1al nolicies should be.

- effectively nut into practice, I offered (1) to continue
' publication striotly as before,

t ; meanwhile arguing out my.
differences. with you in discussione on the side; (2) to
throw the columns of the Forum open to a general discus-

-sion of all basic revolutionary question, with free play
a orthodox views. If your views

were correct, I argued, {it would be a distinot advantege +
to you to have such an opsortunity to display their tril-

lianoe alongside the puny efforts of your critios; (3) to
a views but to reserve for myself

These repeeted offere. you reveatedly refused. You

the



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

-10-

OR the seanvhile I throw the Forun oven to your. editorial
cee ee -  Ddoerd.- Vy other provogals were unthinkable! Give tha
. Forua's readers a chance to hear Sounter-revolutionary® |
. ' Viewcoints? Never that! I could only display ay TéVOm
lutiosary purity by acceding to your demands. We would
talk things over until Spring, then if all went well (1.0.,
if I: showed a° satisfactory adnotability to your viev—  .
voint) I could paok up for an educattonal trip to the
- Soviet Unton where I would certainly become convinced
“of the error of my ways. In other words you wanted my
- signature on a promissory nota with the anount left
_ dDlank for you to fill in. You put this in the. form of
an ultimatum and you told me that if I did anything but © -
-accert I would forthwith enter the camp of the “oounter-
revolution", . im .
~.., Thad to refuse these terms, I had to refuse to
lend ayself to a slanderous and baseless struggle against -
the International Left Opnosition. I had to refuse to
a Tend space to the nauseatingly fawning praise of Stalin
cee etn J), and wneritical recevtion of Stalinist poliotes which
_— ot characterise the Communist Party press the world over.
I had to refuse to take shelter in the cold and draughty
eavty spaces whioh stretch behind the impressive facade
and early tradition of the Communist International. . I
would like to go to the Soviet Union for a vist Someday =
-but I had to refuse your offer on your terms. I had to
refuse, in short, to become a hack prostitute in the name
of the Revolution.

ee ' In the end, too, I had to refuse to turn over to you
. ‘ ‘the printing plant I had built uo with so much pain and
oo : _ Strugale because I considered it not your proverty but.
: the ‘proverty of the working class movement. Beoause I
could not carry on the Forum myself, for l2ok of finan-
cial resources and because of heavy debts contracted, I
' Gisposed of “the- plant and turned every farthing of the |
proceeds over to where I now consider the true interests
of our movement lie. It was. with e deep and abiding bite
terness that I had considered comrades, when for tzo years
~~ 4% Dad fought off all its many enemies on the outside.

Yet with 1¢ camo the realization that we have to
build anew over the ruins you have wrought. The revolu-
‘tion’and the building of our future moves. forward and |
. ,,, ‘when we trample down the defenses of our enemies we shall
- “> exush underfoot everything and everybody that stands in.
os . our way. Ho sycophantic, blind allegiance to a name, an
-eapty facade, a torn and shredded prestige can lead ue
" -forsard. Only unswerving fidelity to our goal and sotive
Struggle towards this end with the weavons of a correct
‘and tosted political ling will lift us from defeat to ul-
‘timate victory. To this atruggle I shall continue to

dedioate all my energies.

: Harold R. IJeaaca,
Peiving, China
Nay 20, 1934.

(Covied by RD)
ter th fd f


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

RCE:  DATLY TORXER
EUR COMMUNIST ACTIVITIES FILES so

Date:_._ We — . ae a oo

i s _.
POST WRITER ADMITS ALL
"| KOREA’ OPPOSES INVASION
a | The Korean people aro ‘united, honest headline:
behind the Liberation Annies from] Know Why Help Has Came”:
i {in Late editions the Post ine
dicated its own awaraisss of the :
phoniness of this headline by drop. ~ -
ping it. The new ond complained: .
“Weak $. Korean Regine Hane
Pers Gls at Front.")

But Isaacs made clear that “if
in China during the Japanese wat’ -
the Americans fad a freaily pop '
ulatton on theie Side, this is by
: o Aur t lfno- means the case now-in Korea, : .
jdeteud: “democracy, : Ho conchides:."Evoa if thé wear’ «”
1 Isanes declared that ‘the: U. S.itemains Jocalized, even 9° victory,
chas “much more Fenton’ {9 countl won in due course will be a tem-
. fe ON Reneral Korean hastili Porary one, and such. 4. victory, will
on hemic. support.” His ‘not be easily won.” °:
> that “South Korean civilitns aval. WT ee ed
tely harder hit by Ue -
action so far” than hy so :

itheir fellow-Kareans from thes
yo eos north, . : i

American troop sent’ there
| Trusnan interventionist orice, th?)
{ New York Vou's Far Kast expert,
cd yester-

. . . Harold Kt. Leaacs, adi
sot . ay ee .
. Isanes’ article gave the lie “to}

the Post's own editorial fino off

~ PSUPPOrE ta the police-state Feginies

«tol Syoghenan thes and the Tro.

: in attack on Korea as an

Rhee was decisively ’

-Teaars ‘Ueclared that-the guerilla’ - . . . fo _—
Poe . + Movements in. South Korea “could” oo 2 . . oa
t. * . i have operated only with a con : ot . ae : :
i : ; Srderable meaure of papwilir sup. a .
t } "and he acknowhuzed the
re of all Kurcans for . : .
ir disnembensd , .

: "To top this story, bristling with’

= expsure of the imperialist natu
2 ot the Truman’ attack on Korea, .
vend with evidence of the Korean} * ,
boople's awareness .of their real

enemy, the Past concocted the dis

Ber Sb0b
Ww ATT es” hb BAIE crs


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

yea fasast, posed

‘ Deceaber 2, Lv3z.
No. 1486. :

EEeeed:
MEM GOHAN DUN,

Sith referenca te R.A. ‘memorandum No. 1505 of Decosber .
1931, regaréing Harold ISaacs ‘anc his ccaneotion with °
aire NCVILNS, 2t has just been. learned that one Viola:

C8 arrived 1a Shanghai on jugust 2a, 1232 » by the :
Re See cMPRESS CFonSTA. © Ca aucust £9, fies UCBIN" “CN, _
- tose ther bith Harold: Isaacs of the CHINA Fon » €8.8@ Aotios -
to the United States Consulate G:neral ef thelr intended .
: . . Sarriage, which actually tcok place cn the Leth September,
Toa ‘In his. triage application, ISAACS par ticularly requested
_ ‘that ac’ pubile ity bo « ven to the forthcoming ceremcny. It
appears that Wise RCHINGCN ds a follczer of the Suffrsgette,
Lucy STCNE,- Bho,. sone Tittes mn cr teenty yesra aso, advecated
ancng smerican wowen the retertien of the maiden nane after
narrlass, According to ofvicials of the United. states
Consvlate General, faetn: LCSINCN, therofore, eill not be

kncon as “rs. Ts SAAC
In connection aith Viola * “OTH: “CNT Sw activities in china, oe

ina letter, dated Szechuen, July 24, 1931, Harold ISAACS
wrote to Viele ECHIN N ae folloss: :

oo

: "You | sre in the swim, Viole. Ita coatng back to
dive in and seim alongside. ‘hat co vou'think? It
ds all extremely fortuitous Crom our standpoint 0
thes I pbculd have aecn the Licht at last. Your
aork with “UdG and the -future in it 4s far more.
important than snything you eculd co out h
. _ - Snyebare elea for that satter.. i'll ge .
ay rn ail.) Bo Batter @ poesible delay .-.no matter how - there .. --.------.5
rn ne ~~ BLL ‘ve a Job ‘to be cone ane by cur gods i'm golng -
: to cet into ite. _ .

: ; attention ta ealled to the name, AUG + menticned: in ithe. atove, 2
Fo. os Oxtraete.. ¢ : \ ;

A fv AT? ROM fad h



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

4

27 2
. . . .

AXERICAN GCHSULSS ‘SERVICE.

American Consulate Cencral,
Shanphat, Ch “Ana, Deoouber™ 10, 1931,

, _ Subject: Harold Ke Ieaacp.
THE HORORASLE
THE SECHEPARY UP STATE,
" SASHINGTCN, :

wine eeey tment aoa

i
t

Sir, vo

T have ‘the honor to Foport tha an Anerioan ©

i an osticon Raed Harold R. Ise.08 hag doen reported to

; thie offiee by the poltes of the Mternaticnad set

Slenent as a corsunist suspect. The faete Feeardlog Le

an - - br. Teanoa aro brisfly as folloves ;

CP » Harold Ns Tenses oxlled at ante office ta

— “pabimey 1930, and atated that he would bo for a fee

“months in ‘Shonichas at that tine-he axhidited paes-
“port Ho. 177026, temued, by the Department of ‘State on
: Moreh i,. 1850. Re ‘atated that he expootad to" leave

: 7 "- Shanehst 12 uno, 19315 tat bio home,nae in Kou York

pe 7 -_ “okey and that nig’ lece2 uareos tab in core of the

Anerioag Expresa Coupany. ot
Apeom ing to Poliee reporta Toneeo arrived. in
‘Shanghag from Vaniia as a first-class passoncer on the
3. Sy PRESTR JErPERacn on Deocaver 17, 3936. Ne eae
esployec by the sitara CURRY and
_ Aster by the CeTra PRIS? but apparently Lest both
oe - . , : pooittons.
Yili ATP 0) Te YAKS shia
| ne cae , . Oi Nee

WPORVEIMPG plop arn

gr 29-4,

StF ec Fe ey ae af hoe mae cet, Reig,


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

i
ae
|

: 1931, oatabliished a news ageney under she. nee of the

fe

poaitions, Me has resided ith e Arittsh oubjeet named

€. Yrank Gluss at-124 volhalvet Road and neda a trip with -
Glass to szechien during Juno, 1931. Tho pollee file"
doatains a aopy or a letter written by hin toa Kiss
Viola. Robineon,, curo of the Amorioan Consulato,. Presden;'

: Germeny, dated Jaly 24, 1932, at ‘Chenctu, Szochuen.

‘This lotter, it is stated, was roturne: unopened to
Shanghai tren Dresdon, avdyoased to Harold R, Isaacs ©

im oare of tho Anorioon Exprese Company, Shanshad, and

was opened by the Fost Office Conaér at the request of
tho Goumf{dstoner of Fosta, Tha. letter is very long and

. Shows that Ieases, al though previcualy holding @on-

muuiistio views, only deoided definitely to turn “ited”

_ during duly of this year. Ho states th: at he was. in-’

fluenced in thie deoloion by certain convarcations with
0. Frant: Cleaa, above referrod ts, eurinc thear trip. to
Szechuan. .

In connsetion thorevith At ‘nay be of intorsat to
state that aozording to a. polico report dated cotober. _
17, 1931, information regard ing this letter was given :
by the Shang.al -Munieipal Police to an officer of the. a
Iceal Britiah Consulate General, who apperontiy oadled
in formation ragards, ne it to Lor sion. -The police report |
otates that. a Yoply waa subdsecuently revelva the gles
of pilonh ie aa follows:

"Viola Hobinaon arrived in tho t United

States abou$ the micdlo of Gestenuer. Tha

whola Partly are comuntsts in touch with

Toase9’ Pocdly.”

The police atate thut Harold fh. igasas dn Rovenbar,

“Ea

-



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

. “be
*7ay Bastorc Trova Corraszondenoe,” ecdle aldreea
Yenprecop, P. o. Box 1926. On Cetubder Gths Tanaea and
C, Frank Glaos moved fro: 1£3 “olhaiwet Roud to Houne

_¥Oe 8, Faosaza Ko. 177, Avenuo Dubail. The police atate ae oS

“that this address woo formerly’ ‘inown as Tum ber 2B Avonuo :
“Dubai and is the boarding house at ‘which henos Smedloy
mrp os -"" pestdod fron ‘kay, 1929, to tay 1990, ‘The poliee ropors
‘that Agnes Smedley frequently visits Teaaes and Class
at thie acdress. .
; mm. my monthly political rayort Cor Novenber, on
; pago- 15 4% waa atated that the bodiea of nunerous nenbers
- of the family of a cergoin: Kou had beon murdered, allegedly,

by commniste in yetallation for Kouta suming traitor to ae : oO
~ the corrumist, eaueo. mn conriestion with tito ra ttor’ Ss
Isaces addressed an open letter to tha verious Rowapapers
ef Shanghai , under date of Hovenbor a, 1931, in vntoh
” ne peored then vor prnnding those alleges MUMiers as
oh sexiblen and "deoterdly,~ vhile ot the pane bine thor oe
ala not raise ‘their editorial voices against tho whole-
sale muniers com tted by Chiang Haieshek, tho ‘Garrioon oa
Comender ‘of Shanghat and ‘other Chinese militariste, | .
Lone of the. popers: pay rit to publish this Letter bus Tr:

“ay have resoived a copy thereof; ani copies are enélosed.
I Rave also roocived a photostetie copy of the last page
-eontaintns: the signature of vr. Ioasee. :

Rospestfully your,

E'win S, Gunninehes,
Arerigan Cangsl General.

, Ene Lopare:

Pips Ld


--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

1 .
i ——
poo:
'

V/- Copy of open letter fro Tarola -

. ————"- Ene loguret
Jeaaoa, dated Novanber 24, 10931.

7) a iaamupageatal -
“So Copy to. Lagat te



--- Page 23 ---
rSbDDOY

Rrolowre Nd. 1 to dospateh Ho. O/ 7 of tauin S. Cunninchen, -
Anertoan Gorlsul General at Ted, China, datet Peoenber
Xe, IVGL, on tho sudsest: wold hh. Igunes.7  *

Your publention of tha “chastly” (3h
“horrible? (Ciina ress), "daoturdily” ("ven Post ‘arid:
North China Pally Mere) winders “allenedly camitted bz

Chinese Cormunists in the Freno!: Congasaion brings
foreibly tc mind eértain other amects ef tho Chinese ©
‘etene whore jhactiiness. snd barbarity find their: my —~ .

J into your columne only at Frure intervals - and tien. | Foe nop
only in drief eool norecradhe, a

+ i]

Thora enn be no atest to “Justify” these alleged
muniorg, {? the tule be tru. we sll hate tho outs of a
traitor. | Sut wo reat all cendane a syste: of vengetta
Wiioh oxaste ao the srice of batrayal sho innoonnt Lives
of a traitor’s faeiiy, That, hovevar, fnvelves the.”
question of difiering social ouator's to wiles no abotract
morul a.solute oun poeably be aonlied.

Ket¥ayal has its price under ony secial nora, .
Whether we turn. the cirty wor of venceence over to the - -

‘Adnoffeble meroies of the Lord er exploy the lesa sesthotiea |

but more offootive inabrumants of the Esaliows, eleotrio |
chair, lethsl chamber, the sulllotine or the sre refined
Peapone of goeial ostraviany whether we consider the:
traitor himself? rasponaldle foy his actions - or exaos .
rotributien fro: his blesd reintions ss well. {Jebovah, -
too, visits tho sing of she rather upon hia chiléren,
yea, oven unto the thir: and sSourth conerattonah)

. Bus you reporters, whose typosritera cuivered
with the horror of these ailesed deote of murder in
Prenohtown ¢sh still withsu$ a cudls c-ndone and even
express sutiafadticn at masa mrdera.a thousand tinos

‘pre revolting, a thousand times nore-barberoug ~ but

lesa eo in your journalistionlly judicious eyes only
vesause ofrivially perpetrated. : .

You city efitors = et the moment sending your nen

out to Pun-‘dom the last threaded foles to this particuler | .

story - why don!’ you send then out to Lunghua eome fine
sunny morning? hy don't you sive them an opportunity .

“to witnasa the torture and rerder of young nen ané women

whoso only erine is a renlistio ansrecsation ef the
social and econenfe fneters at wor:.in the world and
a dezand for their readjustment?

You @ itors, whe wield your ed!torial nowera so
eolf-richteously, why doen't jou O-salstently e-amine and
locicully expose a -overnmment that seintatng itself?
largely by deaporstaly slaushtering the flower of its
protasting youth and the baezbone of tte peasBant in aseg
who attcaipt protest accinst ita venality and eorraption?

pte . .

tniv


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

* $ustiee. should Ch
tribunais oan we arraign the carfison earmendors of Shanghai,

so-ealled "military" vorind of tha ruortintang tn 19La

a .
wie “

Galy when it ia convenient for yur foretcn interesta,’
however,’ Go yo: find it-polit‘e te trot out some af your
faverite blests wcainst the honking regime, attaexa whieh
are almost always Lrialistoly offset by the Rou sont ing
@alovies.end vlatant lies thus foller,

Conatdereé from your own point of view, Wesora. :
Eé{tors, the muriorera of Biese Srorehtown people sould .
de brourht to Juetion and mado to pay for, their orizos.
Inbelrdlerly Tro: your own point of view, to what bar of
fang £ak. Shas be brought, before ehat.

Nenking, Hankow, the warlords of Shontung, Szechuen,

Fwangtung and Nanchuria fox the livea they have taken in

the perpetual wars thay have waned on the people of China? -
On any prinoiplen of abstract Justiee, is the nase minter
of thousunds by the machine cun, the bomber, the rifle, the
sword, thé axe any moro Just than the furtive etranpulatisas
of nine hopelegs relatives of a velf-pranded yellow our?
Thio perpetual warfare has: hean waved on the protext of

suppressing “banditry." If thia be so, ve are confronte:

with the startling f2et, vouchel for and advertised by
the government Boasting tie resomiticn of all roroten

‘powers, that vast portions-of. the Chinass population are

@rininals On tis premise, Chiang fat Shek & Co.
backed by the echorts of tha Svong onage swoop dom on
whole provinses, massucre thousands, texe heavy tolle
from the nougre Life earnings cof peasontea and workers.
And with wll their cuns.and planes and hundreds or”
thousands cf. soldiers, thoy still fil to eradicate the

_“dandite."

: She aro the bandits, tho robbers, the murterera? |
Answer this question, Roscre., Leéitors - and enewer 1¢
honoatly 42 you derep wes 7
Japan, in violatien of so-called. principles -
of justiaa, but in fall accora vith the lessons of
history, 18 helsing herself to a gucd aiise of Continental
Asia, allegedly port of the Nanking Governaent's domain,

: Laoklig the ‘courage, tha ability, the inolination to tum

£39 Guna on the invader, the iuonintang aita in solenn.

: -Gonolave at Nanking-and afasusses further ngasures whieh,

it hoped, stl pormtt the extermination of new porticns
of China's vast "ort-inal" population to procress
moro effeetively.

' Let us take sone of tho fseta sporcdieally renorted
vy your own and the Chinese sresa during sy -Desenber,
1980, You renorted 4,749 exeoutiona, From other, more
hoticulous 6 vrees are derived stutisties ahtoh show that
ro less than $6516 were exceuted durine the last four ronths
ot 18s6 alonel This fl-wre sounds (lobulor, doesn't £¢7
Yet “or every digit there {9 somewhare in China a rotting
corpse, .

During the perlod rollowing: the close of the

to



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

-3-

to the opening of the T. in Plenary session of the
Party in 168¢ soproxinstely 450 (6 workers, poasanta,
and students sot @eut> at th hands or ch tna? a8
*rovoluticmyry” amies,. ¢ne Shangha t dni ly (chinese)
inte the naxt year @: itorializec as Sollewer-

“411 China's: problang’ "eoutd be satistsetorily ositloa i?
the food ror: of tho nast. fev months oan de oortimeds
; : _ Fron: August to Getoder (1930) alone 240, GUE Communists
ee . . " were killed and A5:,c69 z people starved to death in tho.
Soo we famdne regions." -° - ee

wes -And if the dimenatens of these ficires aro not .
. astly enough to nove yu, shall we engage in a bit of

: . Pedloitoun deserinttcn of. the tortures a-Alied by theso
‘ ’ Righteous saviora oP China? Shall we speak of the
_ _ . buynings 2 ‘tn oil, the buyying alivo (aa wore five young :
: . man and womon ft Lunchua-on-Febs 7 lest} ene stranmlatior ,
tho ungpeekable mutilation of nan bodies before ceath? -
-_ : These aren't wild nightmares. You hava ell-scon and :
ete oa . -shuddered at the photorrashs which ean atill be bought
: : ae Rer@ and there in Chanchod depleting shese processes in.
. all their grieliness, ~ .

Co : . oo Ae at ‘these, Megara, Kiters, @ as you raiea
poe ; your @ {torial henés iz saintly norrer? Do you splosh.
a yal four columns with the adjectives “dastardly, horrible,
oo 7 : chastly?® Hardly. That would offend your Nanking. :
te wt a . frienta. If you do not xaintstn oilenee that bospoaks
i Te : - gontentront, you brazenly applaud, Tor this ve oan .
oa oe : quote you chapter and verse Pros your own of ‘iterials.

: There are no organs ‘no nudllentions here that:

_@are look these fects boldly in the face... Your ~
mastheads at] carry. boasts ef your tapartidlity. ” Here” i
ia at least one opsortunity to tnvest: then zith coro
quslity of verisl tlituds. . -_

Sineeraly, :

(Siemed) Larold. Re Tezecn
- 277 Avenus Dubs il,
*. .Kouse 6.

Bovember 24, 1931.

bo Copied by 7
Dope os . Corpared white oa Hy



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

’ ~ a

oe Looe, ‘EZ COMMUNIST ACTIVITIES FILES : .
: - : : ‘ \ PILE NO,

‘ PAPER IN DANGER :

Threat to Turn Isaacs
Over, to o Nanking

SHANGIAL, Re —Th wall noe . mo . toe

Street government, ‘suppdrting its . . . to

| Nanking butcher agents, has threats

ened to turn oyer Harold R. Tsancs,

‘American editor of the “China’ For-!

um,” te-the Nanking hangmen. |
Ap editor of tho ‘Chins Forum,"

nasca has committed tho crime’ . .

against’ Jmperialism of supporting: . . : '

“Hthé Chinese Revolution and ruthless~ .

Jy exposing the mass murder of rov-: : .

olutionary Chinese workers and peas~: . .

ants by the Nanking regime and the; . . . .

United Btates and other imperialist! ao 0

brigands, He has exposed tho shame-! : :

‘Ytut sell-out of tho Chinese ornsses,

by the Nanking trnitors to the Jap-:

aness, American And other imperial

ipa) aw

inte
* The United States ‘government has
warne! Isaacs that $8 will withdrew - oo
the protection of oextra-territorisl - . so .
-|rights unless“ th 6 “China Forur noe
changes ita editorial and netts pole:
icles. Under ths extta-territortality
traaties imposed upon China by the
importalists, American ahd'other cltl-
gong of the imporilsist powers may
. not be tried in. the Chinése courts,
Becauit Isaacs te an Amertean. cit -
zen the Nanking government has nob
- | been able to wrenck its vengeance. on”
[dun for his exposure of thetr bloody. . .
‘|terror and’ betrayal of ‘the Chinese . . ’
masses, The Wall Street Govern, -
pment, which protects ita business
. . . . ‘agents 29 lodting Ohina now proposes
mo . eo . ]to throw Isaacs to its Nanking lack~
. ann "oe eye for trial in the Chinese courts
oa charges carrying Ife imprison
“\[ment or the death penalty.

" Ianscg ‘has categorically refused
‘Teoncede to the demands of th: United
| Btates government that hé change
the policies of the “Ching Forum."
Fis ts closely associated tn the anti+:
imperialist, enti-Kuothintang fight

: . wit, Madam: Suh Yat-sen, who is
. ¢hisrmsn of the committee Wading
. the Night to save Paul ant Gertrude
Rueggs from a depth sentence in the:
Chinces courte. ~
| American workers and Intelretust
and thei’ organizations should at
once zend vigorous protest’ to tho
rBtate ‘Department at Waspington,
josma rts attempt to~tread Lsaacs.
to death in the Nanking Courts’ |

fae Deation Af she allel Gtatas

fi fy 4. roe
WIM ATP oh OO pad, ~ AND :
wmei- fibw ke


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

: at Sey
ww Adee LEI:
a Yipee —_ 1 fesvea
Ste : — —_—_ OO

\atroct to Paris for threo. or foot days befere prococding. to
‘London. Ele vieit to Parid is, therefore, atrictly unofficial. .

FRANCS 28
a correspondent aakod if the Frenoh Government had askod ~

‘tho ‘Stata Dopartnent for an agrsmat for & new Anbaseador. in

Washington, Me Gorsaine-Martin x. Rogats replied in the

‘negative. : ee ee a De

CHINA . .
a corrospondsnt, ‘gaked if Representative La Guardia of

New York had naked the Stato Department to intervene in tho

case of an Amorican namod Horold Isaacs whe is now oditing a
; newepaper in China, which, according to press” dospatches,
isa Commniat organ. The corressondent continued by saying
that according to stories the Anorican diplomatic officers ,
in China warned “Mr. Isaacs that he would be, likely 0 loso ©
his oxtratorritorial status because of nisactivities. Fur-
thornare, - hie father, wno is in Sew York, wants the Depart-—
ment of State to get Ur, Harold Isaaca back and have him de OU
ported. . In reply, Urs Rogere gaid that he kne7 nothing of
“any commnication from ir, La Guardia on the subject. In 're~.-
gard to the story, it ia not true that this Government has

threatened to doprive Mer. isaace of ‘his extraterritorial ight.

in Shanghal. .

BCLIVIA-PARAGUAY.
oA correspondent asked if the State Departrent. had roceived
. : any roporta to the effect that the Boliviens had captured ‘two
Paraguayan forts, In roply, Mr. Rogera said that he undor~
stood that Asaistant Secrotary Faite talked with the corrospon=
dente last nisht concorning the situation and that ur. Whito
atgnt possibly bo able to sec the correaponcents again today.

M/v ATT 67 Te 0942 ~ B86 Role MALE



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

in inde! Rete bie de

reese:

. FBI REPORT . :
DATE: 10 AUGUST 1953 . :
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJECT: HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS
INTERNAL SECURITY - R
FBI FILE #: 100-286243 - BUREAU
105-1247 -- NEW YORK



--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

sy

| 20TOVs IVAN PAVLOVICH

<2 MORDOVIAN REPUBLIC ASSR



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

’ FBI REPORT

DATE: 6 AUG 1952. .
CLASSIFICATION: - CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJECT: HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS
7 -_. INTERNAL SECURITY "- R

FBI FILE #: 100-286243 (BUREAU) |
my 105-1247 (NEW YORK)

tab Stein La rbd Ube ety hae



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

oe . . SECRET

Cohan Fisted fot

LT; DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
Al FILE NO,

ISAACS. * “ warovo Re

: 201-018446 - } -, 201-000413
i sex. m-008 13 SEP 10 | ~ WAAL~ 24958
yi USA NY, NYC - " 13 APR oT

ft CHEV P& 7
i

USA
acc. JOURNALIST ©

3.0. SEN . .
NEWSWEEK CORRESPONOENT IN “ SHANHAL IN 30Se_

ANVOLVEO IN CP FRONT: ACTIVITIES ©
IDEN “W/ALITAS

OF SMEOLEY ANO NOULENS. poss
- JACOB, A MBR OF SORGE GRU RING IN SHANGHAS «

1
'
Pe :
i
1

“@ sroreso926 |

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO,

foem

aap 867 vee

ove see SeCnET
pECRE! eae



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

|

FIUCESENG ACTON

~ CLASSI ICAI ASN

i
Jeameg pon antag,
H :

Jer ree ung Me Que
RLY CEALIEO DEK
dove Ge inte ving

“SECRET

HOMACE Representative, Bos
SOT TSOLOG/WUSPARROW/Operational ;

Dr, Marold R. ISAACS, Professor of Political Bcionce at N.I.T.
ACTION REQUIRED - REFERENCES oO :

1. On 12 July 1967, WSPARROW/1 renewed hie old frietdship with --
Subject at the MIT Faculty Club. Subjéct is tow-a senior research associate —
at MIT's Center for International Studies and has recently been named a
Professor. , L. _

- | 2, For the past few years Subject has been working on an international -
.. gtudy series involving ninority racial groups. His reports hsve been :
‘published in the New Yorker magazine and an books, The New World of i :

Americana and India's Untouchables, Subject plans to publish ia August
To57 a book ‘on the American Jews in Isreel and ig working on asother on
the Philippines. yo ; .

3. WUSPARROW/1 first met Subject in 1946 after he had. just completed
a long ond friendly interview with Ho Chi Minh as Far East correspondent
for Newsucek. At that tine, Subject felt that the United States was
a mistake In not accepting Ho as the leader of a united Vietnan, yYeeling
that Ho was independent enough of China to make him at worst a sort of
Tito. . , : te

~ _&,- Subject presently is despairing of United States foreign relations
in:that our people ‘froa Washington, or elsevheFe, seldom seem to establish |

‘-a deep rapport with Asian or African nationals. Subject feels-that such

' relations as do exist never reach more than an ineffective superficial
level.” . . : . _ _ , ~

. 5.- Subject first went to the Far East about 1930 when he wes a crew

, ‘member of the Matson Line's Malolo and disembarked at Honolulu to work for
the Honolulu’ Advertiser. (WUSPARROW/1.went to work for the seme paper two.
years later.) Subject went next to the Philippines where he worked on a -
Manila daily. While in Ysnits he was offered the editorship of the Bangkok
Royal Mati, to fill in for: St. Clair McELWAY, now of the Kew Yorker.

: CONTINUED . .

f

_ Distribution: - : : mo
| 2+ ¢/po . Ss

Leled Je0-b- 36/3 meat f- ZVI

GSPATCM SYMBOL ARO ” BER

UTEA - 543
CLASSIFICA Tica:
SECRET

mm.


--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

* assessor of foreign graduate students.

CLASSIFICATION BesPATON SYMBOL WO SOMA
i

UTaA = 543

CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH

SECRET

_ 6. Subject's mind was set on China and in late 1931 he wout to
and Joined The China Press, vorking alongside Tiliman DURDIN,
now of tha New York Times, Subject lost hin Job with The China Preas
after a flare-up with Hollington TONG, part-owner of the paper. Subject
‘then joined the ‘Newsweek - foreign ‘staff. Subject wes in and out of
Bangkok after World War IT and BUSPARROW/1 becae friendly with ‘hin,
According to ‘NUSPARROW/1, many people. regard Subject'’s Tragedy of the
Chinese Revolution as a significant work: and-a- recent writer on China,

Dennis. BLOODWORTH, holds a good view of Subjects Scratchay on the Hind... .
|. T. Subject -now-seens permanently séttied with MIT, tiaving bought”

@ bame at 9% Farlow Road, Newton, Subject hosts there at pool-side
"seninars" on Saturday afternoons, with MIT faculty friends and journalist

“friends such as Bob SHAPLEN coming by. Subject invited WUSPARRON/1 to |

yerticipate as well.

8. However, as WUSPARROW/2. ascertained, Subject has little contact.

“with foreign students save for an occasional adult forcign graduate
_ Student. We.bope, considering Subject's background, that he will rove =

with WUSPARROW/1's guidance to be a profitable umedtting apotter and

1) :)

Fold A SUG Bue AL coe nay a7


--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

. t
VX : .
Poe i
; T-lephone Requeat for Nethe Check :
. a,
: ire’ 24 NOV 1968 ;
: FROM_ —£s 6/ES! Glo pate” 2 | :
to _
| TAKEN BY &s € eft J CHECKED BY REPLY
i _— — 7
ot . : oo, i
i —senifeoy Miele | —
: TAME ALIAS AND SPELLING VAR TION b
; :.
. . é :

oe “if So thethe
—— as DA LACE OF/BIRTH

t
i
i

OTHER IDENTIFYING DATA : a _

cee

\ REFERENCES a) yo ase) so foussa- os-
Vee age 26 OLY. OS i

a Suljcets VS AGGS, orld
~ Veet Soxy Dann

mH ID Vey. os

\ - . ita 201 oa



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

“Special - .

wee ct ” : : n

RSTERN TO: Tainor ~_ ; , -
10/14/65 caw ots

FILS 9151-1423 - ;

PC

BUDED: iV/lia

- fee cee 4S 2b ayy 3
te gase a? 10-13 Gs"

“BORN: Sept. 13, 1910, Ny } a I
: "HS: marricd_Yiola Babinga: ‘gist June 20, 1910, NYC, NY H
hiner we Bore rey _Shanghe / \eopt: 14, 1932
ee a . y : .
ADDRESSES: LAdes - : oo =
Aug. ,! “1965 to proscnt, t, 86 For Farlow Rd., Newtoh, Masa. . :
daily, 1953 to Aug., 1965 . iiss.

Fob., 1944 to July, 1953, 333 Central Pk. Woat, nye, RY

Sept., 1941 to Feb., 1944, 4938 Newport Ave., rrtondontp Bt, Md.
1940. to Sopt., 1941, 72 Pk. Torraco Hest, KYC, NY

1937 to 1940, 40 Monroe St., BYC, RY

_ EDUCATION
/ George Washington a. S., NYC, ‘1923 to 1926

- SSH: 082-03-4029°

EMPLOYAENT: :
1953, Mass. Lost. of Tochnology, Camb, ‘Hase., acadonic,. research

1843 to 1950, Newsweek, HDC, CBI, Pacific, SE Asia, NYC, reporter,
. war corres. assoc. editor

. 1943, Lookhoed Aircraft Corp., "DC, radio writor,

pipe -1940 to 1943, Columbia Broadcasting Co., NYC, WC, writer

i -- 1934 to: 1935, self employed, Poking, China, writer.

41932. to 1934, Havas Nows Agency, Shanghai, China, news editor
1931 to 1932, China Press, Shanghai, China, city oditor

' 1930 ‘to 1931, Shai Svening Post, Shanghai, China, reporter

1930,. Honolulu Advortiser, Honolulu, Foportor . | .

“poREIGN "TRAVEL: . ;

: China, 1930 to 2935, Travel, work, writing

--.. China, Burma,. Indta, 1944, to 1945, war ccrres. Nowsweek
PI, India, Indonesia, 1949 to 1949, Mosswook assignsent

gs Puillippinos, . 1980 to 1950, cover Baguo coaference

Europo Mainly UK, 1957 to 1957, travel, viatt university

Czech., Israel, ate 1960 to 1960, academicd. Feacazch projed

, Malaya, -PI., vote, 1963 to iee4,

RELATIVSS: : . 7
. , Father, 2. Robort Isencs, deconsod. oe soe ] \\
» Mothor, Sophie -Dorlin, deceasud . - , 7 .

Wife, Yilola Robinsoa fsaacs, dob 2316. same . .
oo i _ 19946

FILE i 291 6

ric, krown 17 yre. Chara Panic 201)
NAL nha ara ten Poreesasclect i Low preaiite soul
a co Dende. 796% .

a
G5C)- Ive OY TSR OS, A ahe C
ee rigiaes, Mis sett ERAN 10WCY B55 = 4 NOV i9a8

ae eee

REPRRENGK:
& Sor

Sarive iW, Puace C:

_



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

gf. :;

{D0 UNCLASSIFIED INTERNAL . OE CONFE TIAL

wt
; ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

[5] SECRET

batt
: 26 October 1965
[ 20: (Of cer designation, room eumber : -
rag) v Ssvercnens + ond COMMENTS [Number ecch comment to thow Rom whom
mR whom, z

dwikdng|
nal Drow @ hae orrest column after exch comanent.)

far 610 “eres” fe] secret [CONFIDENTIAL Oe, =~ UNCLASSIFIED

2-02"
pea


--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

oo +" 26 0CT 1965
~TOr- Director .
. Federal Buresu of Investigation
seen 7 ATTN: Special Agent in Charge of
Lo Coat ___, Washingtoa Field Office’
FROM: _ Deputy Director for Plans

a FoRiica SiSSte

i

| - _ SECRET.
i -
? . : .
}
H

“©. §$UBJECT: ISAACS, Harold.Robert. -

Reference ie made to the request dated 14 October
1965 concerning Subject. Attached for your reteation ia a
copy of our CSCI-315/04169-65,. dated 13 October 1965, .
subject: ISAACS, Harold Robert. It ie noted that a portion
; of the information appearing in said csct wae previously
forwarded 'to you in our SODB 20568, dated 2 December.

1949, subject Harold Robert ISAACS,

ae €SC1+316/04352-65 pee

1
ae Enct. taame check 1
. 1 attachment ae stated above
“RID/CE: JMA/CPL/e > |
Based-on: CSCI-316/04169465', a :
es.ccy cep PH IE

“SECRET

mp FUSION OSS. sy a7.



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

)
i
}
i

_ BUDSD: WAY, ,

, POREIGN TRAVEL:

ca

te

Special

RSTURN TO: Tainor
10/14/65 caw ¢
FILS #151-1423.______

NAMB: TsAAd HAROLD. RODRRT
EORN: Sept. 13, 1910, NTC, Ww

v3: married Viola Robinson, dob June 20, 1910, NYC, HY ,
married Shatghat, Sopt., i, 1932 —

ADDRESSES: ne :
Aug., 1968: ‘to prosanty 96 Farlow Rd., Newton, Mass. -

July, 1953 to Aug:, 1965 : wags.

.Feb., 1944 to July, 1933, 338. Contral Pk. -Wost, NYC, ‘RY

Sept., 1941 to Feb., 1944, 4938 - Newport Ave., Friondship ta. ud.
1940 to Sopt., 1 572 PK. Toxraco West, NYC, NY

1937 to 1940, 40 Monrod~St., NYC, NY

EDUCATION on ek
"” George washington H. 8., NYC, tens to 1936
:. SBR: 082-03-4029 YF J
: aa .

1953 ’ wase.\, inst, of ttooknology, Camb, Mass. , aoadenic, research
1943 to 1950, Rewawoek, WoC, CBI, Pacific, SS Asia, NYC, reporter,
_ | war corres. assoc. editor
1943, Lookhoed Aitreraft: ‘Corp., WEC, radio writer,
a 1940" to 1943,.Columbia Broadcasting Co., NYC, WDC, writer
- 1934 to 1935, self omployced, Peking, China, writor soo
1932 to 1934, Havas News Agoncy, Shanghai, China, nows editor
1931 to 1932, China Press, Shanghal China, oity oditor .
1930 to 1931, Shai & SH, China, xéporter

1930, Honolulu, Advor aati, vector “~

‘China, 1930 to 1933, x a
China, Burma, India,
PI, India, Indonesia,’
Phillippinos, 1950.2
_Burope Mainly UK,. 105%
Czoch.,. Israel, India}-33
Malaya, ~- PI., oto. 18h “Oe

Eee x conforence
eit anivorsity ~ :
demick research Project

RELATIVES: .
| ° Father, I, Robert Issacs, doceased
Mother, Soxsie Dorlin, decoaged 6 : les ve
‘Wife, Viola. Robinson Isaacs, dob 1910, ‘sane “Sorte
, EF, 20 gy 0 FILE IN 201
REFARENCE:

3: ‘Font Shriver, Poaco Corps., we, knova 17 yrs. .
48 OCT 1965



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

EoTony Wor tate aor _ : x . ; ete
10/13/00 ay . Of om cows
FILS @151-1493 . . C Mya OCT oT

: : . - é
DeDeD: I/II Yj a

HARE: ISAACS, BALOLD BOBBRT

BORN; Sopt. 13, 1010, 3: Cw ‘
ea e004
marriud Viola oviccoa, vob Juno 20, 1910, xYC, we

. E38:
eT SESH Sop 14, 1932 , :
ADIRESSUS; : \

dAug., 1965 to prosoat, 26 Farlow Ed

July, 1953 to Auz., 1955

Fob., 1944 to Juiky, 1053, 322 Costrat

Scpt., 1941 to I'ed., 1944, 4033 xX

1940 to Sopt., iGt2, G2 Bz.

1937 to 1940, 40 Lonroo' St.,

i

EDUCATION : .
Guorge Washington i. &., ure » 1523 to 1926

| SSN: 082-038-4020 ,
! IG3rHIGHO HAgas Vews Posacy ee
! EMPLOYMENT: ete S¥iFempleyrd “wii lte Wye oes

i 1953 Lacs Toast. oz Boorsology, Cand, Mags.,” Academic, roscarch
H . 1943 to’ 1950,

lGwou WBE WDC, CEL, Pacific, SS Asia, UC, soporter,

. war corscs, ansoc,' editor
1943, Lookhoed Agrezazt Corg., Wnc, radlo wy vitor,
1940 to 1643, Coluabte Breadeastiag Co., HO, WES, writer
1934 to 1935 3, Chana, writer
- 1932 to 934} ‘nina, news editor . mn)
: ' 1931 to 192, 33, sone ronal, c » city editor (crina HoRua
: 1930 to 1931, Suai Evening Post, Shani hai, China, reporter

1930, Ponolulu Advortiscr,’ Honolulu, goposter

ad FOREIGN TRAVEL: .
China, 1930 to. 1935, Travol, work, writicg.

China, Burma, Zadia,.1944 to 1845, wae corros, Neweweek
PI, Indta, indonesia, 192 + to 1949, Nouswook assignzent -
Phillippines, 259 to 12956,. cover Baguo conferoscze :
Europo Mainly ue, 2967 to 4957, travol; visit univer Bity
Czcch., Ysraol, india, 13CQ + to'1960, acadomick research pr

. Malaya, Pr, etc., 1063 to ‘1964, .

aye a
—,.

oject —

t ae .

RELATIVES: :
: Father, I; Qolovt Irees, deecasdd . :
’ Yothux, Sophie Bort un, décoased -
Wize, Viola 2odiavon Feaaea; dob 2910, sane : . . \ \
© REPERAIDS: ; Ny
4 . Surgoat Shvivor, Poase Corps., VOC, knova 17 yrs. an ¢

WE Eo1¢ = iase

F

Cake wba B04 ) - 92 ocr 1965 °

SS) NAI to information forwarded in CSCI ~316/01352-65,
dated 26 October 1965, subject: ISAACS, Harold
Roberte

12S 1GI0 New yok 7 Tiandar hy penren : . . :.

Pe ache. Se uf ‘ ml.



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

U5. ONLY .
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

() UNCLASSIFIED” = IN “NAL = CP COMIC TIAL &) secrer

. :
SUBJECT, (Oprenoty

" CSCI 316/ 04169-65

oat . .
Tl October 1965

COMMENTS, (Number eoch commeit to show hom whom |
‘Drow o line oxross cotvmn after ecth comment}

-[°3.RID/CE - GA-10°
. Attn: Sarah Marmaduke

TO; PSB/CSC.

FILE TITLE

nesermeazencepinee nt. pee erbcem mimes in tentne mating gine pes cee amunpatintinn cycle ts

TT obo lead

ee Oat,

i Sa GIO eres" CX) secret (() CONFIOENTIAL C] [RTERMAL =) ‘UNCLASSIFIED
i Her) a oe :
&


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

SECRET «> ee.

HO FOREIGN DISSE

Tor United States Clyil Service Conimiosion
. Attention: Mr. Joseph G. Cam Campbell — 7

- FROM? Deputy Director for Ploos

_SUBJECT: “ISAACS, Harold Robert. |

1, Reference is made to your request dated 14 Soptember 1965.
Tho {lee of this office contain considerable informatioa concerning
Subject., the galient elements of which are Summarized below. .

2. According to undated laformation from a rellatte source,
Subject born 13-September 1910 in New York City, arrived in Shanghai,
Chias, from Manila, Philippine Islanda, in December 1930. Firat
employed in Shanghai by the English tanguage dally, Evening Poat and
. Mercury, Subject became agsociated 2 few wacks later with the China
Press, with which he‘remained until May 1931. In June 1931 Subject.
* traveled up the Yangtze River’ with the British Communist, Cecil Frank
‘4 -"* GLASS, a suspected egeat-for the Third Interantional in China. Also |
in 1931, Subject.became the Shanghni secretary of the Comite hiters
nationale Pour la Defense de Patl et Gertrude RUEGG (NOULENS), a
_ committee, with Headquarters in Berlin, formed to aid the defénse of
‘the NOULENS against charges of eapioaage perferred by the Chinege .
wel: Government. Subject wae in correspondence with WILK MUENZENBERG,
“"""" President of the Committee and en active agent in Germany for the Third»
“ Taternational. Suvject was also known to be in contact with Agnos
SMEDLEY In Shanghai during the same period. On 14 September 1932
in Shanghai, Subject married Viola ROBINSON, an American citizen
‘born 10 June'1910 in New York City. Miss ROBINSON wao believed to
_have been connected with Communist activities ia the United Statea
and in Chian. Correspondeuce between her and Subject prior to their
marriage indicated that they were both sympathetic to activities
being conducted by the Communtsis in China. : .

eS . ok jo
wo FORE _ aor hE



--- Page 42 ---
1400000,

Le

- ot
3. According to predecessor organization information, Subject:

waa also employed ag a atafl writer for the Havas Newe Agency in

Shanghai during the poried 1930-1935 and wa's 2 member of the Soclety
of Friends of the USSR and of the China League for Civil Rights... —

4. Aa undated Feport from an unknown source indicated that ° .

‘Subject had turocd against the Staliniet Government of the USSR, and

had become e Trotakyite (probably during the ‘mid-1930's), Frienda

of Subject stated that even during tho height of hig Trotskyist career

he never accepted money from aay group, that he waa open and above
board, and that .he never engaged in any conspiracies to overthrow
eotabliched government. They also indicated that Subject wag .
attracted to communism by cheer identiom. immediately etter Pearl .
Harbor, Subject broke with tho Trotekyite group 58 hoe had troken

with the Corsmuntetand began writing prepaganda for the United

States Government, . , : oot

5. Aceording to Source of paragraph 2, Subject wan & war

correspondent ia China during World War I for Newsweek. In Joly

1945-he wa refused entry into China by Chinese’ Nationalist authorities,
Presumably 30 a reoult of anti-Notionalist articles he wrote for News.

week. In 1949 Subject waa Special Features Editor for that magagine, :
at 152 West 42nd Street, New York City. . He was the autho# of Bevoral”

books, including No Podce in Avia and The Tragedy of the Chinese

: Revolution.

f

6. Subject's present political beliefs sre unknown to this sffica.

CSCI-316/04169-65.

Encl. 1 name check

RID/CE: JMA/DS/Ipm ”"

Based on: SODB-20568
CSCI-3/778,850

SECRET

NO FOREIGH OISSEH



--- Page 43 ---
_ . 14 SEP 1965

TsasCS, Herled Robort =.

: isecesk
1g AAKS Ne

H
H
i
i
t
i
wo

FILE IN 21S OR

15 SEP 1965
201- j Pte

“Ap


--- Page 44 ---
14-0000 . . oa :

ey SECRET a

(then Filtet tay

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT TOCUMENT TOENETFICATION

Suspected Soviet Agents domiciled in Mire Mv | cuawa-qtaop-n ||P

9. D1 8h ATEN oR SouACK Oot. 3yuODL NO.

Shahghai a SMP-D L718 Box 1.93

@. GATE PROCESSED . . .
3. Dec. 1963 ' .
DOCUMENT DISPOSITION: : - = - ot .

12. CROSS REFEAREO TO THIS FILE , 12, TRANSFERRED TO”
2 cat ‘ a1 FILE MOL

; ” Interested parties in the subjeet of HAROLD ISAACES ane referred to this document) ;
the bully’ nature of this document; ‘plus. numerous refs to ‘other individuals and the -

: tj ‘Poor quality of Paper this makes it necessary to ‘leave the file in ita present’

classification. ,

FILE THIS: FORM iN FILE NO.

TOS% B67 v0 renvvoud coi rsens, SECRET . oe



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

CO onctassixieo 2) EE) conrioestiat fe] stcrer
“yr =. ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 7-7/0 £3 .
ji
ate . .

oo
22 November 1963

COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from’ wheat ,
to whem, Draw a Bae ocroms columa after euch comment)

To, ACSI (Telephonié)

DatuaEnT bate ord 63

TROY jg

1s. 2

Pore 5 O10 formant” (X] secret. (_]conripentiaa (1) fren [J unctassiFieo



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

Pe temnnpeeneyetnen nme inane pepe eterna

j

SECRET

_ Ng FORESH DISSE
. 27 NOV 1963

TO: Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence

Department of tho Army
Attention: Chiof, Counterintolligenco
. Branch Security Division |

FROM: - “Deputy Director, ‘Plans
SUBJECT: ISAACS, Harold Robert

» Roference ito mado to the request. ‘pocotved on”
14 October 1963 from Lt. Whipple concerning Subject,
With. reapect- to the specific questions posed ‘dn tho
request, Eubjoct is. tho author of a number of: books,

including. No Pesce §n Asin, Five Yoars of Kuomintan,
Reaction, and Yoo Tragedy of tho Chinese Revolution. .
Tho Piiea contain no ie yoruation concerning Subject's
teaching at the Massachusetta Institute of Technology;
hovever thoy do contain the following summary of un-

» evaluat. nformation based on several predevessor

*. organisation reports, Additional infornatioa concern=-
ing Subject’ is contained in our SODB 20588, dated 2
December 1949, subject:-. Harold Robert 1sacCs, a copy
~ of which is attached for your rotoution.

= ay Subject was omployed as a staff writer tor
o~" “the Havas News Agency in Shanghai from 1930-1935,

“He was. also-editor and publisher of the China Forum,
- & communist periodical, fron. January 12 ‘oan.

Wnspecified dato. In’ July 1832 ISAACS wrote and

published the above-cited Five Years of Kuomintang : o
Reaction, a..136-page ‘dllustrated book oF Comminiot rr oe

fiature. While in Shanghai he.was a member of The
‘Boctoty of Friends of the USSR (Shanghai Branch)’
‘nd The China League for Civil Rights. ,

db. In 1933 Shanghai authoritica listed Subdject'a
‘wife, Viola ROBINSON, . as a suspect Soviet agent. ro-
siding in Shanghai, Prior to their marriage on 14
September 1932, ISAACS stated in a letter to Hiss _
ROBINSON that he had definitely turned “Red.” All

“the members of the ROBINSON family v were described as .

Communists.

SECRET gg cat

a an . - HO FOREIGN DISSEM

CH.
. FILE IN 201-Syee—



--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

7 . SECRET

pO wo FOREIGN DISSE :

le, tn duly 1933 tho Nanking Government ordered
the Municipality. of Greater Shanghai to take drastic
measures to stop. the propaganda appearing in a :
number of publications including tho China Forum, | — : Pe
published by Subject. Subject's magazine allegedly .

' published Communist propaganda; inthis connection a
protest was to bo lodged agninst hin with the American

. Consulate,

* da Sudject vas described asa “aeif-confessed .
-., Communist” in 1933, The folloving yoar he wrote an
“ article entitled "I Break With. Tho Chinese Staliniats”
which appoared.in. the Septenber-October 1934 edition

sof The New International a Communist prepaganda
organ pablished: in New. York. oO

fq
I
a
H
i
f
{
§
f
|
1
H
oe 2. An undated report from as \ unknown source indicated
i ‘ oo ‘that Subject had tured against tho Stalinist Government -
} . - of the USSR, ~ becoming a Trotskyite(probably during the mid~
| 1930's). Friends of Subject stated that even curing tho .
height of his Trotskyist career he never accepted money
| from fay. group, that ho was’ oper and above board, and that
. he:‘never engaged in any conspirscios to overthroy established
| govornment. Théy also stated that Subject was attracted to -
.
i
|
i
|
|
{
t
1
|
t
|
!
{

Coiimunisn by “sheer idealisn," Immediately after Poarl

‘Harbor, - ISAACS. broke with the Trotskyite group as he had.
- beeken’ with the Communists and began writing propaganda
- for the United States Govornnent,

° s. ‘According toa roport dated 26 Juno 1951 from a
fairly relinble source, Subject served at that time as a
Yord Foundation advisor on Far Eastern Projects,. : .

an 4. For additional information concerning Subject you"
‘ave referred to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and to -
the ‘Dopartneat of the Navy (no documentation available).

cacl-3/778, 880
Enol; 1 attschneat as tated above. , eG

RID/CE: UA/HI/de)

Based on: “FR/1, 201-18446¢ :

wo, ‘CHINA CIA OP 1, SPD 2713, 10+11- 32

CHINA CIA OP 1, SHPD 4606, 16-5-33

' CHINA CIA OP 1, SHPD 4718 «

CHINA CIA OPI, SEPD 4685, & 4685/C

CHINA CIA OP 1, SHPD' 5454-8, 21-12-33

CHINA CIA OP 1, SMPD: 6628

FrDz, 201-483-8 a en
- SECRET. oe

sO for NAVY referal,. .
f Kg FCREIGH OISSES

fay



--- Page 48 ---
14-00000

TeheFii Me POS Rake CHRER. 20e Gu Ri Ma CHK cara, yee ite |

“scsi ~ It. Wnipple ‘via Jane Roman” ene 14 Oct 63°

eee ee ee ee t

— aaa SEER ol oa ce

au. BOLE LILO

ee

“Umer Lomerieyins usta?

fet yc en,

ese ie 1S

_-Avthor of o ~many books. on Chink - - Be EB. Asia’

Se eed

Herold R. R.Isaace authority | on “china

Harold Re Teaace teaches at var

are all the names the same pereont™

co pp i
Vy _ tie 7, : fj an
ts | mined oo LE LUE 2

t
3


--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

Bo “secret

(Won Filled fay

; "DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF COCLMENT DOCUMENT JOENTIFICATION

Be ANALYST

THERE IS A RESTRICTED CI/CA FOLDER ON TEE SUBJECT

OF THIS 201 wat ust

re abe

TN §G7 vieeevient snvvvoen scorer



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

ams SECRET

(Shen Palied tny

= 42 ie.

7 2 13. TRANSFERRED TO woe .
Ley z. zienaes oe es
oe . ; . : earike :
: Dowrtice.) a LOD pre Lea OO eae 5 aagorta 2 a S :

SECRET . : : 17-49)

a er EER ear



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

ASSTRAT CF COQMBIT BEING CROSS FILED

FILE NO, SEE. oaTe OF CocuetnT

90-5237

TOT
ao F eucs, BARSLD Re |
Bom « 1910 = nationality = “narican

PERTINENT (RFORMATION

“AREAS IS A RESTRICTED CI/OA FOLTER ON THE SUBJECT OF

TRIS 201 HELD IN RI/AR FILE, WASH-CIA-PERS-4.
:
f :
; L

FILE THIS FORM Im Fi!

-CROSS REFERENCE FORN

Pom NO. 137 AEFLACES Foew 30-34
wave 4 WHICH May Of USED.



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

COE Sm cee nee ag tte ea a He Se ce ee
UNCLASSIFIED ; - CONFIDENTIAL oo [SECRET]

ROUTING ANO RECORD SHEET 45”.

INSERUCTIONS: Olficer des

b comment numbe pand eats the number inthe “TO coum, Each officer should initial (check mark Insutficient)

g and Recovd Sheet should be returned to Registry

: Es o>. €hy, hi pie S a
we 4 PA facenes

CARLIED By. :
apes my :

wh

eee Peereeres

inten ln ne wl

clay
ee Ty}

CONFIDENTIAL UNCLASSIFIED



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

ro _ Chief, NEA pats §.Hay..1956——-—_—> : :

rion. _ Chief of Station, Karachi woos oo! sc ,

- ; “;oexmat Operational /INTEL *- mon ;
. Ystecme Far Eastern Association Sth Annual Mooting,

on ‘Request for Background and Operational Information

1. The program of the 8th Annual-Mecting of the Far Eastern Oe
- Association, held in Philadelphia 3 - 5 April 1956, has just :
arrived here. It indicates that the association haa already
. taken dociced steps towards its announced expansion into the
\ “South Asian fLeld. The station assumes that Headquarters
\* edévered the meeting and can get access now or later to coples 4
: of monographs, notes on proceedings, and so on. . ot

2. The following items, keyed to the program, would seen to |
be of interest to this wah if Headquarters can get thems

A. On 3 April, Zakyo Eclars "The World View of the
‘Punjabi Villager".
-/"“CRotes This 4s quite likely the East Punjabi,
tut it should have some validity for Lahore as
well as for Delhi.) . _*

. B. On the same day, a Pakistan Studies Organization fut ot 4
Po Keoting was heté at 1700. It would be useful to. 9
_ wT _ know who is interested in Pakistan studies (both

tole individuals and organizations) and what lines
they aro thinking of working on. =

CG. On 5 April, ‘all the itens. of a "South Asian His-
- ecllany" sfould bd os considerable interest,
yiviaron's "The Future of East’:..

~-particularly: Stanle:

- - Bengaly'. Hydécker ha some early drafts of the |
: RaroldMsaacs study, but they: are too early to
2 May 1956 . ‘provide useful material; this project (at .
NRH/wreg: ~ CENIS, M af is one that Headquarters should moni- 4

: tor closely,. however. aft ,
Distributions =. > es vs . “ : Lh, VA. Mn below
: : : * NEIL R. HYDECKER

~- NEA
2 - Karachi

: van sa 51 -28A



--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

a

To Director |
. Yedorcel bureau cf Investigation
.. Ltteptions Wy. s. Je Fapien. .

” FROIN Scputy: Director, Plena

BIT: “Vornande

2

Eeferance is meade to o commntestiva twa tits pzoney
dateal 39 daguct 19555 ceptioned , “03 wbovoy our roforanco CS Cmab4g

. & sbtachsd, fox your information ta: a copy ef a lottar:
writton ty & ject. and eddioaved to thy pest aifico lox ravtionsd
din ths xetéronced ear? Muze “Sho Lotter vos signed. ly subject aa
PoLY, his fouinino psucdonyz. It should uiso be explainod that -
Caglich is mot aubject'u native Lengucse; thorofcro, the cramer
ani upalling ued ly mubjoct in his jotters wre to bo expected.

3. Thiu off leo intexprota dibjuct a lettor ‘au follows. - ;

- - Aunt Josephine is soot > vuith wion subloct bas
beon din contact tho pest ucveral xonths ani wuo hes been inmloctri-
rating eubject. with Toftiot idsolesy, IWNSATG bas nit eduittcd to
oubject that ho tu a Communist, although in big convorcations with

“ gubject ha oticxo very closa to the currant Lins. cf tho Pailipping |

“Gessunict Party ( FKP).

a wl Be. fovold sy ISt203 (rer File No. oowissa9) ta voll knowa-

to tha Dureai.

Banuol CU. ty uho sponsored. Jeca LVWG's outry into the Lnaited
States in 1997 waon LAWSANG ctuited at Coluxila Univoraity,

- Willies CAITR, Jr. haa rot you boon idanti tied, by thls office. :

ad, P#ILILIC, fr is probably Or, Filadolfa PALIL ID,
forter associate Profecsor,cf Mucaanicy at ths Univeruity of tho
Philippines. PUDLILIO recatved his B ixea the University of tho
Fhilippinoa ant Lis Mo... ord Pheve at the Yaivoraity of Bichlgan.

hae I

cee Cenceyhe ln

a. Uncle MaWOEL is -procchly. “tbo lcto “patlipoive Pyasident

sey

SUGURty olco known aa Fervanlo topicrr ACRES |

:
:
5
i
5
4
t
5



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

“Recaing toa

‘of hia life

PRidstdo WA) (vka iierdo Lave)", ovr reference £0 ©.

- CUYUOAN ulti wooa its Burecu

“CS CL 278 |

Selly 3 velichle suureo or U
mavos cule to ¢ tely. Touijust. to Pal
Livod in tho United Statos, Ky da known f siren pre iavir.cun
views exl excanlrg to caurce probclly his jreateat cvaize ‘ts to
regida pexzanantly in tho United Statua. Abts 16 is known. that
PANLILIQ wag on fricndly tern» wlin soso bs there ia ne reconi
that bo chared LATSAGta political vious.

1

Do i \
vu. Fy, BRLEAUL is probably. Palsy \DeLaley, dJecult Suplain
vat tho Vaiverar ty ef tho Pul Lape tio. : oo

i
£. typroa ior dyprua t univoroity goy posalbly te “yyrecusa

University.

ii probably kicardo\UWOl, Fe dng note”
égodty evoscluted with Rorry in ths
anata ard kecebouseson’a Union (TEU) dn
rhou 3 fovLi 1915 da-Montle) hewover, moot
beoa ‘cponk In juaiaii. th vag naturalicod a U.3,
citicun in Ug8 end roturcel to tha Philippines tn 1949, ubere ho
lovt hia Us. eltisansity in 1952. Yhory is no inforcation in tho |
£ileu of. thig offites whica indtcatda that LADKZ Hea returned to _
Havald. “For cides. tonal uuvoréation concerning uZ, reforenca is

mao to @ mousroslua te the Berdeu, dated 23 Fovorzor 1249, subjects
De 05070

ile
man who veo
tatioual

pape
in
Honolulu. Ly.

he tnelo”

A is on fa Fes BG ia Boliccar -

la fealtlor cua ne provicus

corrécpoujonce concarning hia'dehtor, Carma Jeno \CUMal (EBL

"- ¥ite No. 10552541). Froz tho wording of subject's Letter thio oo
. Offices asgassy that Ucliscoar CUYUGAT id evare thet tha-Fodoral |
Tt alco’

Dureau of Tuvoatigetion iu imrestigating Mor CUTE,
epposra that Baltesor CUXUCAN | cubdjoct a lottcr to daliver
porsonally to bla Urother Nor CULUGAN, pogsibly to avoid ¢ Ball
intercept by the Biroai, It should be noted tnat gubject stated

that bo motlod ths’ lotter instead.

he In view of ths senaitivonscd of tha sourco of tha above
information, if io roqusated that .no further dieacaination ba mado”
of tho inforaation without prior: elasranco with thia fgoneye

: te i* va th AND.
Betaanse: - = 4 cay ofa lottor! To Addecus

- r Paneepes

EGP Seeing.

. eran

a

can SRS B

i

i
af
\.

i

j

nee mane eee Seater sete



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

‘ FBI DOCUMENTS AS FOLLOWS:

DATE: 26 MAY 1955

_ CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL -.
SUBJECT:. HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS |.

FBY. FILE #: 100-286243 (BUREAU)

DATE: 19 MAR‘1954
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJECT: “HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS
FBI FILE #: 100-286243 (BUREAU

RATESRIXIANXKSX

DATE: 27 JAN 54.
CLASSIFICATION: | CONFIDENTIAL.

SUBJECT: .LIU TSUN=CH'I (M) AKA’

T.C, LEV, LAU CHIN-KI
FBI FILE #: 100-365280 (BUREAU)

v1

sth ah de

0 Deegan eet


--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

a SECRET - a

(Mon Pil ted tay

DUCA IOCNT IFICATION

i
RU FILE NO. |” 26). 75
3 Orsraten oe SKATE DOC. SvMBOL NO.

DFB~-3014

@. DATE PROCESSED
3 Dec. 63
: OOCUMENT DISPOSITION

+ TRANSEC@OEO. TO...
Or FILE NO.

Comments made by. Francis McCracken Fisher

Fisher also recalled that sometime after the ‘subject had gone ovor the. Communists.
after 1950, he Fisher, met Harold Isaacs, a writer .who forterly was a Trotskyte in His
views, ‘at which time J; advised Fisher. thaht he had known that subject: was a Commu
as early as the 1930's“in Peking, China, Teaacs stated that ‘the subjcet had worked for
the Tass News Agency in Peking after having graduated form coléege and ‘had evern’ ,

J dbeen sen to jaol due to his communist activies. _ . : co.

et:

02 t7 BG7 wre rosvreue soersoes.



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

—o .
a a rs

FBI DOCUMENTS AS FOLLOWS: '

DATE: 26 MAY 1953 4
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL. . ~
SUBJECT: HAROLD ROBERT ISAAC.
FBI FILE #: 100-286243'2 (BUREAU)

DATE: 18 FEB-53 i
‘CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL.
SUBJECT: HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS
FBI FILE #: 100-286243 (BUREAU)

DATE: 12 NOVE 52 :
CLASSIFICATION! CONFIDENTIAL

. SUBJECT: | HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS,
FBI FILE #; 100-286243 (BUREAU)



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

~ SECRET

_f When Felted tay

SUBJECT cr DOCUMENT
Vbinaial bue, al ety Pe Lb oe

: Movecrrevet LL sce. a je
andthe Lbs, Mts pth ” vm Enel a J
ss hack or

7 SOURCE CuYPTONYMle. oate oF INFO.

a - mead ee 7
% COOSS REFERRED 40 THiS FILE

43. tRansreaco fo
1 FILE MO.

he tine ne. cing Brauch , os) 4 AnriLcat wie . ;

5 pe hettee % gerd ay re
a en Ws. 21 O49) Leas JD en
: “he Chinsce Conkue Ct glendiwces” eben sad & : :
the Chinra Perum, .

fory

» PM 867 ev oveviene tovvvaon SECRET


--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

SECRET _

= (iden Falted tny

“SUBJECT OF li

- “oe wel Qelbrrgh

corre Lz. xl: x act ar

- Avtbad ex, steve the Vio ae
Poecnecc ge Woe. Cece Ake J

gales

3. DESPATCH OR SOURCE DOC,

Ar . . .
Oate Ls CESSED 10. OFSSEMIMATED in ‘
PG MeLOL |, |,
S_GOCUMENT DISPOSITION - : . ~

ta. TRANSFERRED TO
At FILE HO.

Sy mEOL NO.

3. ANALYST @

Lee so et :

Nhe i caee se

jiz. CROSS REFERRED TO THES FILE |

SECRET



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

Sen a

. empen Fitted toy

Sue sec” OF DOCUMENT mi
drvsnel We watton ght Fito :
, eet fs, Goer ning
| XKechacel dor ay we ,
. 4a. y feipeal lepleet Ale TFounce cavPTonve| es

13 ainaveaee 6”
RE FILE NO.

awe; vA. Z, Sn. 43, 136 4. 37
Qddsecert! Jar. KR. TRAACS)
aan toer hour Kena, awh

facet adecl eptinete a Chinice Lonluces Cregyipncdinet |
“hy Later: Aegpota © on ss 7 ;

Frurek Gpuccn nfm .
Cre-ret, Ate Aelecwced ae tf

oe addu, adeacensl e Z8AACS. ae bette .

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

SECRET . : : ean

FORM AGT use racers rorrions.



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

phatase deirtin aL

FBI REPORT -  ” :

DATE: 6 OCTOBER 1952
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJECT: JOHN KING FATRBANK |
FBI FILE #; 77-24341' (BUREAU) -



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

‘ : ,
ra EET ray
Subset OF wa
: Central Watley etn.
- Poo ogre te sehAaets ee la re D. DISPATCH O@ SOURCE. DOC. :B¥wOOL NO. ~
DL eckaud xi, Seek cass a ey plat . Evie. &
: Z é ce srecepia (( Btietie a :

6. Cate eT
hoieee ect RIL Z

op eS
+ Beetle mint no zee 2
H Sean ~

Coctrude RUEGE,

fttee te 5-F-

Pi ARR

per dT Cre 7, tn Reet

FILE THIS FORM-IN FILE NO.

en B67 vee recssous sone

Sreceees


--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

FBI REPORT’

26 MAY 1952)
CONFIDENTIAL |,
GEORGE HERRING, WAS:

: RING, PAUL RUEGG
FBI FILE #:

100-344906 (BUREAU)

)

Saanich Ee

coaeteee

ete te bake ae

E
E



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

fo J me. SECRET a
7 a - 7 . : (thon Filled te . 7
: a _ SUBILCT_OF DOCUMENT
: daha fiw Gees ek aERZA: £2
: a a) ra : .
1s TRANSFERRED 10
1 RP FEL NO.

ida x. wa ZSAA es, tied) <2 ise, emny 6 Arta

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO. . >

fOM" BGT vse reecvoes corttons. "SECRET . tea


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000 |

SECRET

oN CHhen Filled fay ‘
: £ —

DUOILCE OF DOCUMENT .

- Agnes Sie iley,. was.

oa According to’ cosfidential informant. T-17, of unkorwn- reliability, Agnes
” amedley- attempted ‘to ovtain. from the Americar Expresa Co. in Sitahghad certain mail

sed to Harold R. Taases white Isaacs was’ avsent fron ‘the city. One of

the return addresses on ‘thie mail was Sith and Teades, Bh East 149th Streed :

‘Boone , New: Yorks Harold Re Teaacs, . ‘mention above, was.identified by T 17 as ;
: _an Aneriican Journalist of Communist ompathies whe resiged in | Shahghat in the Barly

i

thirties. :

SECRET . : i. (rs40n

rome 867 vee retesons conrrees.



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

So, ~~ SECRET ="

(en Filted te) -_

3. DESPATCH OR SOURCE

: DFB~16129 . ab

ue aa a i

meg pee pe
BocuNeNT O1SPOSITION . A

13. TRANSFERRED TO.
BU FILE NO.

- Subject of the document is “mentdoried as” faving. visited the 3 residence. of Herold R,
; TEGO Tpaacs and C, °R Fraank K Gass, two notorious local. Communi ts oympathizers.

SECSET



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

FBI REDORT

DATE: 31 JAN, 52 .

CLASS: : ‘CONFIDENTIAL

SUBJ: TILLMAN, DURDIN .
FBI FILE #: 1105-15218 (BUREAU) ’



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

~ at SECRET. i

(Mon Filled tay

DOCUMENT TRANSFER ANG: CROSS REFERENCE -

° SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
2 ce :
Va. TRANSEERREO: ro a : 7 ‘
AU FILE MO. .
- “Subject. renembers ‘meetint HAROLD’ R. Isiacs, an jnerican Jounnaliots at a a party
+] at the ‘home of ¥, [Adame SUN: YAT SEN..

*
. FILE-THIS FORM IN FILE NO. .
WON 867 ste receives eornsenn. . SECRET oa ;



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

. am

poe " conronnmu; + / ) Rtsteereo.

SaCeeaanneeen oe
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 2.

INSTRUCTIONS.—Omtcer SeFignations should be used in the “TO™ column,

ecroas beet and each comment numbered te Corressoad with th
(check math insalficient) before further touting. This Record an

Jerter Goch comment a tine should be dr
Tear te the “TO column, Each officer shouts tan
Mt Routing Sheet should be erturnéd to Regletep.

CONSOLIDATION EFFretey - /
cr Cae |

PANE Em oe EY Wiener

CONFIDENTIAL

Went ee


--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

~

— ~ CGHFIOEN PAY

Nee dus

. Office Memorand ni ™osren states GOVERNMENT *

Tro eoghtes, 3. 730 \ DaTE: 7 yedrury weg

_ A
PROM 4 Chics,

© S0RIRCT cg Inforas tt =

,
. ated adave, . . wo .

b
i
1
!

fee seston esirtane nt leah



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

vn Aha;-py enting haa been wrlttan in the case of “orria Why Olnons ,
formrr Comcunist who 13 now sceretary of thé Gonarak kore Memorial iiospital
-0f Denver, lie.has beon praised in waghincton for “disclosing his tecnnlot
past’, and hia board of directors has voted confiuance in him and eontinuod

‘him 1n-his Jobs ” .

2, No doubt all this te fisting and proper tut 1t doenn't anseor tho
Queotion of wy nobody in Donyer..goens to havea known anything about
Appélnan's Rod-tinzed pant, or shy there was anythin: acnsational about hie. . -
Fovolation of it in Washinctons -hilo the police rtate fs rinhtly ansthems
to Anerioan citizens, 1% seems xenarkable that official records should not.
be in existenco-and ruasonatly accessable to “people with reason te chook ”
On ‘ach « point as. past Comuntst sarvico... :

dd Tre point about “Appalani- le-not that he did anytiuin: particularly
reprehensible, -Lit. that-what ha did was quite in the oen, Acvording to the
Tashin;ton tontimony ‘he served the Communlat : party, apparently without —
epeelal concealment, In Runnia, Germany and other points in 1uroye,” neotne
grou! the world’ between 1924 arid Re Ho souht to rollove’::
‘Grate“yranich in the editorship of a Shanhal fay Ush=lan ae
” “movasino, "the Votce of uina", in 1997, he testified, init didnit pet off "
‘hia ship in Shanshad becaune of the hostilities \hero at the Liaw.

be Tila sheda acketiing of a lisht on tho enppoaealy Coaricsa and
ruthless Communist operations throu:tiout the rorld. I ws. in chanchat whon
fighting broke out there botweon Jajinn aid China on Aur. 2, 1997, and esa
teatify that to had three months of dir.:-ionz warfare before the cwpaign”
moved inland. vuring that period a rood many people. lett ‘fer obvious.
Feasons, tut sone came in, aid tt alybt be presumed. that an accredited
agent of internatlonal corsmnion vould.at least have paused in nearby Kobe.
> ee Ponskong till things calmed domia little. Possibly the. Conrunists aro
as subjoat to qualis, about personal saroty as anyone alsc-ar moro 80.

Se About “The Votoo of Chirin" there could hardly be any illusion dn
the mind of anyone «ho hiul. cared to pny the oli-htest attention to ite
Each fossa bore a virtual advertigonant of ‘ita Cownnist alleriance on ite
‘front cover, to those fantliar with mothods of converting Chinese into {

: EngUush. Tho name *"Yoico of China" appoared “in beth bn! lish and chinese,

- wed, 60 that. nat fa” ‘ordinarily, ‘vy. vontional © “ate system, written.
“"Fhing Ha" for Quina was epelled *chuny Jua"— an. n extraoniinary effect

frankly explaining tho pobligation'e oftorahtps a

obo HareldTa the editor’ who. preceded. ‘the ,
Graniches, had done considerably mo was conveyed by press. dispatches
- f¥on the Fashingten hearings of the House Un-American Activities Comilt toes
Theo: said he was "believed to havo deviated fra: Communis’ policy" whereas
in fact he ghallenied with the Ghineas Communtata ana their ‘koooow patrons

1 ; _ _s

and in tho Chinese. a prowllor Soviet-ord pinated oyaten of Rusanization waa. ||



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

. -e2e eo” :
.. ; NG Cc
Completely with an article heatal "I irecak «ith Staliniea.® ils pave @
canlid elucidation of the Comnunint financlal tackin; of the “Voice of
Shine” and 22 anon either in Gr cut of offictal Mfe had previously” oo
aufferod any Lllusicns as to its nature, Taaacs*. arti clo=sulilistiod alecs
whore than in the %Volce", ef courso—certalniy sheuld havo dispelled theate

Tho Granicha seea to have lived quictiy fa Shanthal and vero little

the cirewetances was hardly auryzrising sinca they wore’

x Corauniat orzan, -Chtane Eai-eieata forérs could not

on openly, for at that tine Shan-at was an. international

eity oparated under extratarrltorialitys Nationalist eccret’ police

'. did“oreata sere trouble fer the "Voice" aul tien conauleneral Clarence By
*'Qaiigs ‘was. allecoiy reprinanited by the State Depart-ent in 1937 for not.

- doing more ‘to holp thea as Arecicana, | Technically they were. entitled to
Mil Anoriean protecticn. ut Lausa, now with the inmpert=xport. hank in
Wanhinton, Use Us, Rasa sort of ola Curmutreon of the Shanj;hal Avoricoi: |
community ond it eons that he thouint it his meral oNlication to let ther
fry in any trouble they Aicht cot Into as Communlat asents, Uatiss can't —~

_havo auffered preatly. for this in the eyes of his superiors, for he ma . .
later promoted to arbassador both to China and to svetraliag . ce hoo .

in eee oie eee . ran fal

8, This “backround aad sano prasont importance since a “srevican _
ma;;daine te detn; operated teday in Comuntat: Shan:hal, which tolerates no
eriticton or opposition. . Orielnally prostiationas: under the lnte:..... 2. 2

Je De. Powell, ft has boon Crlonily toward the cam tAiste unter hid fon,- —
sohn Willer -unell, and it stayed after most other Annrican enterprises== | i :
‘Anoluding i.m daily Shanshat Lyening Jost and Meroury, edited by nysolf—had i .
shut dom cul Arerican. ofvicials had dof Red stanse+ . —_—

“~' . Qe Refore they dopartou, these
exténsive filo on what 1a now the ch

i
- fo Ioiom to hava irked. thaa was the. }
William Olivo, American cefsular official, in tho. susmer of 1949 acon after - !
the Communists had taken over. Clive bluulored into a traffic conflict with | i. :

tho Communist police, ws. taxen to first one ani then jecond police i

otation,-and in the couree of several days ixprigorent he was severely. | t

7 “{iate and gnnbutts, kicked and Othervise maltreated. fom
'y professed to havo little ‘information on the matter but .

.. @f account unvaveratla to Clive, Khen consular officials asked Powll to

- Game to the consulate. end look Clive ovar and cet tha full story, he foiled -

” ta show up. This. and othar matters wore recorded in-sone détatl but in view

: of ‘the b und Gf American intelli: enee Operntica,. ona may. atsation : cad oo

* whathar ‘th dotalls will ever be hauled: out of tha fLleoe :

10. Nore recently, conics of tho Roview' hava’ doen alanted strongly —
‘anainst.tho Americana ami the United kations cause in Xorea and one Jaaie
editorially spoke of the United States as "the eneay.* It should not be-
difficult to preserve continuity in following such a oase of American .

“ Bye-tarennlsy activity abroad, though nothing could be done to Powell unless ©



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

or natin he: -dovided. to roturn to Mo orn omuntrye-and evan thor, tha
rene ral faubject make it hant to

tell. nhat. could.ba done. aside tron porta
. almond agains |

2. The dmportant ‘nine, fa shom by a lon? list of, easoa cravely:
Anvostizated by conzrudoional coalttoes, 42 to have tho postwar Ce tral
‘Intallicence ALéne ona caxyarable proup ‘such a3-tho Foleral Dureau of
Invostigation kaop
waste offart. gooe fave | the many duplications of Aniiry.

: : ot 1

‘Of tho wealth of information walloble. Teo aah



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

, 5 AlMPrp es { oS - 2¢fF ¥59r
vote OOIEIDENTIAL > tte ee” -
2 ; tote SICUCTY troRangg - :
is eater 3 te ey ey BO TPeorucry dase a
. #itme xdas y o : 4
: Gilet, Contacts talon, Of : : . ‘
‘ i 7 “oes Tr arent Tee roeConaaaiet Seatinent of uw Nationale fa’ Ching :
oe 29 “Prolosed. fea ‘onpy Of ah article presared for Dbl icotion ta :
the Cirtatisa set eiltor of the Shanchat } oe :
‘Bist TERT z peer published agg ~~ 4 -
prevably wa not be te aeustte . ~ i
poe
: poo

opted aes ene AIL HULA NEE

oe CORFIBERT ;



--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

Lo “ a . ee

aay 2g
.
I
1
fl

S “OFFICIAL DISPATCH»

_OUSPATCH NO, :

oa wias :

. . 7 soucey aciey ale oe sce Sd - a 7 .
re 7: “ CLASSIFICATION ie fo \.
i try ae \

S10 | ous eas 78/T8 © DATE) tire an ;
rao gnict, Ti Oo , a . \

i guBsECT: GENE nan = coctarecriantes :
specifics trasscttiod ‘of. stuty 6a othe ROULENS cose”

sonar 0 sat (te

Avett @

Originators. ©

i

a

|

i

i
AcLEasiNG ofFICEa | * COORDINATING OFFICER AUTHENTICATING oveicen 4
LLOYD! GEORGE. John Chrislaw: i

chief, FE ' rE/B/SO . :
boa,

!

CLASSIFICATION

poam WO.
va teas ot” ae



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

203, 2811, Shangmd Lunctpal Piles; fied 1842-397

“IGAAC3, Harold Robort ; 7 i

_'Bom ...13 Sept lolom¥e tC ; os
Net'h’ = American me . .

Arrived in Chtha from Mantle oa lo Deo 1930

. ara of as Dn Clow mer of th ety ob
Prigads of sheae

tate-trip I8AAC3 wrote ‘his fignove, Viola ROBINSOM, that he had eekded to tdtn " RB
a3 a result. of ‘Sonvarsations: with GLASS. .

ater started’ and becaze the editor and publibad of ‘the * rf thine Forum

‘AgOr: 0 Printing co’and omed 406 of ite siareds = -
Oa on 1953} LS4ACS and his wife Viola ROBINSON whan ho had narried* ss Sopt
1932 left: Ghanghsad for Japan ca the 35 Hagasakd Marys On- % A i they Procacded *
7,t0, Japan getorning £0 Shanghat. on Ang 2th, 22

nect lon, wi th this Agency: around Dec 19336

asa9r'tsaics was ‘ta? Poochos té gsther Ist hand info re “the omy f ford
Peclpsta Raveluitonary Government of ths Repudlte of Caina.®

*“Sta-the epring of 2934 TSMCS an hie wire left for Thintein ea este to PuLing
se Bb sich Sanches he posided at 6.2 Mung ru Chis fao, East City. Poking ailing. address.
was’ 8 Sey, UHLaAm 1, Qrand @ Hotes: ; So,

oh at fi¥st wae Job-printed but fron Oot 1932 on was printed by tho Level Publtet
ing: CAT Fs 395" Lana 478 Tiendang Road, Shanghai sESAKC3 openedly otatod he: “Fao mane :

: Inddditicn to bis“ other actiribtoes JSMMCS was also stipe vith the Revisions
.ogvered .

pie te arrival Jotned the. editorial state of the Shangas avontng’ Post and oa if

a : - dp Saechier ‘oce to FBh/
“Oo 12 Jane 1951; I8AAC3 aid ho friend ASS took a'trip up the hella

coated

Be gy
ae

tan AS nl iit neta



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

ce: F ‘January 19>h,- USAAGS visited Mr and Mrs. NOULSXS while ther wire an &
tanger atrike in Prisca . : . . :

- my Senmary 193b;. the parents of ISAACS, ur and Hro I.Hs, ISAACS arrived io
Shanghad fran Loa Angeleags. During their stay in Shanghal they Peaided at the Metro-
pol llotel AnnexsOn 20 February wey left Shanghat for Port Said en route to Marseiliss

~oa.the 3S Rewalpindts . Soe : - 2 :

“On & bpeh 1996 ISAAC3 under ‘the pon‘nase of Lo Sea had an articles published in
ye Row wilitant,, the organ of tho HY District Worker's Farty. The article was an

attack on Stalin vand yes eatitled'® Stalintern ready to embrace Chian Kal ShekayPod
-O*fteer Chinese Red Army in return for reserrection of dfeasterous: 1927 bloas3- *
At this samo tino, ISAACS was atso dectaring en’ ‘Japan, Chins, and the USSR and-tha
: - Mar Criote in tho Vor Faats Loa : .



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

eee as FOOTER ga Pr mea op eae peakae mtd
ra *~ Ea a ‘
‘ ~ - 7 :
* . *
we i ve

St © heptane terme,

poe . See . & cr

‘FB Shanghat Yank Polic © Piles; filed, 16-b—2- 37, p2-

oy Tn Stanghal GLASS made the-acquairtance -o8 ‘one Danares: ¢.B333, -AuoPLean -frea- are
Kansas City, born 1693.This mie sono tia after Apral 19325. ae ;
: Bane O.F,.GLA33 = Cecil Prank OLAS. ~ ; , ;
Born «25 Maroh 1901; BirmbAghas; ingle oe
Passport Britiuh passport, @ 94253, dosed § Jan 1931-1n Pretoris,South Africa” |
Pol Affiliation-Menber of the cP rr a
Overt ProfeseterJoumalist _ res ; ; wy

A hee gm Nene te

Ue Ue

- -Beldeved to have laft ingland 4m thu early 19203 for South Africa where he resided
at Johshnesburg for many years; ae rr
+~Ardived dn Shangaad from -Derkes May 1932 re -
_,0n 12.dune 1931 made a trip tavough'up the Yodgstoo Yangteze- with ISS
- American Commusist and waiter-fer-the oditor of the China Forug; A letter written by ~~
' 184.03 to hia fiances, Kiss Viola ROBINSON, during this trip contsined informtiea eo
hat ISAACS had decided to turn "Red" as a result of his convorsation with GLasgee
_ En Sopy 72931," GLASS begewe a manber of the "NDULENS Defense Comittes" ami tzo
tonths later tas appointed Shanglial Represertative of thy Anglo“Aelatic f-alogrash ,
Agency(Angasta) ‘a news agency with #Q in Hirbin, whieh position be held watil 19335 7. 7
"In 80g1933, lie was living in Rotn 510,9 1276,Horth Ssochuen Road,6harighal. =

RByeyerattem-+.,. sreco wares

ist



--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

DE ie mse ems Sat

a a ee ee

Fe

eg. ae

“ee

-mansaH; Viola’
aa 8 ERSE Heme: Isaccs

Bowe tym, me
Wattl "4p day i,

Penmamtsten ; [ae a
ia PISA mae ek et

“ey Sopt 1932 married Harold Robart, IS3 ACS, | Ska had bean
song years bafors her. arrival in China, and it hag been’ stat
- ‘betreon tho tro indicated Shab Communist’ amapethies op the
os TSAACS" Attention of Joining the cr

Boy Siete rire tn Ota nao snelayed at the bh ing Mae
. Shanghai a8 a Seaoben?

She’ ved ta: the Bebackneat Butiding ama, North Seostoa Read

oo oo? “jugs. 1933, the Taues Loft. Shanghai for Japan and an
ded fo Datreay returning fe Saachad oy Tall of 26 acguat 195

enzaged to 1S408 for
ed that the letters
Part of both end of

18 Aug 1933

eh A a adi As ain ace natn


--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

PEN RTS a OUR EET OED Ys,
ai ce re

Sar 2 API, Soh
re canereety Pian aera Ame

Mihara ie dees es

". Marold Robert ISAACS with allanbe

_ REC rami wt a

Harada Rabart tsitcs | was born in Mew York City on 3 September 1910 of fers
"dean parents. fas father has deen reported as 9 doci edly af t!

he comereial ‘ype oa .

TiAAcs haa: ‘bean dovertbed as intelligent, critical sdervous— and nervously organizeds. :
, ‘Lite lo te know ecneeriiing the activities of: 15.403 pry to.bio-arrival ja

China free Manila oa 10 Docender 1930}. however, aoe Visited 13 AC. BB me Ai

date- aa Shaaghos io:raported to” ‘havo embarrassed his. B00, “tn” ‘tho préasnoe of friends

: by a “Hdding® tho ‘attor about trying to make Boney on real astate hile in Loa

Angoles betate' going to Chines _ ae a ole er

_ The actual dato. when Sect Prank aLass. and Harold ISAACcg a not» “Kania, ba: “st

mist: have” deat shortly: ator the arcival of GLASS An Shanghad -in Kay 1932, “gob ta:

-_ June 191) sakes ina GLASS made. a trip up the Tongtaze togethers:

ur has. boca, tated that. Tsuics beoane. faterestod in. Coamiunen with: opeastie’ re.
E ' 46 has bean atated that
- tatoo to China, but lottera vritten. by. Tsaacs to tila fiancee, Viola ROBINS,

, Hanee, Wale aoa, siden mere ibtttog aaring t th. Tangtoe trip Andtatet Gon

{ ato part aP totny and one &f & he ‘Isteers centatned tthe Antorw:
‘mattoa that Bes | had decided’ to torn cy Rod®'as fosult of his’ convervatios*Wwith .

GLASS: hd you aro amare, ISAacs ond cLAss returned to Shaaghat in ‘August 1532 ant took a
“up residence ab 128 Hathatnes Read. ‘ein Soptenber i931} “beth men are rep ported to have J

CANDY a Te

vecane marbard_ 02 5 the rouLsxss ‘Defonse Cammitioa, ISAACS bake tha ® Seorotaryy

as

. 4
ween weenie tld te oe

iNew wera: ero he aks



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

: aay an chine, he wag Rot 6 follomar of Troteky.. Howaver, he ts reported to bave fue .

: Shanghed‘ea 3 eee 132} on Us Yoptectar 1932,» ahé nd Isxkes inere paretoa ‘and res

. Mereurg, P

eo .  ¢$

pia ee Oo

Is\ass ts itso reported to have been a rethor of the Society of Friends of the USS3.
Op. n his arrival in China, ISA.C3 joined the dditorial atar. of the Shanghal —
Evening Fost and the Horeury. LTSaACS was aiso enployed with the Havas News agency, -
which sonnestion ho io reported to have severed around Deoucber 19235 ;
: “sakes aléo started and lates ‘bosane editor and. publiahed ‘of tis ® China Forum
It ia believed tc: hava ‘been :
neo & monthly Englian language paper - - issued at first as a cormeroial jod fron tho .
ePra Ostober 1992 « ca ate eas Printed by tho: Level Publis ing Company

: Ines 5
ha nao saaser, ot tha Pedi sonpary owing Ah et tho, nara .

F ‘ BSy. otge man. for ‘Aertean Cawsndets, and that uring the first cart. of ‘Me 7 fs

ay beceae seavinoad that the taties sf the Chinese Cenunista, were Wrens and thet

Apt 20ht¢he .
S20" Babar: Batesnienett stan a Birth Sosehat Rosy: Prior ts “thi' oni



--- Page 83 ---
1400000,

S eee Pempentrne mewerwa are mas eS

woe
we

af

blo af Shinai

er

thagedy of at ‘hinose 2 Rersiutien,* alegeaiy a3 8 otro gestae, ae

sai

Lancs oat Jove, 18 atin hon, bis oon nae ie



--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

on has bean stated by {rianda of 1SsaA35" even daring tha beaght of his Trot-
skrtot carearly be never accapted money fron any, SPOUP} that he Was open and above
board; and that bs. ‘never ‘engaged in any consptinctes to overthrow established govern
ment. Sar, are aise reported to have stated ‘thot TaAc8! ‘was attracted to Coaruntan :
"Wy Bhabocr atten? a,

. genet ile in the lits 193007 TSeAcs jotumned ‘to the United Stetons-Byinc“beds
Until the fall of Franco, ho was employed by tho Havaa News Agencyein October 1943, .
of 943) BO as working for Hevannosls Hagazing® a Waahin revonyDy c. Wis address ab that, -



--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

ue. Viola Re Iercy co

- 1OWly 3910}, wre ; 13 Sept s,3910, HTC 2, -
» Aporfoan “0  Anortean

“gig o

addittes to agies SMEDLEY and. Prpak SEA: 1a" woucs te ds. ban. to have been. fa
"eostact™ with. the fopordne: while da China t; ¢- hy .



--- Page 86 ---
1400000

2p trs
Pat «



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

SECRET

(aden fitted iny

5

ane Fon bod,

UBJECT OF BOC DERT

TRANS CaaEO To
mre "No.

bu Se /93( we! yoae gene Mad &. Qe 7)
Cony thee, Z Mee, YS oh. Liat, ZL wz Low Greipees Fick)

| Leseen) bes ctenct Ceca » rho. Ad fr el ae,

ve Maryled , aad we ae a blebc x. tse

“2 Scie! Lahcdadd Lilo PEAS ak
ethan, ~ Le at ce fintesrd Ab Hebi fiir

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

> Jatwled |

oh : SEGRET —

a: $7 867 vse vecrtoce sorrrons,



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

"SECRET a

C Ben Filled tny

DOCUMENT TRAKSEER AND CROSS REFERENCE
TAF ICATICN

<7 r IDEN
SUBJECT OF SCENT . DOCUMENT
. | amy |

2. OlsPATCH OR SOURCE DOC. svwDoL mo.

SODB-1,5339

7. SOURCE CRYPTonve,

TRANSFERRED TO
RU FILE WO,

rl. Reference is ‘made to
and in. particular to your
in which i

Indonesia,. -and on Uy Nove 51 was interviewed, in ‘accordance eith your request, and the
following information elicited, - a

2.” Dirdin stated he Iiew-nothing definite regarding the present activities and alieded
-Jcommnd st connection of Prang Joseph WEISBLATT, Haroid ISAACS, Frans GLass, ALEXANDER
BASSLER: BUCHMAN and George Alexander Kennedy, and that @ could furniah info. on their

Trimm aomrcrzecaencaeneig

Se. DURDIN said’ that he-knows Harold Isaacs well and that he last saw him at the conferei ce.
in Baguido in the Philipvines, which was held in November 1917. He. stated that Tags tO
SAACS "4 Pl]; x now :

>

SECRET tea

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

on 867 vse rererovs tortion.



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000 *

re
i

*

re ee

FBI REPORT

DATE: 5 DEC, 51

CLASS: CONFIDENTIAL 7

SUBJ: PAUL RUEGG, Was: HILAIRE NOULENS,
AND OTHERS. : ;

FBI FILE #: 100-344906 (BUREAU)



--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

Fae . : es
. eg IS NAVEST
INYCBIO

Noose:

PA Yor ation:

Paianhoee

mee a

dein



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

Lend



--- Page 92 ---
1400000 *

coPy — SegReT

7 Novenber 1951

Assiatant Director for Policy Coordination
Attention:. ‘Security Officer
Chief, Special Security. Division

| owald_@.. Tsaacs_,

7 _1,. Reference 1s made-to a memorandum fran your office dated

~,3.July 1951 in which you requested that a Special Inquiry be com
ducted. to resolve information cencerhing an allegation that Sub-

. Ject is sympathetic to and/or connected with Communist activities,

- 2. .On 31 August 1951, Mr. Kenneth Patrum of the Security
Office was advised’that partial results have been received as
@ result’ of inquiries ‘at several national agencies, The partial
information reflected that Subject had beon connected with at
least two factions of the Communist Party while living in the:
Far East; It was. suggested that extreme caution be used in con-
tacting. or. associating with the Subjéct, - :

'* 3, “This office has completed the investigation of the Sub-
Ject, which inaludes: a check of records of the appropriate Federal

" agencies, As a result of this investigation, the files of thia

office contain a great ‘deal of information concerning Subject's
association with questionable organizations and .individuals. :
- Although Subject ‘has denied any current activities with the Comm--
nist Party, his, associations and activities are highly questionable
ee ’ and his political : sympathy ‘has: not been unqualifiedly resolved at_
io Ol.” ‘the pregent. tine, wd noe. re

>. 4,:, In view of the information ad-set forth above, it is _
: Yecommended. tha extrene caution be exercised ‘tn dealing with th

Subject,.~ 0 circimatances should Subject be contacted, with.-
“Pegard to Poss

@ use by this agency prior to receiving a final .
ition'-by this: office, - oot

FOR THE SECURITY OFFICER, CIA

Bb | ROBERT Hl, CUNNINGHAM

.

ne en

a



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

©
ue
ay.
oO
—_
re
Oo
no
0
QS.
a
x)
x

: era _— . ;

D Veadtre ae o8 Me em gen ~ _ i

4 ! :

5 i : 1 p

he . “y 7”

t . TLaSStF IGaTioN | i nn H
cate: BS Baptantey Beak

@ilaf of ftattas, Noag Seng
Sile?, Feroien Mivigiay a

SUBJECT: semen. .

2S Laferaetica ”
Request for inte

Sear sice

fusrting

U, Te eocwettin with a current fovestigations. MASERARI hag Pegusated
Vad Thlmeh berdin be Uriervissse alen ino Ifoes i298 cut balew, Ita ~ Pood
| Poytsrted Hat if te nob aow in C Eety ot $e ast expootet to bo thos |

38 guCacsEnt, tharetaya,

teblo W2G offieur

OP scur ‘stel? ay un krs

tnt @ procts Gf ile iopitct. Bg Wekio acmilable toe at

(a regyescctative ef te brick. oouNty S:Slew, if S ave:lodle), aod
ho isteurvies Lurain end Soto yeu ok Sho Testis, . . t _
. + —_ * \ s a

: : VON
: Bo A peliadie “NGA YD tmprtact yee statu Mab in 1953 Dentin wes ge
Pracpoal, esting ag cfty oditar ef to “Cina Presde” AC tent too he wus oaks
to have shared so agartant ot Apes Jsteph TL OSULATT, who dp decaribed ag as
Onoriean ultiant tron.da tring ag B’bosd rayerter, Acconlas ta tae inferaanty,
LISGLATT war at tot ties @ elec angoclota of Zaseld Marca, who ene aalé ea
hove bem @yiqu:is vheraual da 3983 ao cdltar af tho "caning leoun", aoeariiad ©
88 6 Crsmmiat puiication, A LASERAi soures of inka raltabinde? bas a bed
: that ie 1uS3 Ic24cs urge “retortous radio qopatiiow sad ons erspeoteds |
-, BP Dedng am agent Co tha vhird internal mal’ - : Te

Be Te L949, “ALELA™ seprcoaitatt vos inturviewsd ao Merrie Liuig ATLEay
in Reaw?, Gelerndo; A’PLISIAE edalttad saving bec 9 CP swap fron lozd te -
1987, Le state? that tn 1335 ad 1934 10 wv Darin in-Shayat, aot that
aupling Taot pariod, ha, Faruid L403, tram At and Alusendsy BMAHAg, .
fro partly nol’ mestings ot the here of Tilb.. oantin tn Bray e = Frems 01489
io @ Britichjeud fect presoutiy Mving iL Log écguleag EU RAG ta on araytesn
"So 9159 livbe fa Los Arselong A'TUSHAT described IZA end GLtS3 aa
Trasyites ta loedd, ant duseribed BoC 2 as & forna> eonber ef the -
Goumie® levth Lenguc In the Ged. A 2) RS Leferment. of wilreny FollomM iter
"RAS Rlpertes Wat exter ‘tat period OLAS asd DUACS mars enepestad. af boing

ROLES TNn cesicem Cobau inating orescra AUTRENTICATING OFFICER s-
ren emere TOT eens ee eo }
GECRGE FL RALLERY _ ‘

arte:



--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

Bite |

i

agmts for the Third Internstiones in Srangbad, -

4. In addition to the above indiviaiele, Duvdin in ales reported to havo
boen an sequatrtarce in Brant about. 1932055 cf deorce Aloxanicf SEHARGT, wto -
fa prosemiy aploycd ot Yale Ualvoralty, KZYNCUY ves an aaparinicws of
TRAACS anc wis aloo reported to hare beun assootated with Pluk welag oF:

bal at that tins. . ota

a . :
6. in view of the above ZASSRAFD doairee tha? Durdia by trterviesed 900
28 9009 49 poraiblo volative to the. 45 sequaintans end senociiticn .
_ witha WBLSBLATT, JAAAGG, Glass, DK RIBEIY, Durdia ie Pequseted to -
‘pennent’ particularly Seneorning any acts J these {ritvidimle ou behalf -
ef tho CP or the Paird Internat! ona}; “uP euy ary beve teen engaged in
‘@ayi wage activitivs oa bela? of the Sovigt Unien, eithar curiag tho cayly... .

: 1980" in China, cr at ay subsequent periods



--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

ae ~ .
‘ ; Moan Thay ‘ ad +
Wnitvd States Bepartment ef Pustice _ -
Gedernd Bureau of tnocetigstion ; ‘
Bach ingten.28, Bg, . . 4
CONFIDRETIAL 4 —
BY SPECIAL YASSER :

* eg DEB -HFFO
‘Daw: September 11, 1951 2 . ny
or Director Bw C16 ESE

Baehingten, D.C. Te

Attentione Majer Smaral W-0, Byenn
. Offices of Speetal Oporetions

‘Prat _ John Edgar Soover - Mrooter
. Podsral Bureau of Invootigntion

iad at ete a
!

EERE pe 747957.

‘ . ~— . . mo _ . 7
Subjects TITWAY DIRDIA nn a
- TATRRIAL SECT = Ro ae 7

, In cormoction with on official invostigation toting con | ood:
auoted by this Bureau, wo are desirous of ottatntog eortaia inforar tion
froa iy. TiLiman Dardin, sho 12 presently located 0/0. Heng Keng, Tigey. oe
Standard, 103 Findaor Hours, Viotorla, Hoag dong. IS wcald appre giated |

Lf v7 would have one of ruEr rearésontatives interview i, Durdia
Fong Kong along the jims eet ost colew. - : :

a Por your information, Durd‘n is a foreign ecrrespordeat for
tho tna York Tines ‘rrspspar. Ke is sn Ascrtesa ci ticen born March as
1907, at Slshart, Texas, and has been saployed 39 a foreign ecrrasporiens.
fer ths Rog Yark Tieso for cany yeard, posaibly sinso at loast tas ocrly >
1990" «. coe 7 : y. foo

i
\ oo A reliable inferwant hee advised that ta 1939 Dardin cael $n op,
- Shanghai, Chins, acting as City Biiter of the pewepsper VUAisa Prosa Pe
At that tivo Derdin was ceid to be Sharing an opartesnt with Prana ‘' i
!
H
{
i
H
j
i

_ -wetadlatt, dase-ited an an évorican eitison thon in Chima ac a rowopsror

_ * Poperter, : . Cds de _ . i
CS Acoardiag ty ow informant,’ Wisblast mis at thet tins slalom |
associate of ona. Harold, 8. Toaacey an dverican et-tdder prosantly -E
Uiving tn lew York City, wao esid by our inforaant to have deen exploved ean |

é a —_
fa , - . kG
E i .
- & 4 :
P
. b m fa ene ~ = n


--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

a

“a

a :

33 aa Réktor wv the “Chian Fores,” desorbed e39a- *
Communist publication. 4 Souren of ulema relfability. bas stated thas
in 1023 Inuaco wae a “notortour radical sympathiter” end ine Subs bed
of being ar. arent of. tha Thtre-Invernattonal. eaaca tas cald to bow
| SFenntred. the Shanghai Comsltvea far Mhe Defense of the! Rudise , Feel
~ and TaloAueyy verg convicted is Chica io 1932 Yer Russian etplorage

Bs fluo Bureau tatervievsd ons Kerrie’
| eat Appleman, an avert Bresently living {a Onavar, Colaraia, 4
and Ap, eran oAgitted haviag teen a momber of the Communist Party re
1925 “te 1937. Appleman etetes that {7 1923 amt 103% be kuew Durdin fa a
| SRerghat,; ant that durfag thie fevied, ba, Applesan, Rarold Lanacs, frank |
wv dtaee ane ‘AizearderMuchrar, rrequeatly hela meetings at the kas of :
 Pllingn Geld te Stanghar. . fo

Slass ioe -E-fttap ettteer, presently Living in Leg
sia. Bucheac (3 aa Anerican citisen aleo aresengly ”
lea. Morris asp lesan deacribed Isaacs amd Qlasa ac. -
23-34, ard deacrived Puchmas as‘a ?ormer member of ths
sorminiat Yrute: Langue fn the Unite Ltates, An Informant of unkoaw,:
so reliasil{t: has also reported that duriog wat verted Giags and Isagsg
. Were. dy pes ted of bein; agents for the Third International in Bhanghag..
In dition to thy abovy

. » Dun
to have teen an Acquaintance tr Shngbal ta about 1932.
Auexaider dennedy, an Awerlean cit
.. University. Kerrady wae an acquaintance of Harold isaace at that tina,
. ane wio-alse repartee) to have Deen Resociated Wita “left-wing erage” in
“Shanghat at thet ties, | OE : - . ree

livtee is ain ap,
" Uretazyitec ta

bee s

. in View of the informatica indicating that sp. Durdie wag” :

1) O64uainted? with these Indiviiuals durtas tha-early 1920's, “4t tg @eateed *

“that be be te level relative to the extent of hte acquaintance and.

associatiza with the. Tollowing: Frany Joseph ‘Metablatt, Garoid Isaaca
jlasa, Alexander Suchoan, and George Alexanier Renogdy.. .-

t {8 requeeted that Durdin be questioned particularly as

any luterzetion he may pessess concerning am activities of these:
individual ut venaif of. the Somrtst Parcy or the Thiri International,
* A180 be atand vieetner he has any dnfurmtion iniizeting

wAls may 2 ‘er vazed. tn esp Lonace activities on berare

m, efther the early 1930's in China ep at any ~°
. t {6 deekres thet Pull detaits he sbtataed freq”

wenn EG oe hk



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

ann eae,

.
NZ Aremanegtne me epee cree

ap ren aes

relative to aay information be my funieh eonvaraing :
hvers ive activities on the part of any of. Uacee intividests,

“ke would be apprecioted if you: wroitd erdegvar to have
a elerviewet at. tho eurliest ;cseible date,



--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

a eteree pee nes mM oe cer TT ee fee nee
Cos . be
: ; SECRET

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET 2 7,

ne “TO column, Under each comment a line should be drawn across shoet
‘ 4 worn tha "TO eotyne Fach edticer ehauld jential (chek mark inentbcgat
This Routing and Record heat shculd be-returned to Registyy. :

3 700/B3.2 -

t
5

Lo!

bo

poi ;}  DITELLIGENCE ” : :

po in) f — . : -
. ’ (oh teg. , :

ie . necans _

i fe Lo

: : »

: SECRET : ,

. ee


--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

: Freat anol. ©
an No, of pagzst 2

Report Kade ty Walter J, Ingold

" Ddotribations Nene
Source Cryptonyas Punic-2
 Renarkos

AMgueres! vloit to |
_ accurate reporting.
pride in hia works :

. an ope coment relating to

}
i

oenhleetaeeswteramertnetcm nes nec

‘Ly In our last wesoage to Tunic-2 on 30 July we u c
NVN ad an example in a gentle lecture on the virtuos of
by 1 Auguot ‘unio-2 anowered back.

SECRET

Roport Xo. 2FH-69
Bnelogureas None .
Approved ty Janos x, Lenior

Roferencer HANU 242 and ASH 01125

eed the discrepancy concerning Leo
Tne van obvicusly takes:

thio report wili be-eent.in enother pouch or via eable, | ~

_ SE0RET



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

fShneeed Seer Noe GREASE a

a

\

:

Ry “ . , : . 7 ~ 4
\ : SBORET . — .
\ . . . .
Budjects leo Figuoree | Roport Nova 2FH-&
- Date of Infor ae indicated

Plade Acquired: Viet Mam, Handi . Date Acquireds 1 August 51

Bvaluation: B3 " Date of Reports 2 August 51
v4 . ; Lo .

Sources :

» According SKeare Mul, Who worke in the Viet Minh dinletry of Foreten.Affairo,

© L40-Pi-uoreo wae in Salton in oerly 190, The French did not allow hitrm to remain
in Séicor-and ho was forced to return to France. Fijueres later wont to Hong Kong
in Late August 1950, and then procooded to tho Vie& Bac via tho Hoa Nan (F.C. 4 South
China t) road ‘to attend the Third Congroce of the’fCI held in early Octubder 1950, ©

Kinh territory froa Salgo:i-because of Fr

2, Thore had been sevorat prévious casos of individuale who were unable ‘to roach Vint

. hh interference. In July 1949 Hr. A. doth,
; Biltor of the Sunday Tritune, arrived 4 igon and obtained all nocesonry papersy ||
| tho French did not allow him to proceed because of his pro=Cormunint articles, Othore -
\ woro Walteryériggo of tho Chriotian Selence honitor, Harold ‘fcaace from Newewook, and
‘Abocouoa he oriticizod Bao Dai in westward, Hot), . cot

. - an . aN

SSCAST y -



--- Page 101 ---
14-00000

!
a Ay -
|

Te emer ne oe

. FBI REPORT
DATE: JULY 51 a .
CLASS: . CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJ: UNKNOWN - — : Se
FBI FILE #: 100-G8282 (NEW YORK) . —_ :



--- Page 102 ---
14-0009

~.KEMORANDUN FoR “Fi/cs”~

SUBJECT - + Harold R, Teanca, Requoat for an infomation °

“> Ramoohook ony . . -

. _ ds It ts requested that ’a namechock for information be.
Gonducted on Subdsack for the purpoce of doterninin:. the valide

| ity of charges: thet Subtoot i¢ syxpathotio to and/cr counseted
with Commmist activities, : ° .

"78s Wo. have boon: informed “‘unoffloLally that dict is
-ourrently employed dy ‘the Ford Foundation ae an adviser’ an
For Bart projecte. ~ Wien’ eno of our covert agénts. wag recently
“oalled upen by tho Ford Foundation te prosont cote sugrestions
. for a Fer Bost program, the azont found that Subject was in-

-- tereatod in and ws to be Closely. oornooted with this program.
Bost It fa planned that tho Pord: Foundation Fenaing unmare of ‘tho: |
. CIA connection with thie covert agent... ° :

7 5. Then the report is comploted, the information should
‘be'routed to J, Brica Anstuts, #i-1/oPd, . ; :

_DOUgLAS-D. Pim
Deputy Chief, ‘Fa-2

Be FU+1/aBA/ph:
: Dist: rig ¢



--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

NATIONALITY y norton

HAME, Morold Re Viaaes ; \

ADDRESS: (last inom ~' 148) e- 35 Contral Park Veut, Be¥.Ce

wi

DAS oP BIRTH: 1910 -

SUSIuEsS caRTR, (=) Stal writer for liavas Nows Agency - |
~ _ : (1890-1038) 7

(by: Liter of of China Fora’
yi sn Sona : oo
(0) Clty Editor ror ching Presa, Shanghas,
7° Stidea C=
“(d). Fay Eastorn tar Correspondent for Howewooie -
_ Bidids45) . :

\
{e) 4 fpootar Projects Editor for Loeswesi, (1947 - )
(2) Advisor te ova Vourdatton.

“PUB. Gav Ouds
——s!

1 Uentributed to Bangor resin and forante ter Mockly.

- _ Booksi (00 ainda)

~2-.



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

een

\. Twe-Thirds cf tho Yorldy. Protjlans of a new appreach
To tha paaples cP fais, Afriss, and Latin~Anerios, - Us

2. Jor Cyvole is dclar Selected dueuzwate an Nojor inter= :
- HetTonal fevolepmonte in Far Snst. “1963 and ima? -
notes astd intpoduction 147. a

Xo Fenso fer Ala © IMR ee wy : Lone

Bete of chinese Ravoluticn » 1088 -—

Five Yeara of Fue | tata Taig Reactier - 1632

thither Presies - : 1936 ‘Lear Trotaky wrote tho bodk and:
Te Teaacs translated it. :



--- Page 105 ---
14-0000

‘secret
ao conen Fitted Emp ~ .

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND cross REFERENCE

DOCUSENT IDENTIFICAT TON

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT -

aa

Tal FILE NO, 200-617-55_|

AT EM_OA_SOURCE © p0C. SywaoL AO. : ~ a

Serge Espoonage Case

B. OATE PRUCESSLO

21 Nov.

awatv at

Ry ames. ‘Ee Flaugher

+ ~Faanar enn #0 -

we GROSS REFEAALD 10 THIS a rie
. . “RU FILE Oe

wi PERTINENT JN

“ Consecutive Exhibit Nos 32 in the documentation of the Sorge Espionage

le _ Inelosed. is Co
“Case. This, "exnabit. consists of two related parte: I and Ii. the second part is.

a B, because of its” bul Part I ie an Andex of each

divided into two sections, A an

personality and organization Listed in Part TI. Part It consist of 4 resume of the 40

anghai Yunieipal Police file, followed: ‘bya a | babular- sting |

contents of each Sh

of the contents of the files, with page references. .

Page 2h.

Isaace, Harold Robert: G-2 Doc. fs Page
Anti-War Congress report, ‘mentioned in 59 . 30-32.
’ ‘Burton report, mentioned in - : 10, — 8-9 ?
* China FerumMeditor of oo 65 . 1
"Chinese Workers* Correspondence": - : . :
. Investigation re . 32 Ok
Received by a . 7 9h. . ee a3
_- Bavelope addressed to- ce en > a .6
“Fiev Years of Kuomintang Reaction’ _ .. 65 ~ as
. Granich, "Evidently another Taaacs™. <0 wen : 107.
"qt Break sith the Chinses Shaliniste”, uo comme cores

: author of Be 2-7.

er 867 ote peavious sorteans. .


--- Page 106 ---
14-0000

Tee martes; ented EE

. L, Chao, ow enployee, ‘who was 3 arrested by the Katicnalists ‘aiid’ ided tn Prison,

SECRET _

om Cthen Pilieg Inn

OOCUNENT TRANSFER AND CSOSS REFERENCE

SUBYECT OF DOCUMENT

CROSS REFERREO TO THIS F

"page 69.
The July 30, 1932 issue of- the New York Times"t, under a Shahghias - Dateline

of Jule 29, 1932, skhtes that Harold R, Isaacs, an Aweri¢an citizen,, was warned

by the U, 3. consul in Shahghai that the uy Ss. may with draw ak. stk its extra

__ territirial rights and allow hin to be tried ; ina Chinese Court. Téaaes, then
editor of the "China Forum", had violently attacked Chiang Kai-Shek, calling hin

among other things, a butcher. The article further stated that iasacs | was

as associate of Agnes. Snedley, a correspondedt for feoricah newspapera. .

page Be “The _arch 7, 1946 issue of the New York ‘ines réflests an article

‘captioned "Broup of Anericans, including writers and journalists announced

that they. had sent -aletter to Chaing Kad Shek concerning the death of Yang

The sighers were critical of the treatment recieved’ by CHAD. . Tite FOLLOWING TIVE L

“signed the lettsr: - Maxorell.S. stevart. Elisabeth Ames, Marélitie Slade,

Alfred Kazin , Erie ‘Severeid, Richard Masts, ‘gre 8 NeoRs Tsaaes, Agiies Smedley

“and Theordore White.

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

SECRET on areas

Wty B67 o4e reesious centres,


--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

™ SECRET ..

me (Ben Fetled tay -

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE +

SUBJECT GF DOCUMENT DOCUMENT JOENTIFICATION

AGKES SMEDLEY was, Ayoo, Yahoo Br FIRE No. |. |

2. DISPATCH OR SOURCE DOC, syMaqL NO.

REDFB--3

T s0URCE ies ae =

@. OATE PROCESSED 10. DISSEMINATED In

3 Dec. 1963

3. anatyaT

: TRANSFERRED TO
MEFILE NO. + *

Lt Paseport files of State Dept. also indicate -passport. renewal application dated June

23, 1932 in which the subject listed as- identifying witnesses —=-subject mentioned ©
Harold R. Isaazs , who according to-information poasessed by T—-1 as 'REDt

vow
37

SECRET - (tae

B67 ont eaevvens tosveoes.



--- Page 108 ---
14-0000

. , 3. Ca 15 June “3931,

SIRT 2

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. >”
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

}
i
L.
a :
a tad. FA OW.
ry
te : . tar
: i Atbantloai ~ fr. tase He sagoresll
fs . tubjecti gbtarcld hobert Lads
ws Me Thfe do dn reply to cre Jack U, Sebl’a request for taformation
voy ; coneern ins | harold Robert : rags, nase by telernene on Ey’ oveaber 1949.
: 2.
a =
. faerioan paseport ATRizb. ous Fas “Thre % wtoye * tn - * inee nah
the chausnah iventas oat £ vereury, an ‘np ta Loncuace datly podl Larad

weet in. de -Ltor a feu weeks, he tesaze aveoclated with tha chink URGSI,

! ecligimlanmses gaily ptbitesed da Jha. Raby and rae bith tois
FAper until. say 1971. la-cune af iho eacs year (hase Wo 8 trip un: ”
a the tanztre iver sith Saehh Fenak cha Sdy/a orithan s ot and auaber
of tho orltieh Comwalet ; Farty, sunpected of tein’ an agent for the Tibed
« IntePpaat ia anbl dn Chine. :
: - Loire NOULENS, ith aliases, sac orrusted ty the
_ chmaghed Suctelsa lise os chargas of asplonacs tn tenslf ef tha Third
- “ astersational, AdcS becese tha chaninal escrétiry of the Coutte fnteve
o> Jgmnmatioaale Tour la Sefereo ve vaul ot Gertrate aege (RUINS), a conalbtes
: ia forned to aid the NOULENSa ‘ia thet sipfenge ogainest charges sf esplonage

peelarred ty the C: nese goveranent, cur flles reflect that ta47

Ty wag
aA eorresnon IGERG, the breuiient of the cocskttes

: BERG Res an active agent U@ PROAy
_ for the Third Iitsena ISAACS is. alsa xnann to hove. Sof sontack
pith senes SMEULEY ‘La Jhanghal at thts tino ee SMR HAROLD R SAAS S .
CER OL 3 COMMUNIST ALENT ? White ce ranoro RovgnT 1saacs (ror )Seub)
wagust 2932, [Sdn yave aotice to the aeerdens

ueneral La uhanghal of mio iatencien vonrriecs bof: : “tes) vig
fmerioan citizen ter

“auzost 1944 froa yanoouver, nila, aboard the
a3 1A ;0-seanloa of anarioas pass oom 392046

My LIL. Tho wedding
193% at the emerican. onoulate Gener:

GES SENG


--- Page 109 ---
14-0000 - . . . a .

» have bech armectad atty vos nalot activities in the United states cad
ane = -OPranportence Latho.a Jonas Ad utes WOk. A prior to thete
Merplacr, .ciicatee nat they wore dth aye
“@sriuelid by Une. sormuniote tn binse
Ras entrusted ty Lr

to aativitios: being H :
wer ABS, cbee LLIN GR { .
' datenue attornar, - : i . \
g $26 Toureyaar old >

son of i Mlaire amt Sertrnse MOU she

‘
ve C8 & aprak 1930, ISA Co, enter the: peoucauya of LO SEM, vu-Lisred aa
artiols lo the Yow ctlistant, organ of the ocinisat orcers’ /arty in.”
- Hea Yori, eatitlid “talintorn Seedy to «abrace chiang Saleghek acs
offer 26d .way in hetura for Sesurreetion ol the cLea:brous 1947 Boze?
iW to Poldeved thet 14.05 later Joined the toarth intersatlonal, organized Poa be ee
by Troteky aubscquont to the lattor's oxlle ffoa iusola, ‘ ‘ _— ,

Pane oe!» a

ionrg #0! sbegenengraes

by) Curing seorld sar I] Toaac:. eag ia mar earrespoacent for 2epsweck
in cnioa. In duly 1923 he “as cafuses entry inte “hina by TAluaoe
Mabbonal det outhorities, presuaatiy Bn a result oF antlesvathanalias
“articles aritten by i2ascs for iewarset, H

2, fapota vebart Lacs is curraitly cpeclal featuras Tditor for “ea gree {ie
152 est dand vbreot, few York, Heo York; He da-the author of caveral
_ boone, inaluting ko Leege in Agha and The “resedy of the Snigees Lovaiphhcns

Isae2o' currant polivleal beliefs aré ank-oen ba thia -ganaye

Be should [isd Leave trie counter, this isancy sonld ‘appreciate ising
ecvised of 14e intonda! destiietlon, dete uf departure and any other
.Partineut Jctztio.

SE CHETRAL DUP LIGGNTLe

AT he

a .
co Asalotant : oF
‘ t- 2 7

BO StO56d

eo: Feséral tureau of investig>tioa

| PF
2-2.

EGISTAYCOPY

epee cmt


--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

cen, SECRET a

Cee Fethed toy

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AXD CROSS "REFERENCE °

DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION

SUBSLET OF COCLAEAT

r
REFIRE NO. | 6-7-2479)
w O1sP arcu om soUAce COC. s¥MecL nO.

2CSA~7L6

2. SOURCE CAYPTONYM]@. CATE OF INFO.

a bate

24 Feb. 49

o. Cvatuarion

Shanchs! Municipal Felice Fates.
» &perican Citigesns Suspected of Conmte
Comections. : Pe .

+ DATE PROCESSED 10. O1SSEWINATEO Im

OSI TION

TAANSFERREO TO
RE FILE NO.

Covmuntse seriodical first published in 1932: the secretary of the Nuolens

Defénse Comittee; a member of the Shahghai branch of gociety of Friends of the

USSR and of China League for Civil Rights. He arrived in Shanghai from Manila :
in Dec. L939 and worked for Shanghai Evehing Post and Mercury, swithing after

a few weeks to the China Press ehere he was cPleyed until. 3331 (May). In June

gn Isaacs took a trip up the Yangtze with ~ . Erank Glass, a Brigish Commnist

and’ euspected, Third International agent. A aster Fg letter vdritten by Tsaaes

te his fiance, Viola Robinson stated that he yas turning : "Red" as a result or.

/ conversations with GLASS. Ather atater nts indicated athat Miss Roptason an

aerican then in Germany, was an active member of the. communita Party. Isaacs used

the pseddonym of Lo Sen and published in’ the Mew Militants organ of the New - York

; Dist. Sorkers Party, an attack on Stalin entitled Stalintern Ready to Embrace .

Chiang Kai shek. In 19%9 Isaace was in the employ of the ?American magdzine

NEWSWEEK, New fork City, as special projects editor.

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO. : >

SECRET Tae

soar B67 cee cevcrous cos



--- Page 111 ---
14,p0000

Dennis

2 SHATAPNN cent Tt me tera ern ate a



--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

.

. a SN. 2M#2477
ASP? NCH ZB©1O REVCRT DATE: 8 Doe 45
0.0 6 CAPT. BLUSCHRLL, ATTN: LI BARKETTE INFO DATE t 7 Doo 45

0 Fac) - GRABILL re. peses 6 2

19 be gna

e

oper,

| Qrgunarray

Se einees omserment as

“of between 16,000 a:

“than: tour cercent +f

“with the potentlal real

VIii SETISEN MR. NAROLD ISAACS,

SUBJECT I
: TASEY, AND ER. DIAM.

- SOURCES? Yr. Sgreld Teanga, correspondent for Nevswoo% Basazine.—

Me. Carles Tacbu, Malaya born Taril, forrorly enployed

8. newevapers,. newsoaster for. Slngsnore

7 letespeaking -asnouncer on tatavin Radlo
cupation, and presectly adltor of newsraper

Me. . .

sitor of Heclesa, nationalist novsapaner, Satevia. —

‘EVAWWATIOS: 83, exoapt ao noted.

. The subject interview was held at the Fequest of Fr. Tsaaca
in line with Kia Jesire to talk with leaiing ftrures of Indonealan
nationalist movement who hela no offictal Roverngent poottione-

CRE

Stroulation of MEKIEXA,-Er. DLan replied
A Ls tho larzeat Indonestas newaenaper on
esent It ts printed anly in Batavia, with

..' Asked about prese
with the following;
the telani of Java.

AL

>, & dally total atrculstion. of about 14,006 coples. Of this numbers —

aprroxtzately 6,ClO goptes ara cent cut of the elty by train to
Bandoeng, Sooraxarta; and Jjokfakerta, leaving ao jatevia elreulaticn.
. ¥14,C00C ecplesa.- Source exprosaet ths ozinton, ~
that while the Indonesisn population of Satavia to in the nelghborhead
of 500,000 persons, the litersae; rate ts poPrlars enly twenty rercent
of this fivure. Thus, to accitted, MEDLEA Le probably reacting leas
‘total In¢oreslar ponulation of Batavia, .
atavia 29 probably tho xset litorate area on

dearite the fact treat 5

_ the Islan? of Java because of ooroentration here of all the govern-

wontal functions, prewar ‘and presont...

tis aireulation was 89 incoraLetent

. : population, gourco replies trat he was
handicapped by lack of ; * “ee expressed the oninian that a
elreulatian of 57,009 war he assured, and a atreulation of ao hish
as 106,000 possible, were sufcicient naver avaliaties At the present
Pate of e+-su lon, to estimates trat: aulllotoert rer iecn tant

fraa prewar stocxae to ovitinua pibliontion of ViidEKA for ong year, OL
(2) ‘Ugak- Ky atl
. 2May77

- When quastY5ned. as ‘t>

Ba Se.



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

“SRP LSETALL

' Cn Degestor 7, 1945, the MitDR4 preas. common rubligation of
@ dally Nrelieh lansuase newsoaner. entitled UNOEPE: « Tho
maethoad cf thie parer states alas that tt Lnoarporates the INIONESTAY
REVS BULUSTIN, a Corser English language newspaper pilfered by
ANTARA neve ageroy. ; . :

ENOVET 16 at crogont béing edited by Mr. Tarbu, with

The Txoz!

“eome asstetance. froz Mr. Diah, and using tre paper -anz facilities
Of MERDEKA. - coe to : . fo mo

fhe first Lasue of INOS "ENDEYT wee reuarkable only for ite

7. Avoidance sf-anz diagueston of logal- affaira, only two articles

i Tava. uestionéd about this,

t oitlorwao ts roeah foreign -
and troen (fritter) reacera, he wes hesitant avout entoring headiong ©
into: discuesio.. of Yooal affairs and’ the Fatlonallat 6G, heaausé,
(0-3), tho. British nro unfavora>ly dissose? tovarida ' KA alroady,
and would. use his venture as an excuse to OmPrlecate the ontire :
printing plant, wero he tao openly partisan in hts early lgsuecs.
Within a ‘week .or twa be topes to be secure ensus in tle poaition to,
start laying sore atreen on lecal news and eiltcriars.

Watecover to do ul
that, while his ultizate a

having anyth t

The first Lseue of TsnerenoneT wad printed in 400 copies, most

Of whiok wore etréen ‘away, although the states price ts 1 Japanese

2

guilder the copy.

4



--- Page 114 ---
14-0p000

27 March 1945

Le iment

To: Lieutenant Colonel ROGER A. PPAPP
From: John I, Coddington
“Subject: HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS

Mr. GEORGE N. KATES of 053,.F&A, has just returned to the United. States
from. Chungking. He reached Hash ington yesterday. He clains to have know
a HAROLD. ROBERT ISAACS quite wold in’ ) Chungking, and has: the following observations

\ to. maka concerning ur. “ISAACS: .
HAROLD ROBERT (ASaacga ia about 35 years of age. Ho attended Columbia

H
: | os University, and received tho degree of A.B. there in 1930. He 18 tho aon of -

I so _ an orthedox Jewish merchant, who 1a very wealthy, and whio haa almaye supported

ig HAROLD, even though fie did not approve of the. radical views that HAROLD eapreseed

in the 1930's, :
wart went to China iuudiately after graduition from Colunbia, Partiy, :

: atleast, ‘out of a desire to see strange parta af the” world and to experience :

; vadventure," He went out by way of. Hawaii, and stowed away for pert of the.

voyage - ~ either between San Francisco and Honolulu, or between Honolulu and

a ‘Shanghai _ Mr. KATSS doea not Femenber mhton, Angway, | this was art of the

: “adventure,” . . .
In china, HAROLD met: a South African named FRANK GLASS, ho was an "int: |

Tt oe 7 and” a very interest ing person. CLASS was a Leftist, but’ not at all a Conminist 4 a

HAROLD took-a trip up the Yangtae with Gass in 1930" or 1931, at absut: this tine, | !
ee - HAROLD became a ‘Cofivert to Trotekyisa, partly, at least, under GLASS" influerice. a
° ‘He felt that “suffering humanity required a "revolution" to set things otraight. i.

a : Communism was too organized, and RABGLO was a complete tndtviduadiat, and reactod -
: ; strongly against the organizational set-up of Communism, and ao ‘espoused trotskyien

He returned to Shangha from the western part of China, and went to work tor



--- Page 115 ---
14-0000

SARCLS S087 SaACS, continued
— te en ined

T a RAYAS News Agency. Shortly after this, in Shagghai, he rarried VIOLA ROBINSON,
--Who.was, like KARCLD, a wide-erat intellectual, This carrisce protsbly took place
. ‘in 132. VIOLA was a great friend af AGNES SHGDLEY, the author of the Battle Hymn.

"of Chins and of other books dealin: with the Chinese Revolution,

ooo a organization called the China League for Civil Rights was formed about

_ 7 _ 1932. yaNc CHV IEN was the head of this for Central China, and Dr. “HU: Sut (later

~ Chinese ambassador to Wash ington) vwas the head-of it for North China. YANG was at
that tine Secrétary-Ceneral’ of the Academia Sinica. YANG was soon assassinated
by the Blue Shirts (at thst. tine CEIANG KAT-SHEKtgs bodyguard). HAROLD ISAACS had

“been | an enthusiastic: member of the China League for Civil Rights, and in the
“atmosphere of turmoil, after the killing of YANG, when all Leftists were under
attack by the Kuoriintang, HAPOLD became the editor and publisher of the China Forum, a

a magazine thst published a number cf controversial articles, The magazine was
Rrotected by the fact that the editor was an Aneriean, and therefore had extra-
territorial rights. fot the magazine was regarded as a "thorn in the flesh" by Mr. ©
 CUNNIDSHAY, | who -was-at that time American Consul General in Shanghai. There were
various controversies —- the printing shop was broken up by Kuonintang strong-arm
. ‘nen} the nails were refused to the sagazing; but he continued pubiication for some

ven es “tine, “and smggied the copies Gut to the subscribers,

in 1933. or.1934, ISAACS had s fight. with AGNES sumLer. Tt was an ideological
fight, and therefore esvecially bitter, | ISAACS and his wife left Shanghat, after
this, and noved ‘to Peking. There he acquired a Chinese translator tamed LN, and
there he Settled down to’ write his beex, The “Tragddy of the Chinese Eevolittion, ” ~
_ This book “naile the Stalinists to the mst” ani shows that they wera messing ,
around with a situation in China which they did not understand. Very many People

who have read the book consider it exellent.



--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

. 3 . . -
“HAROLD \RODEPT ISAs, contimed ~~ -_
The book was completed, and ISAACS and his wife returned to the United States
_ about, April or May 1935, Immediately after this, ISAACS mde a papid trip. to
Oslo; Norway, to see his hero, LON TROTSKY, who was diving there at that time.
Tt.waa on this ocedsion that he mst have undertaken to translate TROTSKY a book,

a Whither France 2? JSAACS then returned to New York, and went to work for the
: HAVAS News Agency once more,

ies some’ time in the late 1930's, he ‘became or in New York politics,
and he worked hard for NORMAN 1 THOMAS, .
. ‘ _ - By 1940, however, ho became disgusted with New York politics, and became
interested in the war, and in"bourgeols life." He and his wife had a baby at

about ° ‘this tne (their firet) » and ISAACS found he could write radio scripts and |

a get good money, for them, - Up to 19k0, he had been Living. chiefly off his father,

but from 15k0 on, he began to mke money. In 1942, he did a
for CBS, ; : i

Report to the Nations

" Séon afte tnis, he Joined the Stare of Newsweek, and in 1 19% was sent to Ornging

that th gazine, There, must have been a certain Amount, of ‘trouble in ‘cénvineing

. the Chinese Central: Covernaeit that Isascs haa really chariged since the old days:
in Shanghai; but this convication was evidently acconplished, or Isaacs would not
. have ‘received permission ‘trom the Chinese ‘Covernnent to go to China, :
IMCS te avery emrt rin indeed. He knows a lot-about. China, and he knows a

lot about people in generals Moreover, he is a'gréat deal "smother" and ore

diplomitic now than ha wad ten years ago, : . oe uO oS

;
3



--- Page 117 ---
14-0000

13° March 19h5

fo: Lieutenant Colonel ROGER A. PFAFF
From: John I. Coddington | q? é.
Subject: HARULD ROBERT. ISAACS

HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS is now the correspondent of Newsweek tagazine in’
China. iis hesdquartérs are ‘in Chungking, but he evidently travels to Kunning,
Kweiyang, and other places “tn the course of his duties. He seems to have arrived
inChina in his present capacity. during ‘the Summer of 19h, probably in July. ;
Subject was born: in 1910, and is a member of a wealthy family. He became ,
a firmly convinced Trotskyist: ‘in his youth,’ and remined one til the. time of 7
PearlHarbor. He is now regarded as a renegade by his former Trotskyist colleagues,
because he has disavowed the prineiplés of world revolution, tumed away from
Trotsky's teachings, and since 1939 hes’ been writing mtriotic Propaganda for the

United States Government. . ; . :
He went to China about 1930, and wrote two books dealing with Chinese-

politics » Five Years of Kuomintang Reaction (1932); and The Tragedy of the Chinesa

Revolution (1938). Bote of these volumes axpressed the author! Trotskyist

Stalinist Comamisté wera 80 powerful in this’ country that they were able to —

prevent the Pablicat fon of the Tragedy of ‘the Chinese: Revolution here. This

book recejved high praise from many serious students of Far Eastern : ‘affairs, :

including Gs Po Hudson: Fellow of an. Souls College at oxfard, and author of

@ Far East in World Politics who’ said that ISAACS' book was the best one ever

The Far Bast in World Politics,

written on the Chinese Revolution, Hudson is now an official of ‘the British

Ministry of Information.
ISAACS* non-Communist and non-frotakyist friends say that even during the

20-18 SL

+ few

$f0QOY STOns';

‘point of, view. The first was published in Shanghat ,. and tho second in Londons |
Neither was ever published in the United Stataa, and ISAACS said that the

a


--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

20

HAROLD ROBERT ISAACS, continued,
ee TS

height of his” Trotskyist career, TISAACS | never * accepted ‘money from the group. He
wae always open and above-board, and never ongaged in any conspiracies to overthrow
; established government,” ‘He was attracted to the movement, thay ‘say, by sheer .
idealism. — _
For a tims -in china, ISAACS. Lived with Tillman DURDIN, the China correspondent:
Dot Of the New Fork Times, who was. then the managing: editor of ‘the China -Press.. Isaacs :
ee . Yeturned to the United States in the Jate 1930's, and was for a tin etiployed by
‘the havas Nera Agency,- until tho fall of Franeé in 1940. “tn 1943, he was eaployed'

-by Newsweek meazine, in Maebington, a. c., and 1 resided at 4938 Newport + Avera,
Prefddehtp Hodents, :

Publications
: (a) Books

. Eive ears of Kuomintang Reaction (Shanghai, China Forun Publishing Co.,
: “pp. - Li rary ¢ ongress Call No.: bs T7747 6 C45

BOR The sages of the Chinese Revolution (Lendon, Secker & Marburg, 1938) Se
ae : S01 pp. rary of ongress: Now's Ds 7th 4.17 : . . :

oe (b): Translations

- Lev Troteki{ (Leon Trotsky); ’ wh’ther. rane’, ‘translated by John G. “Wright
and Harold R. Isaacs, (New ne F oneer * Publishers, 1936). Library of
Congress Call No.: pc 398. TT mL: os

: (0) Articles in Periodicals
oo Sena an Feriodicals

"Perspectives of the Chinese Revolution: a tarxist Vier, " Pacific Affairs,
“Vols 8, Pp. 269-283, Sept. 1935, ees

“Mob by Experts, Newsweek, p. 30, 7 aig. 29h.
"Surprising the Japs," Newsweek, PP. 35-36, 7 Aug. 194d.
"Blowing the Top, Newsweek, pp, 45-6, & ‘Sept. 1944. :

, "Laat night ‘in Kweilin, f Newsweek, Pp. + 31-32, 25 Sept. 1944.


--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

<3

‘

. " RARCLD ROBERT ISAACS, contimied |
. t

"One Man's Fisht agsinst Corruption: the Story behind the Stilwell Incident, .
Newsweek, p. dy 13 Nov. 944 \ .

“Troupers “of the car," Newsugek, Pe 100, 3 Nov, 19h

"Ignorant Ment and Modern Wespons:. Inside Story of the Chinese Army," owswsslc,
Ps 4b, 20 Kov. 1944 i : : noe .

"Death for Rweiyang," Newsweek, pi 36, 18 Dec. 1944
"Dorn of the, Salween,” Newsweek, PP 2-27, X Jan. 19,6 Se
"First ‘Truck to Kuniing," Newowook, Pe 3h, 29 Jan. 1945. _— ,

- s ©Ting Hao: Shouts of Helcons met Pret Convoy t to Running, " tonsa, pp. 35-36,
” 12°Peb, 1945

| .
.

: BibLiograpay
st Files $25,443: 6 October 1943"
Books and Periodicals in Library of Congress:



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

~  CONFIPENTIAL

so, Jb. YoR-
OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES © o oa
: . 630 FIFTH AVENUE,” a 7. ddaors He
¥ To, : "NEW YORK 20, N.Y. ‘ : ns
10 March 1945 ag
i . ra ;
To Major General William J Donovan _ i
From Soha C Hughes oe oo
“Subject Harold RIssace
_ ~ Pursuant to our telephone conversation, I asked L ‘
: Mr DoVeccht of this ‘office to check with Alen Grover, Vice ;
President of "Tee and Life", One of the men with whom :
i Grover works very closely knows Tanaoa intinately. In i
: t
this man's opinica, Isnace is‘a very solid ‘and sudstan- i
! tial eitizen, knowledgable, hard. working and an able cor-° !
i respondent of good character. He states that he has re~ ; ,
: } cently had occasion to connimicate with Teaace and that his : i
af : . Pe i
3 address ie: ‘ ‘
Ee Earold RYsaace ee _ aa
! War Correspondent _ : See ve i
ae -U.S.F.° OP seat th wente : i
i APO 627

c/o Postmaster, New York

i
H
:



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

a | ey
; | buh
OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES . — me

630 FIFTH AVENUE

NEW YORK 20, N.Y, COMEINE Lo
wee se ebay, 1 :

SPENCER PHENIN ”

FROU: ROBFET DeVECCHT’ CA ov oe 4

. Alan Grover, Vice-President of TIME, LIFE,’
at my recuest checked with one of the men An his ors

Ganization who knows Harold R. Is ersonally.
' panlcenmahaes :

_. -He told Ry. Grover that te. Isaees, in his
Opinion, is-« verv solid and substential citizen, -
knowledgable, herd working, cood character, and an

able correspondent.

- Hr. Lsaaes can be reached at the “Following:

address:
HAROLD R. ISAACS ¢
far Corresnonden :
U.S.F, CT :
APO 627 oF
c/o Postmaster New York, N.Y:



--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

is
Le

ow SECRET os

{ton Filled In)

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE \
: : \

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT OCCUMLNT IDENTAFICATION

hu 1
. AL FILE NO.
Vari . ‘ China [LA-OP-}
arious reports and news paperz clippings 2. DISPATCH OM SOURCE Dac. sYwaOL NO. Je. DATE

relaving ° : 35
relacing to operations - SHP-D-5760 “Rox. 203 | 26 sup _

7. SOURCE CAYPTONVMl a. gare OF (wee. [o. Evaluation

. maT am o OaTe PROCESSES vO. OFSSeMINATED tN
21 Nove

. : DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
ROSS REFERRED TO wid rice ° . 1H TRANSICARLO TO
. . . RI FILE NO.

PERTINENT INFORMATION

tae 7 Sg .

., THE KORTH-CHINA Daily NEWS. Saturday 6 July 35 | Co ,
we : . : : . ee! A .
Air.Harel¢-Ri—teades, an fmerican- and Publisher of the commnist Publication
"China Porutass —TUAT Haueh editor of the chinese section, of the "China Forum.

EM BE vie recsveus apitvess.

SECRET : ea



--- Page 123 ---
14-0000

ne, SECRET aa
CUMen Fabled fay

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IDENTIFECATION

SUBJECT OF DOCUME TE

VICTOR MISSIK's viait to AMOY,

Cimare

PERTINENT. INFORMA’ -

| Amoy Botwach Doce Sima ahs atGAtse Gt, Amey, are of the belief, that Breads (88S Went

Jananese authorities, therefore, request for-infc regarding the movements of Victor
- 5° dMuseik during the afore mentioned period &o, ‘ascertain if Ho actually visited amoy during
| Athis period —— ee So

i
j
¥

BNE DES FoR IN FILE No. > | sap- SY LY _|

SECRET aa

rome B67 ose rervicus covrroms,



--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

SECRET ~s

caheo Falted tnt

SUBJLET OF

(COCUMENT

Attack on Bookstores

3. OlsPatcw G8 SOURCE Cec. HET AO.

SMP—5L54-3 box 200

3. ANALYST.

~The second incided " was’ seen in thie “ent. by. persons: ane 5H the night.

. of Novenber Ly of premises © of the Lev el Printing Con, incorporated in New York.
printers “and publisher of the "China Forum a. bi-Lingual magesine under the ak editer
ship. of an American named Harold R Tosacs, which has dicided coumunistic:-

spmpathi es.

FILE THIS FORMZIN FILE NO. > i me

SECRET

Form

FORM B67 use recerous verrie



--- Page 125 ---
14-00000

ae ‘ - ny SECRET at
: ; -_ (then Failed tay

DocuMenT TRANSFER AND cross REFERENCE: -

DOCUMENT 1OENTIFICATICN

sugsecT OF DOCUMENT

-{DISTRICH WOMINTANG TSSES SerTST ORNER
LFOR ANTI JAPANESE MOVEMENT.

Pa

7. SOURCE CRYPTONYM] a, DATE OF INFO: 14

because. the magasine had been publishing “propaganda: tor the reds as well as attacks
en the National. bovt, that the publisher being an American citized named Igaac_t the .
‘measurés takén- vagainst the peper had no effect. This time a strong protest St wild by

lodged | with the American Sonsulate agatest Isaac...

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

SECRET . . froreyy

hed BGP 092 reevroos cortsees.


--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

: oe an SECRET =
. . . haan (@en Fitted tne _.
: _ CIHINA zo

: ONSPATCM C8 SOURCE SOC. Sy BEM BO. .

: PD 452 .

: “ s. sare Fabtiasts
}. #3. Dace: 263-.-. fee 2: ;
- OOCIMENT O1SPOSITION

AREO TO-THIS FILE

TAs cee 3. . . :
- | among the correspondents. listed_one:H.
ments. Repr. of the HAVAS News. Agency.

fore
oa?

B67 ort ceecrous corteone.

enka oe


--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

(fen Pitted tay

~ SECRET ew,
—<—=[

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND” cross: REFERENCE

suaster oF. DocunT

Copy of report by D. S, ‘rTts. .

Copy of Uhina. Workers? Correspondence,
. Addressed to Karold R. Teaacs

3. Disrarce om $ouace oOc. svusoL ao.

-SMPD 2713

This document contains numerous. re. eréices. to X
} information the, Antereated parties are requ

‘FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

* eorrvons. ~  * SECRET

uae 867 wae



--- Page 128 ---
Ve rs siete

Ny ten Filled ny
———

PROcESSCO

, 1a ve. proved. nosey
8 nd I attach, herewith: ‘three, cones Feapetively 4 dated duly. Js dug. 10 and ae: 2b,19326

doctrines prevailing throughout the United ‘Sta States, and advocating. support. for the
Aerialist Fatyts eck candidate—Norman Thomas at the forth oming Presidetial
Jelections. ——-——--——. a

a, but no mention is made ,

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO,

ON G7 on teanens nae SECRET ean


--- Page 129 ---
14-0000

~ ee toy
ee tte toy

TRANSFERRED TO
Tat ILE nO.

ring’ the ‘Suter: 0! - 1932 darrey 6 known: to. ‘have been associated with: the following
al: “Communist -tympa : : . .

, FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

SECRET ° : . : (yeaee

CORY B67 ose vecstene eonrsons.

Vanities Mahe Bee)


--- Page 130 ---
14-0000

BECASTAY,

r
Gers

(Branch 32 "copies af on extract trom "The New Interraticnel, .

oa Let & f @ Communint propaganda orgsn publi_hed in Few York, U.S.A.
fre, mest nds ESS : = ~ ~ —
: ae. —_—ehkh SenSIEEPEEEetiaeaena

>» Cc (Special. Brench).

i



--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

“the Ching Porua mich I. founded ana edited during that time,

“I consider it.neoees

. suep ngion,

. diatingutahing between propuganda and truth.

“ potifgh accurate facts about Coina 1£ they cculd gct thems a

. dna few organe which were rot official Communist party: . ;
 papere, including. the Naw York Militant. . - mF

I Break with the Chineso Staliniats

To the Central Committes of the Chineve Communist Party:
The two-year period of ay, extrasurgantzational collaboration .
.witn the Chineso Communist party hue com to an end and - oo. Lol

hao bean forced to suspend pudlication. in the interest
of our whole movement as well ao in. ay. personal “interest,
to record here ‘publish: the
rua ane tne circumstances of ite

history of: the Sidna

AXXAX - .
Prom almeet the v. ginning of sy active wotk ec: a. oo.

which I date from the tine a besan reporting events in : oe

China. ina communist way - a nuaver of queationos presented

themselves tome in increasingly forctble form. These

uroge originally from. my discovery of tho gross distortions

and exagreratione wnich I. found to be characteristic of.

-conmuniay propasanda in-China and abroud. I define pro-

paganda' as tne ekiliful, clear, accurate and wholly truthful
reporting of the facts Linked to an incisive, purposive .
interpretation and a plan of action for dealing with the”

facta in a revwlutionury way. 1 leamed.this from the life .
and work of Lenin and his Bolonc sit comrades wo taught . . . Pot l
ua that the truth cones from the aasecea thencalvea and that a . :

onty disaster can reoult from telling them lies. 1 ‘Rave
nevar learned to the contrury tnat it was my revolutionary

* duty: to work in any other way, altsough I soon found that o

‘the presen t- day. Communivt varty preos. makes a practise of 1

Examples of exaggeration and distortion most e'riking.
to me were nuturally those which: applied to China, because _
here I could check allegations. with known’ factea,. I first Cee _
these down to the ‘lgnorance or ‘incapacity of indi- . .
la. I-felt that communist editors auned xeuld °°

“Accord ly with a-friend 1 triés te set up an incepencent
tail news service ané sent weekly. cbilleting to papere ‘all.
over the world giving brief, eharp, factual. accounts of

what was: going on. This waa in the fall.of 1931 after zy
return from the area cf the great Central Cnina fleods of
that purmer, J scarcely underutocod then why thie service
failed to eecure any resconse from the comuntet presa. :
abroad. After about three monthe I kad te suspend it for
lack cf support. It aimply aian't get published except ”

It wasn't long before 1 began to perceive, witha . ‘
dee por etudy of irterfiational ézenta and the hietury ag .
the Chinese revolution, that a consistert thre:d ran.” . po
throvgh | the diatortions and exaggeraticne wich I found so
not cniy in. trief casual reporte of current events tut
in the: Jolesn pronuncianentces Taca by delecates tefore
plenums cf the B.C.C.1, 1 discovered that these ceparturea
from the truth sere mace noceteery by the official presica
that over since tha catnatrophe of 1927 a mighty, upeur-
ging revoluticnary coverert tas been marci. ing forward in
China te the vory brink of sslzure of power under the
leadorortp of the Chinese Comounist party. I discovered
thot theoe exagcersticroe were neceusury cechuse the prezise
wae frloe and along with 1t al2 the tapie tenete of the


--- Page 132 ---
i

22-6

\polttios being purauud by the Comeunt ot Intom=tional:

Jana the Comnanist pirty in China. Tcannat bagin here
to give s oumsiry of bord of thaas dioturti ono (whicy

I vervally. cated to you by the ducen), ranging froa
particular inerdents (the eslfully faloe picture sivon”
of tne optton mill atrikg in Shanzshai in January 932,

‘Gran, to the potat of trans,oaing It to February to

“heighten the thpfeasion givan of the workers’ rolo in
the Ghanghail war) to high-flown generalizations like
-the statement recently mide before tne »lenuo of the
B.C.c,1, that the C.C,P, hao “won over the m jority
of, the Chinese working olade and the ovaaantry".. see

In dénying the prenanoe of 4 mignt revoluti
upourge (i.e., & vot onanized narch toward tne sete
zure of power}, I respoot facte mde still closrer
perhaps when conpared to the facte and figuroo of the |
monster mase novenents of the 1925-27 period. . The .
tragic errore of the oommuntst leaderonip in 1927. were
primarily responsiblo for.the decapitation of that
great movement and becauna no leseone have deen drawn
frou these events ta thio very day, theso erroura, .
monstrousl coumulated, ara still responsivie for the ~
tragedies of ‘today. But for the purpysua of our com-
parison heré,-let us take for ¢xaaplo the ainyle fact
that in 1926 in Sreatér Shanghai.thers sere 257 atrikea.
In 1932 ‘there Were 52. Let ue remenbder that on tne eve
of the workere! edizura of power in Shanghai in March, .
1927,,: there ere nora than 800,000 workers, handicrafte-
men and petty traders uvut on the strevta fighting with ©
arms in nando ‘for damands of a far-reaching polittcal
Oharacter, A Close chéok fur the entire country in
half of 1933 showi me taut lese than one-
thirtieth of that number were engaged in strikes and
other disputes ‘during any givon month und that almost
invariably the démando wore defensive demands against
‘wagd Gutd and-lockouta,, Moreovur, tue lack of cohee
B1vO leaderanip + often in dapartaents of the same.
factory or in one ov more of a group of factoriea -
or @van sam timea lack of even tne roast elonantary
organ ization + has in almost ovary caeé led to deadening
failure. voly @asy betrayal by the yellow
1 id fmedintora® of the Kug Min Tung. In
19. the eee thr of thirteon otadents by Britian
polide in Shangh 1 wie tho touch-off for a general
Strike shich paralyzed tho city and sich wae seconded -
by va t éyipa thy ‘atrikea which broke lize’ a series of
tidal waves over the entire country. In January 1932,
when the Japanese: igpertalists used the Shanghai -
Internati onal ‘Bottlement 46 4 base for operations -
which cdgt the lives of tana of thousands of Chinese,
not a eingle etrike interrupted ‘the normal course of -
the public” or other Services in’ that settlement, In

itor there Were no otrikes but.a large scale
lookout to'Which ‘the overwhelming majority of Shanghai‘
workera gubaitted without Protesteees

In the osse of the widespread. but isolated and~
indiy 1 cases of peasant uprisings, and tais includes
the Red aruico in Kiangai, these atrucgiva await the
leadership of a strong working clase movenent before
they can have a Succeacfuk tasua. Tne Red arnies in
tneir restricted and surrounded areas and «ita their
moagra reogources havo fought herotcally againot the
Kuomintang attacks upon then. But.until tha Kuo Nin
Tang ie shakan froa ito bulwarko in the impertaliot-
controlled working elace centers, thair prospect
of revolutionary triumph remaine necesourily dim,
Ho revolutionary purpose 1a gorved by taking refuge
in the fiction that thebe araies hara proletarian
louderentp’ booausa individual sor tkaro, undoubtedly



--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

-3-

loaders of eupericr Guaiity and ccurage, have ucen torn
from their factoriée avd fren trair fellow workere and
sent. com te occupy key positions in tne Hed army ais- a
triete and in the Red amiee tiemoelves, Induvu, thie ~.
common practise’ of extracting thea. mogt conscivus And pro-
wreveive working claes elements from wetr vorking class.
ervirorrent and sending thom down te the Hed diotriote te
a@.gocd irdex to tha erininal transposition of emphasis

"which hae helped paralyze tne working claes movement in

‘Min Tang hae succeeded, by filling mat

+. Phe party hag net vet gripped and directed th2 dung usd

_the.cities. If the White Terrot doeon't. carry off the .

workers’ lenders as. they ariee, the C.P, coos and kae

. @cne -eo' ia hundreds of cases. This helps in no small

part to explain why it -haa-aleo been impoosible to mobic

-‘Lize-a genuine mass anti-Japanese movement in the face of

error of the Kuo
eravce and in-
numerable prisone with the martyred dead and living, io
downing the anti-inperiel.et. moverent or efforty tcward -
the organization of such a movement and paving the. way
for the ever-increazing enorvachcents of the imperialist

military aggression and why the ‘Shite

Be
bitter and often inarticulate hutred of. the magscé of

the people for thelr oppressors and thie includes large
sectiona of the lower potty bourgeoieie who could be won

““by auccecsful nase pressure from bélow. ‘This io becuuse

they party hae fuiled to translutgtha realities of every-
day eventa ints its program and tactica..es. _
Tt . KXXXX :

But precisely becnuse ut all coats 1 desired to
earry on the Forum's open struggle against the cormon
onary - against thé Kuo Min Tang ani the imperiallete -

I oedulously avoided bringing theso isswe inty the
columns of the paper, increauingly against my better
judgment, “I leaned over far backward in this respect.
Tria expressed itself in many of the current ieeueu with
which we had to deal, rn . .

I usk you to recall the whole uphill fixnt which the
Porum waged on behalf of Paul end Gerturd Ruegg in. the .
eprirg and summer of 1952 curing which tine I repentedly
warned agairst the emphasis which was being placed on the -
“legal” aspécts of the case and.the "neyotiations”® with.

' the Kuo Min Tang to the detriment of mase pressure and-

the capitalization. of tho case for political purposes.

, You paic lip service to the need for mass oreeaure =

particularly here in China - but in fact the "lugalities®

. and futile nagotiations remaired the major pillaro of

the defense, Until in the very end I finally redelled,
I en't even permitted to. give Ruegg hia honorable and

orightful title - secretary of the Pan-Pacif!o Trade Union:
Secretariat! Yet although I felt the etruggle for the ~~"
“Rueggs was being Seri.usly handicapped by the tactica

being. pursued,.I carried on the fignt with all the energy
at my command and. you will recall that it was I wno created
the local defense committee and was chiefly res;onaibie .
for the widespread preea propaganda camzaign or.d the

-Cconaideratle sympathy wnich we aroueéd, Yet the etrictly

Non~political attitude which Ruegs was forced to aveume

vat ‘the trial (tn contrast to the highly political attitude

of hia prosecutoro!) was in my opinicn one ef the major
reasons for the fate to whicn he-and his wife were ccndemned,
. I ask you to regall the wtiole period of the orguni-
zation and activities of the Cnina League for Civil Rishtsa,
from Decamber 1932 te June 1933, in wnich I tock an active.
part. I gave full play to thie hybrid League ore its

work without once publishing tho beato criticiems enich

I often wicod to you and wrjoh in the end were wholly
ocnfimred by what happaned after tho Kuo Kin-Tang murdered
Yang Crier. in June that year, I asx you to recall the

“views 1 sot forth in August and Septecber 1923, on the



--- Page 134 ---
14-0000

whe oo on

: . . subjaot~of the” *Anti-@ar Cong rése” which at- your
— specific rejueat I-did not jubliah, Inatead, te my
Fogret, I published the foul rot of Marley 4 Co.
without freely giving play to the true facts. atout
that farcical. junket which nad convinced me that the
policies which gave it birth do not one single whit
advance tke’ international otrujgie against imperialist

. On ond occasion - and this at least I can take
comfort in - I passively resieteé when you requested |
-me to write and publish a-slanderous attack on Chen
. Du Heiu when he was cuondemned*to 15 years imprisonment :
es by the Kuo Min Tang. Your reyuest was specific. TF 2 - ao
a a was not to. deal with the isedes which had brought - . : oe
Chen Du Hoiu from being the leader of the.C.P.. in 1927
‘to being leader of the Chinese Cpposition in.1933. 3. .
. Was only to atring together a vile series of labels : :
a in an effort to explain wiy the Kuo Liin Tang. even LO ;
"7 7 Ampedsytied “thé Icader of the Jeft Opposition. Aa -
. you know, that attack was nawer written or published, :
. Again in Decenvter 1933, upon my return from .
. Fukien, you.specificdlly demnded that I cet aside -
the resulta of my own personal inventigutions. in ton
oe Lo, Foochow in-order to write on your behalf (but over
an . . my, signature!) an utterly baselcasand elendervus
-attack on the Left Cpposition. You will reoall that
: you charged at that time that the "Trutskyiste® were
. : Prominently identified with the new govammont set -
Meet Me up in Fukten by Chen Ming-shu and Teai Ting-kai. You . .
- Doe lumped the Left Opposition with the Third Party and mo, : :
oe the sooalled Social Democrats among the petty bourgecis . .
ee Sos satellites of thé Pukien militariste, It was as much . . “oy
, : soe ‘to satisfy myself on this very point.as to perform a - : _
° ‘+ mission for you, that I went cown to Poochow and ~~
_. spent two. weeks there and learned through direct. con-
~" tact with dozens of pele prominéntly cuncemed that
the. Left’ Opposition wae stoutly and cleurly spposed =
to the Foochow regims.. I haven't place here to dis-
~ Ques the relations of the C.P,to tre chort-lived
-Pukien goverment or the Character of. the “negotia- _ .
tions® which were’ going on down there, .The important, 0
thing here is that on-=y return you demanded that: I
write slarders which flew in thé face of everything
-I myself bad learned. It is interésting, as a side~
“light on your methods in factional etrife as you .
concei ve it, that your representative in FPoochow sent -
‘back @ report, through né, ironically enough, that
_one of the ‘most prominent cf the youthful. pseudo-
Qo radicalea in Foochow, fu Cui-yuen te ‘be exact, was a : .
. leading *Trotekyist", It so happened that I had ret. ‘
-and had several lengthy interviews with fu and-by - 7
the time I left Foochow 3 understood his pcaition and
his peréonality exceedingly well, He was as muhha - . ,
Trotekyist a6 Mei Lan-fang is! Yet you actually :
dezanded that I ignore ay own mMowlecge of the man
and in ay article on Fukien set him down as a
"Trotakyist®’, I waa faced on the one hand by your
' demande that I-write falsehooda to euit your policies
and on the by ay deep desire to aet fort. the
actual facts about the Oppositton’s attitude toward
the Fukien regime. But once more, to preeerve the
ehrede of our relationship, 1 drove a middle ccuree
and did neither, leavirg tho thole question out of
. my article, uo . :



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

5

. Nevort).aleas. obrurtly in January..f this year you
forced an ultisate= upon ze and oubacy aeawy forced the
brouk in our relationship because I Could not and would
Mot, at your demand, deveite the China Porum tc policiea
which I could rot‘and do rot, believe computivie with the
intereste of the Chinese rewlution and the international -
proletarian revelution. I could nyt, at your denand, .
get agide the convictions to which I nad literally been
@riven by the stinging lash of fatastrephic events in ~

China, Germany and \the world over, Particularly my deep

——

intereet in Chinese eventa during the lost tnree years.
made At im.oesible.for ce; finally, to ive active sup-
port to policies and tactice whoee disastrouo effects
Jere being a.:thoueandfold confirmed for re by the tragio
events of every weittly-parsing days I could not ignore
Gueetiona which ‘Strike’ at the roots of our work &nd the
Whole structure of oly hopes for a Tevolutionary future,
Despite the fact that these queations are rocking
the entire Intern. i teday, you deniéd my r t to
raise tham in prin You de-anded more. You derianded

”. that 1 attack anybody who cid ao « primarily the pele

you call “counter-revolutionary Trotckytate"™ - the. only
pedple mio are facing these problems today in.@ fcariess..
Fevolutionary way 2 You densnded that the China Forum °
become a sterectyre for the policies and vulgar factional
Blandefe which I could neither then ‘nor now ve party -to,
In reply to my questions on, Ciiind you simply quoted back
‘at'me the lice and half-lies I've been a0 used to reading.
in Inprécorr, You aren declared: 4¥or Propaganda purposes
rain ‘amount of exaggeration is hao *
weht, oh amazingly toiday: "but we know thé : r
and we base our policies on them, not on: thaae exayge tas

- thonel" 4 ney slant on sodeim-day C.I, ‘tactical, Pacts,

you sayyare Gurioug thingo, ;They hava to be tumed. -
around’ and around an: arcund, and éxanined Closely until
their true natu: Om s apparent, Tlie Sreuble is you.

tum. them @ far! ahd’ oo Quickly that they turn into somes

‘thing like a dizatiy turning top of fancy + or at baat

“wi dh-fulti

‘famningly to foudle and hail the §

ling misrépresentation a

-To- my Gueati-one on Germany you quotéd Heokert,
Platnitsky and the B.C.C.1."3 famous resolution declar-

of the German Works ra Were based on the Past, present and
future’ Gorrect policies of the C,P.G.8 You declared T had ©
ho right tod offer critical coment o7 na dangen uely

.opportunietic foreign and domestic polici’e’s of the ULS.S.R.

mest notably on the entry of tne U.S,8,R, on a ‘straight

‘-natiohal tet basta into the disgusting cofridere of im-

y¥, Il wae livingly,
t ljcies which have meant ~
Glouster in’ China! Geroany and eldawhere and are rapidly |
loading the U.S.S/R, inte the vacuum of nati nalist—
leclation fron the dorld-wide proletarian moveme

T was. to do; to besin with, by publiehirg Stalin
on the front page end colunne of the customary penegyricg
to hia infallibiiity, “Avove all and before ali, I waa

to take up cudgele against “coun ter-revolutionary
Trotdkyiem", That was to be the main point of my re-
formation - to raise no Questions myself and slender any-

perialiet intrigue. To the contri.

_ body eles who did a0.

Te eb ante

. In reply to your demsne that I submit to on edi torial
beard in order that these editsrial poli¢ies should be
effectively put into practise, I offered (1} to continus
publication strictly as osfore, meanonile arguing out
differences with you io @1acuss:ono on the aide: (2) to
throw the colume cf tne Forum open to a ineral discussion

> . . a

pei

oe


--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

3 . : -6- : i -

of all basic revoluticnary yuesticno, at. free play to .

unorthodox as well sa orthodox views, If your views -

were correct, I urgued,"it would te a diotinct advan . ‘
tuge to you to have euch an o;portunity to display their

: brilliance alongotda the puny efforts of your critica;

7 : (3) to publieh orthodox news and views but to reserve

, for myself the right to coment.und. criticise. :
. These repeated offers you repestedly. refused. You | , .
offereé to discuss these Quéations alth ne vervally 1¢ . . an -
Jin the meanwhile I threw the Porur open to yuur edt torial :
board. My other: Pro porale sére inthirketle! Give the
Forum'a readers a chance to hear “counter- ro huts onary”

- viewpoints ? Never that ! I could ‘only atopley my
.tevoluticnary. purity by acceding to your dem.nds. Fe
uld’ talk things over until epring, amen 1f all went

etl (1.6, if I showed a sutlefactory adaptation to -

- your viewpyint), I could pdck up for an educational trip -
to the’ Sovict Union chore I would certainty veccm con-

_winced of the error of my ways. In other aurds, yeu wanted -.:
my signature on @ promissory note with the asount left
blank flor you to fill in. You-put thie in the form of
an ultimatum and you told me that if 1 dia anything but |
accopt I would fortnwith enter the comp of the “counter ~
revolution’,

I had to refuse theese ternn. 1. hud to refuve to
lend myself to a alandercus anc baseless atriegle aginst —

i : the’ International Left Cpposition.. I:had to.refure to

i ao land space to the nauseatingly faming praise of Stalin

. and uncritical reception of Stalinict policies which
Characterize the Communist sarty prevs tre worlé over,
T had to refuse to take anel ter in the cold and draughty
empty epaces which etretch benind the impreseive facade . . .
and early traditions of the Communist Intermnutional. I : . f
would like to go to the Soviet Unton.for a vicit cne duy--
but I had to refuse -your- offer on your ‘terme. I had to | -
refuse,:in ghort, to become a hack prostitute in the’ name
-of tha revolution.
-. In the end, to0, T had ¢ fuae to turn over “tw
27 tf you the. printing. plant I had > t up with oo much pain
"and struggle becsxusa I considered it not your prvwrty -
vo . but-the property of the working class :covumant. Because . _-
- * leould not oafry on tho Porun myself, for ‘lack of. ~ an
. financial resources and céciase of heavy debts contracted,
‘ : be I disposed of the plant and tured every farthing of the

a . wl . : process oves to wnore | now consider the tage | intoresta -

- woo . of our movement lie. It was with a deep und aoiding. :

. : dvitternssa that I had to. see the Porun cu down under the
blows of. those whom I hed considered comradas, shen for. : mo,
two yeara it had fuy off all ‘ite many vnoaes on ‘the . ae Sone
outaide, " .

: Yet. with it cans the realization.tait wa: uve.to . . .. *,
‘build anew over the ruins you have wrought, The revo- , .
lution and the building, of our future moves forsard and: . sot mo
when we trample down.the defenses of our enenieo we ‘shall % eo
erush underfoot averytnins and everybody that stunde in .
our way, No sycophantia, blind allegiance to a name,
an empty facade, « tom and shredded oreatige can lead
us for@ard, oniy unowerving fidelity to our goal and

activa struggle toward thia enc with the wea;ons of a

. corract and testad politica line will lift as from

° . . dofuat to ultimate victory. To thia atrasyle i ohall con-

tinue to dedicate all ny gee istese . . .

Peipins; China, May 20, 1934
Harold R, ISAACS.



--- Page 137 ---
1400000

195125535 Chana(DyB '726:)

os ~ wa (dares ©
ao ware Ralest \sancs on mi, centee Qo \wheuet! she ae mn)

wih 1h speeared
mhlet- ‘onouncos the Kk

ue to rule and
the capitalicrtion of human mis . Chinese C
ISARCS sors rues to reside at 333. Central F
ay 536 BPB-27426, a

ists are ‘seer as the hop
y WMC, aad ds enployed as free Isnee jouael

Do sysiew Los
nol-1g arb ©

DPB 11880; 11.Sept $1, 201-6556-1.
DEB-15007, 5 Jan. 3 201-655

Presently Living in wy

i» PF 12787, & Jan 1952, 2c1.orc0L2 re aPPct » “orris Loris
: DFB- 27d26- 1% Queue 53, Zor ivddG.d, °

H | : ’

Fe ee ne cree ee eee epee emeee cate nmmetm ONE A



--- Page 138 ---
14-9000

. +
ISAACS, B . .
"Probably Harold nora
. . bo:

2.8 JACO3, -FBT think that there is a possibility thst the JACOB, a an unidontifies
young Amer journzlist’in Shanghat in 1931, 12° vho was a member of the SORGE netyork
in China adeht p possibly be: identical vith ISAACS; ISAASS inself has advised th at a
“he doe not be? teve that he could have deen’ the ind iv te whom SORGE fave tha co’ cnn
© JACOS, ( 9F3 7864) ; : :

4

i

: “Oddeesses : ay t@s3 ~ 333 Gonhal cd esr fe
“. DEB-AT4aG.

ETT Aawondead, | yp 5 Feb 99: oer Nunietpal Pol pe og me

; seg 4 7S Ludutd think
fia ome tee be bee ya Coe G,

eee Eee


--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

$f tet | AAT g fserrs corr PeyAnust (ee uoeviy® sot soz

i
1
i
}
:
:
i
i
i

pu datelizo of 2 Juiy 1932, 00.1

@-by the US Consul General dn | -
Sac allow him to be tried an oo
»" had violently attacked
2." The article further :
spondent for Aneri¢en nevs— ~

“Harold” R ISAASS, ms
watt te US dithera: is ext
oS then the edi
calling hin, enong other.
was an associate or sree 5

. a ‘Preéeded the GhANICHES, as editor of"he Yotce of China", Wrote an article: "I Breek,
~ With ‘Stalinism™.-which fave a-candid elucidati on of the Com. ‘financial 7 Packing o of the : ;
"Voice; of China", DCE~43€5, 7 Feb., 52 ee ee | i oa

, $ One Harold Robert TSAACS was born 13. Sept 1916 ; 59m tall, ned build, br eyes &
blach wary hair: brushed bac Born in NYC, Arc eitis Editor e publis' sher of the’ ,

er of Society of Freinds of USS!
staff of Shanghai Evening ~

: C:F.GLASS, susp Sov :
wrote Ris fiaress he decided to ‘turn "Red" as a result of talking ‘ath’ case, the SY *
aAuz-’& took up residence at 2128 Weihaives, Ross, Started pr: inting Forwy later

evel Printing Ci, Ine in EY Stato £ owed Lt Md with

| of its shares. ‘Exployed with
's ISAACS married Miss Vola R0RINS Sest 32, Lived in Apt 20,
Skanphat, dn 3 Jan. 34 Subj visited } Beane

: * who vere on huager strike in
prison. Subj's parents 2 St 20 Feb for Marseilles, ‘Subj,
“litant, orran o. Ker's Party attacking STALI,
cS was also leeturing on Japan, China, an3 ussz &

crists in Far East.
ey Lé-2 res 5 Feb 59: ee poe ey les. s+)

_ hang Beas oe fe
j Cite we a Meh a fe oth

: Cite Nes) Cathal t Prascer thant Ob as. Uth
OM ges “gist foe Eat od. Se fa be cet



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000 !

tad,

7 . |
“€S6T RozUR eT “EQ0Gz Gd *eyspimumoy ‘esou

oes: 4 *€-97r8t-L0z
2 pus eter -
BUTYD Pay JO uo;yTUWIODar Pue susyoopuy up ea FY: Fesny Ueanzeq e3pea oe Supar.

. 9 1 3P JO edoy ut
8 PI0F Tefuores vow :
. . $93890ApE BTOT IIe OL *nOTTQndey SINy O42 jo ones; acer ty sony ow Of ezeeast veorton eae
AMP aUT TOT Lone Soe gat gg om VF T8°FS}Tod-uon: étquoredde oF qorua eggs osoue oe
SFtddne soyyst *a04eT pus: rr: -
380, pus SvTsY UaNOS uoue Squvtaaa3e pue BaF Beg) “tnors0n jo econ Tang ous STD uoraoe ros
- Vy SUOTIEL, ‘OF FFOVI Jo oyngTysuz ua Aq L761 UE qnd ‘soyyor Aq abtey uz epary aon, 4009 aug
f COLLETTA OTLEY a
. . L7L7T HE, oe Tost pa wuco9ag oy “saa I9qT it 4. id¥ a
Aopusxa Ty nay sd
_ SF fqag finn

Ab JO waded 499 any vO 105} p09 UIs O44 BA Cqns
buB LOT NTeaes asauygg a iF SO :

fp

KESTER as

ee De te Dine ok ile a

“26 June 1951 = Meno dated 25°June to PI/cs Fequesting informational namecheck on subj,
:.for the ‘Purpose of determining the validity of. charges’ that Subj, is sympathetic
-, to and/or foci with Communist activities, Sés file for rest of memo,

2 lat i

VY

Be
oa

C

a 2 MoT auth. ~ VT pat bllisa ee Oi sacs? yn

—_ toe _B Z. Maude Cand CE. Ret A Rrsts ct ferent seg

Cy OF SS Oe I ee
7 fice. Courne Ct hlad, Lee oy tren w ¢

: 77 oe a
0 tats. WE wll Ste. 7 .
1 bby. Cdbaia tout tate OSES, ie sree Boesy
GEA GEES Gog GE ete


--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

! : ees reg %, ETE Be 9 Pre Lee | y
: THR ES b Pere omy 4 eth GD <¢- : es
he 4 2
— iy FRETS ya to je
| Oa taee PMD, ey we oe
DOO ET RDP ig Mr Ey get

Lf) Prager em yrprrrep

can

YF . Wore Ln .
tad pone perry oe SE Zz

: sIGOS I0/pIT 94

owen. Jo 4BOX IOS OTTS 98S “seTqyATyow 4qepmumm) WTA eyo!
shreqeduts mt Stans 9mm sefreqo Jo AAYPITeA om} Bayuymrezep JO esod.md ts a0 np x
he Uo yooypeura [suo TPEMLO SUT Buyysenboa sofia oy oun SZ PeqEP OuPH =

ALN i OD
or a oe Lees g D-.. Gree “sorysr

Seow gk
ante sermon sin

an ncn rere nt fonda ane

Acco:ding to Aer Sy Subj is suthor of "Phe fregedy Of the Chinese Fevelution" and
APPELUAN net Sub than Alexander = eed wa. the first of ut tor of the CCP paper of wh lel» a
too Vo Ai MUAY Iter was to becor ed .

ROLES IILI/L /, LEMME .
"New Cycle In Asia" ISAACS, pub in 1947 by the Institute of Pacific ®clations as a [ mo
cediection of the official tote of various tfeaties and ecreements erong South Asian and Weate - :
4 orn powers during tho perild of FH II and loter, ISAACS supplies a brief editorial introduct ior)
| to thesy taxts which 43 8pparently nonepolitical in nature. His article “kKorea and American }
\ World Poldcy® appears in the August 7, 1950 issue of the "New Republic’, The article advocates
withdrawal of US suport from French colonfal forces in Indochina and recognition of Red’ China

in hope of driving a wedgo betucen Russia end Chin se Comm iets “DIB 25069, 12 Barch 1953
201-1RLE3, ° meee , ™”



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

oie ° i

"€S6t uPteR ot “ose aia surepumunaoy osaury *€~9778T-T0z
9 ‘pus Shesny woos: o3, .
BUFYD Poy JO uoTyzWoaas puv aden eoPul UF 899.105 Tazuotoo Wounds weap sod ing 2 siete
:@0R800aPE 197978 au, *yoTTqndey waH, ena: JO enast Os6t *Z ysn2ay oyy- uy sazodig saorrog pee
seme ceed PUP 89% y OTOEII2 STH “amyou uy T89F9} Tod-uog Atqwosedde S¥ qotua ete seu en
» Cbtlek: Patlinie Fo tame ef 2) Yon] sa. y he sceaas,
ee frien

Pee ia eS lt se) eg.
fat thd Eb S ee thal ge IGE
sel i dn pod 3 ee -

3 Mera 4984 - gone 6 adsca “ thé wider ne Ciremmnch, i ,
| ith : : oe

ee Xe

@

.
==
a etl S gS at SSS a Staei

Si St asi amanda eh BA Fi sane



--- Page 143 ---
14-00000

A INTERNALUSE ONLY. sy
.. co, (Wren Filled tn)

PERSORALITY (201) FILE. REQUEST

So, ie ist 201 number. dentine: data in.the spicvs provided. AW kaviiin alidses anit varianta (inchidi
applicable) must.be listed. Wtbe Srontinn clita varies with the alias used. a separate form unt he used. Weite U NENOWS 'N for items you.
are unable 6 complete:

SECTION Ih List crvpiomm or pesvihanyen! Wasigned. [true name is sendiive, obtain 201 umber from 201 Gontral Desk and complete
Seetiun Fand Section Ti, Ou a wparate form. enter the 201 number and complete Section I and Section III, Submit each firm  aejarately.

“SECTION Ith ‘To be coreuiteted fa all casei

a : : j SECTION 4

aan ey = =

es, Harel Rober P= TT}

NAME vaaiant

awe ew i)

SECTION TI.
iw ‘SECOND COUNTHY @cTEREST

or 7

- =

Vonse 821 the eremovs ettmora Ha on



--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

be
Leh btyo ¥nive
3 SPrived Le .ee .6.b) en mute to Gtise .
Jf ertere w reetm: tw 2} Westra; an . £
0 te remre Wo Chinrsing . H
sere
Te

ie {us Lad rete ertisice

fe PER 00d Shee refveed tee cose prev
Aviat Od povarmant * Ari@rantly, See poldey ef bheselioting
S Dumaliets sto erite aaferereviy CAD? wri, .

See pléo"Sooptert A LUGk.8 L. DLA, warm 'te Gol. FTA and RCE
*  Moeeter B15 EOL AAT Tad © abd, Bb 90430 nom te wind. Cesler)y

MENCO OGON) LA; Toutes errived fn Bien Del Dee 1990, worked for Danghes © acla-lizo-
. O14 066 Jgreury, later for Qane ipves (eet ea te Ottevies Leoien
SO ied om wasat dietetete of coin Fe

+ KASS, eUDb dete pester of
HAUL Ames. 3.

fee Gomer BAL CAN

Fra Lan tle ine 1990, Solved atnghad 55459

WS wisizens dorm 3910) cre te Boathi . H
ony Nt tow. wee wrk ‘CLA J F9eg, UAL hay 193% Shangral m4

“wlth Rial Sepulval fHtendiy wie, Poet My

4 THIRD (COWTULST) EeTEAMATIOUL rERsoANTL, |

—_t

‘te 10008 10 aay 6
ana

1958 GD),

See U7D-7Fbs, 701 Anweoticative report, 28 Fe

my Calpe fn 209 for attack * Drew
a active promeandiet for Use Tiet tue ESD
ome Fes oe ectete ei eS Lag praca pce

= isle ty ‘eubject. attacking’!
Unit be cae Sequsicted with alter Sure Sales,
early betas bid Of perecns and ergnisations corres.

J. UTAACS, Beret Rovers — (etarianed)

a-£h water _Laiscostinnal dgvelecmeata in iba”
DUPLICOMAFWE-2907 Lie: . oan

Matter of Ror pie ta seg aeles
Pap Harh, 12 1987-1987).
s m9 : .

Aether of Be peace fof sole (1987). tn doveters “BLis DIDLICORAFRE-1987 List.

: — coy. :
“Prive Tears of Loocdnteng Reaction, @ 96 pare peaphlst.pxbliched Le 193 at types
Shanghai, iste subject as editar. The pamphiet consie’a of reprints of articles 13 dan 5D
i etuch appeared ia the "Chins Fara ty Saninrmcus esthere and collaborslors®. > :
- {The penphlet Genounces the Luonistahg end CRAM) Kai-shek for alleged mnssncre .
Of Ate poli:tcal opponents, chiefly Overaxiiets, 1A order “that the bourgeoiate oy
Wight contions to rele end the inperialiste to drue their tribute free the
carttalieation of bumn aisery*. Sebject coctiauss to reside af 333 Central
‘PEIN Verte HT, end Le emplayed.ca @ free’ dance Jourcallst. See ref. does (RI),
jeck'@ book Srhe Trarety of the hinese Rewal:tion*, First oublished 1938
inerese Irttat r & revived editten 1751 ty ctanford thts Prees,  DFBZIN
Thesis of Dock Le that revolation in Chins, 19721977, could have perulted in U2 ang 5D
a Curccratie socielist state, bub vas Perverted to serve tne needs of iuestan
SAES*T: ald Tae Ga Saag a hts sore can be ceeteives a soaceeretie eas tee
‘ ts ean “ reste
Fee Gov. in ( §2,70]-]0LE-$), : ~~

' a ;

— oe

“tee Following files

fora treet}

4s.g Pererted e:tive ce ber Of wer an 3: aleo reorted

se ouspetio’d sonimtern agert, Soe Shp Piles, TH NI-D, ryt of W hay 19)}

Nae teen in thts country elnce ISAT. Rew (fed A$) Srectal Peateree efitor for termed
eararkpg. After com unit phave tn te and early W's wrote a biller and Brilliant

qe of lnscow Jirection of Une chinese Com uniet farty from 1726-18 (Tq era
tonsca, 1937) (roa a Tretexyite viewpois. how elalas te
ustoned sith Une comurlet wowemect (Stalis or Tevtexy drench). Lites
wife and tve enildren, won

Gurried on BaP cespect List of freien acentas nee HOU toasters BumiPs Bete
WU Eg Wee O14 DSE-TUA, vane Crestor, - :

for connection with Mtlaire RCTAAS, war,

ost gh. = 32.

&. 134-03, Harold 2obert (ecet'd)

hutror of
eat thrvug!

in ar,

I

ee OO
| Seo WELL, 11 Ped,
bos

Siby ts

tis early

tieteed book fer
| problene of Crients

Tnwtitete ef Teemalogy,

Aeek’, Firat editor of CCP paper of snich

track J. HUWLEY aGvieed that ex:
i. Trotrhyite Conmun tet,

Sadject's Book, “Ro Peace Fee Aste,
foc, is BY Leas

T3MACS, Harold Rotert™

arlivities of the seatera os
: for rive of tonal! Ue “Setardey Revi-e
's SSCS reviewed *Jouruey to the Fur Pecifie® by Cove Thaves

SThe Trasedy of the Citnese Sevolotion® hea. Roerte 1 ca
6 APPZ LEAK
Alea Vi Felieved to te forei¢n sx
AT Fish Later we 10 beacus

‘AS (99) An Sharghal.

ASI, wubjects Ida TREAT

Spree seanseenenenmncarn asco areovnaneanonm

write and fomet Troteiyite. Stated

3939 tr dee tas,

le enanele,
ale of the Aseriew do

6 Setal log

ant Ube UT rd dat emat fo

7s Published 1537, exmartsed, B08 ref,

Chine ast eal wortot fae Ti
fron colieys ani nef cvea .een pert to Jal.

10 pet ervated by Bus:
Ue US, adele Soere aleig ett!

Orient bend fear and deire:

ate ia eels
ee

—

» Agree caatad, ef ad,

eitihe Cabs oh K vhads ASRS TATED —— DDSI /Ye ame O-2S27/A0

pared 23 hacest 49, weaj.0 Cort) Prank GLAS, mas, 10 docsters FAL
CUMAIRCMCHNE =~ Coil, Frank Gass. : : ;
TETRRATe te slate bait. ame ‘enech, eve-cme Vo Sale ard.tery to PA, PRATT TY, |
Fits omayeubns tie trast Ganies ‘

(ecstlment) +

DUNT
@ dan. dysa

Jeet told Ain that Jor une URBAN! t
See refs coo. te M20L-AgeTe Mt, A UPARES (a9) BFD-2 1896

{qv) (a -620%7),

Chat LIA, Tacmen'd (91/15/2759) sen
3 Xow Aceney ig”

7 ‘ lan tetaliterioalam, bet
Velal tha: ceralt of eolontal ‘peoples tp Aste

end Selp geld
Ble wrtiele “Tee Bitad Ailey of” = .
edeny”. July. 1751, otates Unat past

exper Melallty ead for fevewendieg only ail) ary solutions te

See DFRI08CE dated 2 wander 1958 10,

+ Caatarheze, Been, Pet,

(orelesede

fab york presently restos ot $2 Varteh Bond
Pali ios Reenarea tneselats 5 Wee thant fee teens, peace fe SRR

oration, Mase, 6
Con at bere emeees teey | matias

——

i

