
--- Page 1 ---
14-aanon . . o
104-10179-10025| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 empdicialedbean.

. . : o Ys
. mw. ps\ : ; ; L .
-, Ory lt
iit ls . SECRET
\ MEMORANDOM POR THE ROCORD , . .

SUBJECT: Contact Feport on Mecting with AMRUMG-L AC / -At

1. On 5 Yoverter at 1130 hours, 4MRUNG.1 and -I\CECKER were met
at the washington Airport by undersigned. They were then taken by :
taxi to the Nayflower "otel, where a room had been reserved ... for i
their use. After having lunch at the hcte?, the party sdjournod to :
the m, where A\SUNG-1 was given = stort briefing on(Franeisco O8
Castel}, the -/T operator who was schediled to meet S=STNG-1 at
1400 hours.

2. At 18CO0 hours, the umers, Qe to the lo‘ty of the hotel

-> where Francisco was waiting withl Roy Carcial his escort officer,

03 (Careta was instructed to bring Francisco u> to the moa. It was

rt in advance of this that all srincipals would with draw. from

: the room to give AYRUNG-1 an opportunity to talk with Francisco alone

t Fowever, it was sugrested that} Garctal¥eturn a half hour before the -

‘ interview was terminated to clear u> any points as to the nature of

: Francisco's training, or any asnects that sMPUNGA1 right wish to

: olerify. The interview vith Francisco was terminated stout 1510

: hours, as ‘Gul statod he would be nleased to have Francisco
assicned to hin, ALL indications were that a happy racport was este-
blished between the principals and a comleto understaming was -
reached as to the future role of Francisco as the «/T operator for
the AMYUM greus in Cuba. >

i

S

: 3. At aporoximately 1535 hours, |Andy Rogers) put in his appearance
|

at the room and was introduced to b as Fy, Rodrick. Prior to
this meeting, “RURG-1 was told that “r. Rodrick was the coordinator
for operations and would live to discuss soze of the nore specific ~
t aspects with hin, orior to his return to Cuba, [Cecil Cart: ht), who Ot .
! had escorted A'SUNG-1_to Yashington, asked to si€ in on this ang
H along with eters and] fogerdfSas he felt that MASH sheald te fully -
| informed on whatever oderationa) matters were discussed with AMAURG.)
i ‘or rore effective future cooiiffistion between Headquarters and MASS.
\ - 10} [Rogers}indicatad no objections to this and stated he vas glad to have ~
t

sit in at this meeting,

4, In substance, [Rorera|covered most of the highlights dealing ~~
with orevicus attests to susply the AXTIM group with arms and ammo,
; and air-maritine overations currently being olanned. In this . ‘
: connection, (ES NG.l was highly pleased to learn that a.+,000 pound i
i

a 7 SECRET

fee eee

SK


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

OS Royer} then briefly discussed tho SIN? operaticn and asked

SECRET

~20

shipzent had been successfully infiltrated to his grovp during his absence
and avalon urged that rors ench scicments should bo etepped uc the future,
SYAUNG-1 Af he
ddn't think this area fer the ce wa. already "tlown? due to the number of ©
people wic alr-ady knew cf his o,eration, (This includes £ other people
besides ALNUNe) and A SUNGL1,) AYEUNG-1 stated he was not sure, Lut vould
inve:tigate this upen hie return. Howover, he felt that this was an excel-
lent DZ site and should be utilized for any sur sequent airdrop scheiuled in .
the Pinar del Rio frovince)y[Rogers|infcrmed AVHUNG-1 tbat his overlays on
various LZ"'s and £2's had been recived and wero being reviewed by the opera-
ticns peo,le. He corplirented Av:UNG-1 on the excellent work of his czrto-
grcopher und oxpressed the view that these TZ aroas would be rut to good use.
Finally, he assured aviCNGel that no stone is Eeing left unturned to provide
his grov, with the necessary materiel support viich 4s critically nevded and
that this sup.ort «ill de step cd up as our infiltraticn capabilities are ine
creased both by air and sea. In parting, he csuticned avHUxG-1 not to take
any unnecess «ry chances when he resumed operaticnal activities in Cuba, since
his lesdershiy in the ANYUM group was vital to our overall interests. The
meeting wos terminetad about 1720 hours us| Ropers] and Petars took their de-

parture, or

5. Sore of the more significant hi, hlirhts of the conv-rsaticns ihtch -
tock place betwen AYAUNG=1 and the undersitned prior to his weetings with the
W/T operator (Francisco) and Jitezersl are noted herewith:

a. Security: Castro os taken stringent acti n in tirhtening up
his internal security a, ainst counterercvoluticnary forces inside
Cuba. The raiitia ars being usec to search heus-s ror concesled
weapons (usually by a hlock system), and anyone failing to produce
proper identification is removed for questicning by the ick.
Hence, ANAUNC-1 ani his organizatiio are largely ccnfining their
activities to the daylizht hours from 0700 to 2000 haurs. He
considers night operaticns - particularly cn the st:ects of Ravana -
as highly dangerous inasmuch as the Di: (security orrans) are -
ecnstantly on the alert to stop individuals cn the street to check
their identification dccuments.

b. Documentati:n of Avents in Cuba: AYAUNG-1 surgested using an
identiricati-n card issued by the Havana Universtty for their

students. He had a sarple copy in his ;ossession, which he cleins- a

was readily accepted by Castro security, forces as being valid.

Sirilariy, 3 driver's license procerly authenicated along with a —
health certiricate were considorec to ba g¢ocd Ycover® docurents —_
for a, ents cperating in the Havana area. A sup; sly of blank identi-

ficaticn cards wi:i be turned over to the Staticn by AVAENC-] fop : “

transxittal to headquart-re for any suts:quent Accurentation of

SECRET

pe ae on

ise


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

: SECRET

-h

agents whe can be passed off es students at the Ravana University.
(He sugcested preparing cae for tis w/T o;erator (Francisco).

©. Operaticnal Expenditures: CQue:ied on this aspect, .*SCNG-1 stated
his organizati n-»culd need a minimum of 50 to 60,N0 pesos a
month to cover their overall operaticnal expenses. These funds are
being used for safehouse raintenance, travel expenses, purchase of
vehicles and gascline, ailoraticn of funds to vericus sub- .
divisions of the AMYUM organizaticn located in varicus provinces of
Cuba, and purchase of food and support of various arents whose
families may be in dire need of food and medical surrlies.

da. w/t O,erators: To date, both avPANICs14 and AYCIEX~) have net
mot the requirements for effective cornunica! ion with us on AYYUF |

operat.cns. However, AFAUNG-1 feels that AYPANICw2% has not been
compromised or turned by the DIDx and once he rets over his nervous
state, it is possible he can stil] be used, Similariy, although -
ANGLEN-1 is considered to ba a co d W/T cjerator, AYtNGs) fecls
: his usefulnoss to hie has been considerably nejatet by the nature
: of his assignment at the Naval bese end his recent restrictions
, to this base by orders of the Castro regire. In stert, AYRUNG-)
feels com-unicaticn is the weakest link in his currest epera’
and that direct com-unicati:ns with the Embszsy is growing ine: !
eroasingly hazardous, due to the fact that Embassy rerscnnel sre
under close survedllance by the Castre cecurity forces. For this
reason he feels that Francisco wil? fill a sericus wid in this
respect, once he is infiltrated into the ANYUK orgarasation in

Cuba.

e. Support for other anti-Castro gro: ps in Cuba: AYSTMe2 stated that
all materiel sup,ort srould bo funneled directly te his organiza.

i his view this would sorve as a ccntrol factor in unifying the over.
1 all effort of the varicus spiinter ,roups seeking evct suppcrt in -
i Cuba and ould also entsnce the pfestice of the MRE ss the spesr
: head for the FRINTS,. He then went on to acd that he was fully —
: aware of our efforts to supsort other groups in Cuba, which he ©
: aosumed ve were operating wath on @ unilateral basis. (i.e, he
1 sited Nino Diag in Oriente). AMWNCG~1 felt this wis a soricus —
Hy mistake, as this unilateral suport would affect the leadership and
direoticn new being provided by the “kK Shroughout Cuba. . The,
undersigned told AvalXG-) that he arpreed on the desiratiiity of
i &@ cocrdinate d effort on the part of all counter-revolut: onary
groups seeking to overthrow Castro using the FRENTE as the rally. - -
ing center. However, the question of sup-ort being :étee ted -
through one channel] namely: his organization in Cu, was neither
feasible nor practical. The fect that Castro had tightened up
security throughout the varicus previnces of Cuba, 2 make it
difficult or in ossihle for the AMYUM greup te ship ares and other
equipsent from Havana te the eastern ost provinces (t.e., Las

SECRET

}
|
|
|
t
|
i
i
!
1
'
ticn for distritution to other anti-Castro gross in Ocha. In i
a)
|
|
|
i
|
!
$
i
|
{
!



--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

| ne

H Villas, Casaguay of Oriente) without jeopardizing both shiprents

! and person el. Hence, the need for unilateral action on our

! part to sup.ay those fighting groups in these provinces. This
explanaticn appeared te satisfy AYEUNG-1, however he still insisted
that his organizatt n should at least be appraised of any rateriel

support provided other groups in Cuba. He was sesured that wa
would take Lis request under consideraticn.

f. atRLDP¥-11 AYKUNG.1 feels that nc useful purzose would be served
ia sending his a:stciaty to Join forces with him in Havana. He
feels that ArBIDDY-1 should continue te represent the AYYUM
facticn in the FAD and when the counter-r: velutivr-ry forces are
fully prepared to everthrew the Castro reg-re, aAPfAIDITY-1 will be
brought into the Pinar del Rio to direct the AYYUY forces in this

province.

eg. Manclo Ray: AbalNG-1 considers RAY as a hipnly dan-erous individval
because of his great ambiticn to play a prerinent role in any
subsoquent Cuban gov: rnsent following the overthrow of the Castro
regine. In his opinion, RAY poses a soricus threat to VAHONA*s
leadership and the FRD inside Cuba. Ho is atter;ting to draw .
various dissident groups to hie banners 2nd appeurs to have support =:
from the riddle class represented by businezs interests, politiciats,
and the professicnal class. Should iY te persuaded to join
forces wath the FKD, AXAUNG-1 thinks he wi:l cortirnue to operate
on & unilateral basis while seeking to supercede the FRD with ©
his om crganizaticn in Cuba. .

h. Tony Varona_and the FRD: Although AMRUNG-1 reccgnizes the neod
to support the FRD as a political front for rallying counter-
revolutionary grou,s against the Castro regive, he n netheless
feels that the FHENIE and Tony VEKCNA hove lost eensiderable face
An Cuba by inaction and political maneuv~ rings He further pointed
out that he 4a aware that thousands of doliars tad been poured into
the FRraTz, but dissident groups in Cuba h.ve s<en no evidence of
any of this money to sup ort their efforts to cverthrow Castro. —
Hence, ccnfidence in the F!D is at a relatively low ebb amcnz the
people in Cuba and a nex shot in the arm in the form of materiel
and financial support is needed to restora this confidences- Ace
conding to “FEUNG-1 vhie eup. ort must be forti.coming soon because
such peo;le as Manolo RAY ere taidng the initistivo and will socn
contrcl the entirc counter-revolut onary movement in Cuba,

|
!
|
|
|
|
|
|

John D. Peters

lw,

pe SEAT.

