
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10173-10130) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

ose

20 December 1973

MEMORANDUM’ FOR | THE necokD

SUBJECT: E. Howard Hunt’) | SO re
: ; ‘ * $

Lo L I’phoned Paul, Burn; Spec
said that we had some leads that could’ be followed by whe

_ the action in the DDO in ‘tracking ‘down Hunt's activities
»fall of 1964, when-he was alteg’ tojhave been engaged in surveillance ,

activities of Barry Goldwater:

\

2. © anid that. our files showed: Hant was in DO Division (Burns —— : : 7
was. not farnillar With that title, but recognized itas the prédecesasor :
ef FR Division) and in August 1964 was assigned to the Washington
_ field office, I suggested that Stan, Ga nes, who wad Deputy Division — 7
Chief of DO Division and now DCOS Boni; might’ be in-a- position tor eg
give a few groups on “What Hunt was. supposed to be doing then, I. .

suggested that he be queried by cable, Burns

$ said Gaines is staying OE
on under contract for a while, so would continue to ‘be available,

3. Tasaid that Fig Coleman ivas bn the Iberian desk whenthe =. - i

‘Hunt assignment to Madrid was brought. up i in 1964 when Hunt .
went to the field in 1965; He could ai <
‘ynent, which-seens, to have “bee!
_ direction, _His recollection’ v

7 ‘information on what Hunt did not do for. the Age "during t! that verted.
I suggested that both Helms, and’ ‘Karamessines should be queried.

I gave as a possible. presa treatment that Hunt was engagedin |: : q
‘domestic operations (soinething Senator Baker is pursuing) and that,
a his assigiment to Spain after. the election could be sented as giving”

z 7 him, tine ‘to cool off. IU therught we had to pursue matter to. be"

sure we-know the facts.

: ™ . ‘4 I asked Buchs to be : sure that we are on | information. distribution ;
‘ . of cables to the ficld on this, given our assigned responsibility for = a -
7 ’ ‘keeping files on Watergate. ‘He said we are on the PLMHPLANK for. :

He would advise the action officer. I said we are’ .

-. messages to Helms.
available for any help we can give.

a

S$. D. Brecknridge



--- Page 2 ---
14-0900

-_ OST

bo Oo . gh

20 December 1973

t .
a . a .
H .

[MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: E. Howard Hunt

_ 1, F phoned’ Paul Burns, Special Assistant to the DDO, and -
said that we had some leads that could be followed by whoever has
_ ithe action in the DDO in tracking down Hunt's activities during the ©.
. fall of 1964, when. he was alleged to'have been engaged in surveillance
activities of Barry Goldwater.. ct ; _

; 2. 1 said that our files showed Hunt was in DO: Division (Burns _
was-not familiar‘ with that title, but recognized it as the predecessor : j
of FR Division) and in August 1964 was assigned to the Washington en
field office. I suggested that Stan Gaines, who- was Deputy Division’ ‘

- Chief of DO. ‘Division and now DCOS Bonn, might be in a position to
give a few groups on what Hunt was supposed tobe doing then.” L-

__ Suggested that he be queried by cable. Burns-said Gaines is staying
‘on under contract for a while, so would continue to be available,

. 3, I said that Fig Coleman was on the Iberian desk when the
unt assignment to Madrid was brought up in 1964 and when Hunt

. vent to the field in'1965.~ He could give the background on the assign-

“ment, which seems to have been through Karamessines at Helms! .

direction. - His recollection would give leads. 1 told him that Coleman.

‘became COS. Madrid later, after Hunt left:Spain, and could provide ~

i . information’on what Hunt did not do for the Agency during that périod.

: 2 ° I suggested that both Helris arid Kai Amessines ‘should be queried. |
x _ J gave as a ‘possible press treatment that Hunt was engaged-in :
E domestic operations (something Senator Baker is pursuing) and that”
i _ . his assignment to Spain after the clection could be presented as giving
! "+. ) him time to cool off. I thought we had to pursue the matter to be >

‘sure we know the facts.

at.we aré on information distribution

ee! 4. Lasked.Burns to bé sure’t

~~" ef cables to the field on this, given our assigned responsibility for ae ; 7
“Keeping files.on Watergate. He.said we are on the PLMHPLANK for ok am uo
messages to Helms. He would advise the action officer, I said we are ° : Cha
availablé for any help we can give. . .

ae SED, eae

Ss. D, Breckn ridge



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

te

cee SECRET ik

9 May 1976

MEMORANDUM FOR: _ OPS/RMO
SUBJECT. ot vatergate File Re Research ~ Final Report.

TL The: files of the. ‘immediate office of the chief, oPs/ose
_ have ‘beén checked for:matérial relevant to the Subject. of this ;
: memorandum; . The check. included chronological files “of communt=:
’ cations ‘of which I was the author while assigned to Madrid, Spain
‘in the period July 1970 to July. 1973. . Nothing pertinent was: found.

tne me LEM a IE

wares

2, d-have. attempted. to recollect any other details which . cos i
conceivably could be pertinent and which relate to the period . _
of my assignment to Madrid. The only points which I recall but . ,
on.which I have no documentation are these: :

a. There were occasional joshing. inquiries made of me
by American residents of Madrid about the reported presence
in Spain of E, Howard Hunt in 1972.. My standard reply was” | a :

- that I knew only what I had heard rumored: For the record, a Po
at nO tine did Huat contact me, and I have never known of his i
having tried’ to contact any Station personnel in Spain during
the period 3970- 73. I made no effort personal ly to ascertain.~ - toe 4

whether or not Hunt was in Spain, and t ‘had. no effort made by f

any Station member. - ah ee

FUDAN Cease nd ween teaihee ou BU:

ea De “A. Station officer, possibly. Richard diiderkiri, now
assigned to Guatemala; was given some information by an ~~.

. informant: in 1972: concerning. reported. activities im Spain. .
by. Robert Vesco. I. suggested : that the information bé given ©.
informally ‘to ‘the Embassy's. Economic Section. chief, John. ---

_, Oliver. - That’ officer was ‘charged with keéping abreast. of:
developments related to Vesco: “The Station did. not pursue -
‘that subject, as I recall; because it was not a topic of .
reportable, interest, according t to. requirements. of the period. :

of
e
:
4
i
t
by
:
ie
P
£
p.
i
4
4

£2 UMPCET
CL BY 058759

. maTpys
co Melati


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

SegRET

: : oo 2

t
t
i
H
i
‘.
| -
i

SUBJECT: Watproste Fila Rosearch - Final Report (cont'd) -

. 3. There: is no other ‘employee assigned to my immediate - . B .
office who has relevant personal knowledge of events and. ere 7
personalities. = : : a

eure. Omar

Robert E. Owen -
Chief, OPS/0SG- °

. in
. i
4 4
eG . i.
: é
j
i
“4
i
i.
4 . ut
a
i i
Loy . i
; i ’ d,
, : 1
a a
2 . '
‘ 1 '
1
£ : o
eB, i .



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

arg a anes

“OO unaassingo =O Na C1 CONFIG. TIAL (A Secnet

COMMENTS [Number ecth comment te wow from whom
1 whom Onrw @ line orcs column ee each comment.)

we EBM erent 8” eoenee 7 eneinrecees mm Wena . 7 ars seereren


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

‘ its: records to determine if we could .
. Mr. Runt°in an amount of approximately $30,000 that required:
no accounting. : : en

“ans reaates stant EAE RUSE AIEEE Na sehen

RODE ebNeo re RtCW Son

NAA ohinisees a SUNN AC etter jet

27 FES i974

MENORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

_ SUBJECT | 3 Howard Hunt

:: al _ At'the recent request of the Deputy Director for .
Management and Services, the Office of Finance has searched -
find any payment to...

2. We have searched the following records:

The expense runs for the period July 1964 to
Le June 1973 for the immediate Office of the DCI,
on the immediate Office of the DD/P, FI Staff,

a CI Staff, CA Staff and the Office 6f Security.
, We have checked various’ items that were Te- |.
flected in these expense. records but have.
identified nothing relating to. Mr. Hunt.

The Madrid Station, JMWAVE and FR/Washington
Office accountings to determine if there. were

. funds. passed by. the Stations to Nr. Hunt during
‘the year he servéd under non-official cover in
Madrid. We could find no payment ‘to.Nr. Hunt’
either in his true name or his two identified
pseudonyms. re ar : ,

- Mr. Hunt's travel claims. for the period -

. 1960-1972 and have found nothing in thesé

. travel claims that were not consistent with-
-hormal travel expenses, i.e., transportation,
per dien, - oo fee a -

ae

“-d. We made’ a specific analysis of Mr. Hunt's.
“advance ‘account for the period he was. under

., Non-official cover (July '65-Sept "66) and have

E2 IMPDET
CL BY: 006567

Ze)
mi
2G

ITY

OY Re On min etary ede.

coe



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

> SECRET. 8

Mt SUBJECT: Howard Hunt

determined that $33,500 was advanced to hin
_for travel and transportation of household
goods. to and from Madrid with one trip to
Paris for he and his family to renew their :
- Spanish visas. All of this advance was fully 4
accounted for. However, in his accounting, a -
ad one item appeared unusual, It was an- - eo .
expenditure of $1,600 for a sensitive | coe
operation which was approved for. write-off by Mr.
Desmond Fitzgerald on 1 June 1966 without
.-further accounting. ~_ ;

3. Also; we confirmed that no other Agency advance ‘accounts |
were established for.Mr. Hunt during this period. | _ :

. .4, At the beginning of his non-official cover tour, it
was necesSary to establish a bank account in his name. The
EUR Division accordingly requested we open an account at the

Chase Manhattan Bank in Mr. Hunt's name to receive all non-
(Mr. Hunt had-an account at Riggs National

po ’ salary payments.
- | Bank to receive his salary and allowance payments). The -
ing deposits were made to the account during 1965 and

+
i
§

a

A . a follow
19663 ; - . Po i
Account operied: 13 July 1965° : Oo oa
“13 July 1965 $10,000. | _ rs
5,000 Soe Leg

15 September 1965- _ = §;000-
"5,000"

; 6 October 1965".
19 July 1966 "75,000
- $30,000

Ail of the above have Been accounted. £6 :
- of travel and transportation accountings ae ae qe

1

7 5. - We feel at this time without, specific guidelines that
further searching would be somewhat fruitless; One strange. - pet
a aspect of. the non-official cover assignment in Madrid is that.
all the costs were charged to the support allotment. of ‘the : mo,

EUR Division whichis not normal as non-official; cover people
It is unusual to have a.

: ‘are usually assigned to a project.
: case officer abroad for one year on an operational assignment

without him incurring operational eapenditures.



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

a ced

Tween ned,

é
u
A
g.
=e
f
&
a
i
a
i

&
ca
z
z
a
é
Fa
£
i
&

a an SECRET a

SUBJECT: Howard. Hunt

“6. The Office of Finance has not found. operational
‘expenditures except for the $1,600 mentioned above,
- Therefore, it is suggested that Mr. Karamessines be quéstioned
as to a project or projects to which.Mr. Hunt's operational
expenditures if incurred would have been charged, :

7. “Another possible course of action is to request the
Di ector to approve my asking. a. cleared contact-at Chase
Manhattan Bank to provide a ‘transcript of all elitries into =

_ Mr. ‘Hunt's Ghase Manhattan Bank account.:-

‘8. ‘Weare currently: reviewing ‘Fecords of all cashier’ s
“checks prepared and issued ‘by Monetary to determine if any
weré. payable to Mr. Huiit. Hopefully this effort will be
‘finished by the end of ‘the week,

| halle

. Director of” F nance
& . _ ke?



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

stata mas pete

§

ane teach

. ment by Helms,

: to be” sent.as DCOS. to. Madrid.

‘much about it.”
“Hunt was to have the telephone number of the COS, “but he would do

, £0 December 1973
MEMORANDUM FOR ‘THE RECORD
SUBJECT: E, Howard Hunt
ae spoke with Fig Coleman about Hunt's ‘assignment to Spain,

Thad ‘spoken with him back in August when we. were inguiring: ‘dato,
roported activities involving Mrs, Hunt, res

2. Coleman said that he got out of the War College in May 1964
(by: which he fixed the time), and took over the Iberian desk. Bill.
Ryan was C/EUR (or was it WE Division at the.time),’ In early autumn

“Ryan said that he had just been informed by the DDP (Karamesaines}

that Hunt was to bé assigned to Madrid as DCOS,.as a directed assign-
A memo was prepared and sent to the COS, Jim Noel
(now' retired), There was nothing further for about a month when Ryan
called Coleman in and showed him a RYBAT letter from Noel stating
that Ambassador Stanley J. ‘Woodward would net have Hunt: in the

Embassy,

3. - Woodward had’been the Ambassador to Uruguay when Hunt °

“was COS Moittev ideo. He had’a low opinion of Hunt and was counting

the days until Hunt left, The President of Uruguay visited President-

.. Eisenhower in the States, at, which time he requested 4 personal favor--
* that Hunt be reassigned to. “Montevideo.. - .

So Hunt took another tour.
Woodward was outraged, and had his revenge in 1 1964 when Huat was

4, Aftera couple of ‘months--early 1965--Ryan-cdlled Coleman
in and, observing that there was more than one way to skin‘a cat,
told him that. Hunt was going to Spain under nonofficial cover. This-

didn't Fequire anything special, Ryan ‘saying that he didn't know.
It came to him from Kararnessines on Helms' order,

nothing’ for thé station, Hunt was to submit administrative vouchers

for reimbursement of his expenses and they were’ to be paid. ~ Coleman ~

said he never saw Hunt before he went out. He knows that there was
no operational reporting, to indicate that Hunt was doing anything.

4
i
i
;



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

soy ; _— yee ~
Bet : obi r.
foe A. iN
3
. The vouchers were ‘not large, although the doctimentation was poor, *

Coleman raised the question with Ryan about his signing off, and ,
Ryan said he could talk to Karamessines if he wished. Because 4
Coleman had a close personal association With Karamessines he

did Just that. He was told ‘by Karamessines that he didn't know much
about it cither--"Helms said send him out."' He was instructed to I<
ahead. : :

__ 5+ In early July 1966 (4 July) Coleman went to Madrid: He ~~
Riad a-ten day turnover with Jim Noel. Hunt had already gone and
he did not: see him. Noel said he.didn't know what Hunt did, but

hat Goleman need not worry because. ho:was gone.

an 6. Several nionths apo Noel was at a seminar at which :
“Ambassador Woodward was also Present, -At the time he asked
about. Hunt, Woodward said it'might still be dragged into the press,
- Tad Szulc had been after Woodward about the Hunt assignment to
Spain. Coleman observed that Szule did have along article on Hunt
in the New York Times, and the Spain assignment was mentioned, |
but without any conclusions as to its sigificance. :

4
z
z
‘8
o

. 74° Coleman said the RYBAT file of C/EUR may have something on
the event, but not much. A letter out and the reply, “but not much more,

s. D. ‘Breckinridge .



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

sievnericet Me seer

; MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

“Chief, ‘Staff D, Deputy. Director for Operations,- on

* the subject of M
of Mr. Hunt's assignment as a Contract #28 A agent

_:assignment of Mr. Haat during this. period.

’ by Mr. Thomas Karahessines, the Assistant Deputy Director

“Was unaware of | any specific project.or target for Mr

. 2 Hunt. Mrs Ry
| Mr. Hunt produced ‘positive. intelligence on the Iberian®

‘target.- during this period the officials responsible:

were totally. unaware: “of: At.

Mr. Hunt's activity and the nature of his. assignment
during this period came:.more. through heaysay thin woo

“Hunt? s to the effect that-Mr.. Hunt ‘stated: that ‘while

22 Februaty. 1974
meme LG Fike Tab BL

SUBJECT: E. Howard Hunt--Madrid Assignment

‘le On’ 22 February 1974, Mr. Frederick } NY Evans.
ind. the undersigned interviewed Mr. Edward Ryan, - ; C:

E. Howard Hunt. ae) the period

to Madrid between July 1965 and September’ 1966, -Mr.

Ryan had“ been the Deputy Chief of the Western European 7
Division, Deputy: Director for Plans. The purpose of . nn
the interview was to determine if Mr. Ryan had any . . a ooo
information bearing on the matter of the’ operational net ‘ B

“2.00 Mr. Ryan stated that the assignment of Mr.
Hunt’ both to tlie European Division and to. Madrid was.
handled without: benefit of the routine processing
procedures through the Western European Division.
Mr. Hunt's assignment was coordinated and directed

for Plans,. With ‘regard to operational duties, Mr. Ryan, -

made the specific observation that if

for this effort: within. the. Western European Division . —

su Merges Jvc

3.° Mr. Ryan Stated that most of his knowledge’ of

direct official kKhowledgé. For example, he cited the
commeitt: ‘nade by a mutual ‘acqnaintanée: of his and Mr...

in. Madrid he was going to "play ‘golf and write books.” <= *
Mew Ryan was asked ‘specifically whether” or not he was cot



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

under ad impression that Mr. Munc's writinea activities -
were cither being encouraged or subsidized directly
by this Agency in any official effort. Mr. Ryan re:
sponded that he was personally not awate of any such
arrangement. He added as an expression of personal
opinion that Mr. flunt had no operations! function and.
was simply granted the opportunity to write books. for
his own personal gain at: Government expense during this
period. | .
a te

PARE US Pedant;

ruastite arin ceart aa

ey


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

.
with CHECK CLAS
ASSIFIED
.
“E
. : e
}
i
i
5
f

WRENS eon acta: he go

FOLD HEAE TO RETURN TO SENDER _
Mi NAME, ADORESS/AND PHONE NO.

es aan



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

be Cuasy » THN FOr ANO BOTTOM | } ‘a nos . . '
- Bh ~ Te te ee .
a ar Seep my _
¢ : : to .

TO KL 10, wb Fa

22 February 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR THE REGORD
SUBJECT: Conversation with-Sam Halpern”

Lt _ 2 Imet with Sam Halpern for about 20’ minutes this morning |:
in GGl0, where he is cleaning ip some details before he goes to |”

. his new assignment as DC/DCD.. I told him genérally about our
Attempt to reconstruct Howard Hunt's assignments and financial

and asked him particularly for recollections he may

s assignment in Spain in mid-1965 to the fall of 1966. -

transactions,
" Rave of Huat!

: '2, Halpern said that ke kas ‘ao recollection about such an
" assigament. In June 1965 he moved from WH Division with Des
FitzGerald when he became the DD/P. . At about that time
Halpern's father died and he was in New. York for the funeral
and ten days of religious observations following that.- He was back
-_ in mid-June and in and out from then on.as he got ready to attend
* the National War College which began in August. He did -not- return
to, that office until the end of June 1966. . : Me,

os 3. Halpern observed that-daring this period Karamessines
was ADDP- with Helms moving up to be DDCI. He thought it entirely _
"possible that Helms. and Karamessines could have handled this -™'

on their own,

rs “Halpern said that Evan Parker had come into the office _
of the DD/P shortly beforé.Helms became DDCI, and had returned -
from Henolulu for that purposé, He ‘stayed’on for FitzGerald until -
Halpérn returned from the National War College: He suggested
_ Someone might talk to Evan Parker who may have ‘known something
abaut it. (although he may not): ‘He also suggested talking to Georgia.”

YOM or eteratt Heats igte ain an

ft om

sh SDE:

at)



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

ee ee

21 February 1974
Ye Lo

- oo . ; fy
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD. |
SUBJECT: Watergate--Frank A.: O'Malley’
a 1 At 3 p.m.on the afternoon of 19 Bebruary 1974,
Mr. ‘Frederick N. Evans and Lawrence J, Howe interviewed - |
Mr. Frank AL O'Malley at his residence, 6419 Lakeview
Drive, Falls Church, Virginia.! Mr. O'Malley retired

from this- Agency in June of 1972, Prior to xvétirement cod
“Mr. O'Nalley was an officer in the External Employment’ : a
Assistance Branch, Retirement Activities Division of - Po

to assist personnel retiring fron this Agency in finding’
". post-retirement employment. In this capdcity Mr. O'Malley
- had been instrumental in the placement of Mr. -E; Howard

Hunt in the Robert R: Mullen public! relations firm. The
purpose of this interview was to attempt tq determine if
additional information could be developed from Mr; O'Malley
With regard to the placement of Mr. Hunt with the Mullen ¢
Company. : ae ; So, Le

the Office cf Personnel. It was Mr. Q'Malley's function

_ rr ee a Bt een
+ Mr. O'Malley, began the interview. by: recalling
the nature: of. his Past Agency associations both. with Mr.
Hunt. and the Mullen Company. Mr. O'Malley stated that
prior to assuming hig responsi ilities in the Office of
‘Personnel he-

-had served with Central Cover Staff in the
area dealing with. the funding of covert action projects...
In this capacity he had become familias With the acti- —
‘wities of Mr; Hunt. while Mr. Hunt functioned on the Covert
Activities Staff primarily in the propaganda fi x
O'#alley stated that he first came in contact with the!
Mullen Company when he was attempting to find an .organi-
' , Zation to hance €@.the public relations effort of a covert
Agency activity khown as the Free Cuba C ittec. Mr.
O'Halley related that he had arranged this cover through |
the Christianform Organization and that his duties ‘in-,
2 : volved all aspects of.the funding of this activity. Mr.-
O'Nalley-described the nature of his working relationship



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

with itr. Robert Ro Mullen aus deing close ana cordial, «
Nr. O'tlalley stated that Mr. Mullen was in the hapies :
of confiding to hii inforaation couceraing other Mullen
business convacts and Projects. In response to a
specific question, Mr. O'Malley Staced that curing the
“period of his contact with the Mallen: Company ‘dealing
with the Free Cuba Committee, Mr. Mullen told him the
Howard Hughes Organization was a client of the concern.

- 3. Nr. O'Malley reiterated his previous statements,
that Mr. Hunt was referred to his office for Placement :
assistance through the Office of the Executive. Director, >}
then Colonel L. K. White. Mr. O'Malley ‘stated that ins .. ad
view of Mr. Hunt's. interests in the public relations: |
field, it was’ thought advisable ‘to put Nr. Hunt in touch’
with Mr, ‘Robert Mullen for the purpose of gaining the.
benefit-of Mr. Mullen's guidance, - Mr. O'Malley recalled,
after thé initial meeting, Mr. Mullen mentioned having
met Mr. Hunt some.-years Previously in Paris, France.
ir. O'Malley's office arranged interviews with various
Organizotions including Reader's Digest and the Kennecott . -

Copper Company. Through ‘the offices of the Mullen Company:

an interview was arranged ‘with the General Foods Corpora- —

tion, a Mallen client. -Mr. "Malley stated there was.

‘disappointment that Mr. Hunt had. bean unsuccessful in

"selling himself" during any of these interviews and that

ho job offers had resulted. In response to a question | . .

as to whether or not executive level Anterest was. still : 8 ee

being showiv. in Mr. Hunt's post-enployment placement, so, ae

‘lr. O'Malloy recalled that, Mr. Richard Helms, then
Director of Central Intel ence, ‘was listed as a charac-

ter reference on Mr. Hunt resume and that Mx. Helms’,
“signed a letter of reconmsadation to the. Kennecott.“Copper oo
:, Company on Me: ‘Hunt's behal£, Mr. O'Malley recalled being -~

contacted in the last month ‘of Nr. Hunt's Agency service by © —

Mt. Mullen,. who stated that a decision had been made:to.. 8. Dona
‘expand their operations. — In view ‘of this expansion, Mr. : :
Nullen, had decided “he would hinself-offer Mr. Hunt a. job. .
Me. -Mulfen had stated.that he was interested in having Mr. OEY
‘Huat begin work inmediately. | However, Mr. O'Malley re- . :

* . called. that Mr. Hunt conipleted retirenent’ formalities and
actually started work -fo the Nullen. Company approximately

“a week to 10 days later. * a

’



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

in. feeling Mr. Hunt had generally been less hel
"these. occasions. _ Doo. .

ained.
lauing .
Pune

ir. O'Malley stated that contact was
MN fluaz while at the Mutlen Co
basis, because Mr. O'Malley was interested in uh
for possible referral of other ‘Ayeney retirses.
O'Malley also understood that there was Cover and Coz
mercial Staff interest in the Mullen Conpany, ard that
Me. Hunt becane instrumental in discussing Several aspects
of the cover Operations in. his Capacity as an officer of
the company, Hr. O'Malley recalled referring various
Agency officers ‘to Mr. Hunt -for guidance when these indi-
viduals expressed an interest in-entering the pudlic
rélations field, “Mr. ‘O'Malley did recali disazpointnent

i pful’ on

‘S$. ‘Mr.’ Hunt contacted Mr. O'Malley on Several ‘occasions~. a

Tequesting referral of retiring Agency erployees ‘with

; specific qualifications. These ‘instances occurred apparent-

ly after Mr. Hunt had assumsd his responsibilities with

: ‘the White House. In one instance Mr. Hunt requested re-

‘ferral of a recéntly retired Agency Secretary. -As-
previous memoranda and discussions, Mr. O'Malley was unable
to recall the name of this individual, He did, however,

State that he is quite certain Mr. Hunt turned down the

: individual whom he referred. .As a point of Clarizication, :
“Mv. O'Malley said that this individual had not previously -”

been known to Mr. Hunt;-nor had she previously worked.
for hin in’ any capacity. Mr; O'Malley also recalled.a-.
‘Tequest. from Mrs Hunt for aa individual having skills in

the area of. locks and surreptitious entty. A resume of
‘Mr. Thomas C. Amato was provided to Mr. Hunt at that time.
ATtsis Mr. O'lalley's recollection that Mr. Hunt Specifically |
Stated that a person with Mr, Arato's qualifications was’ -.
reded in connection with a requirement of the Howard © 3+
Hughes Organization in ‘Las Vegas, Nevada. _ Mr. O'Malley _
stated. the opinion’ that it was his impression that the. ;

. aunties. involved -vould ‘include the Ronitoring of a listening’ ©
| ¢evice in. aa undisclosed location, Nr.. O'Malley xyeiterated
“his understanding that Me. Anato did not accept Mr. Hunt's
pCffer Of cnploymeat. BO :

6. Mr. G'ilalley then recalled request: from
a recomnéndation of -a security sérvice orgen

‘to earry out an electronic countermeasures “Sweap Mr.
‘O'M3lley recommended the. Wackenhut Corporation: a? ae



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

O'Malley recalled that Ne. Hunt expressed dis
With that suggestion in part bees t. :
viewod as that firm's political erien ion. O'Malley

did not claborate further on- that remark, Nr. O'Malley
then suggested the use of Anderson Security Consultants,
Incorporated, a commercial cover entity of the Of£ice of
Security. Mr. O'Malley stated that insofar as this. {
organization was advertised in the yellow Pages and that
Mr. Hunt could be Assured of the reliability of the Ser-!
vices, he felt this to be a reasonable Sugyestion, | Mr, :)
O'Malley stated that during a Subsequent. phone call when |
Mr, O'Malley asked how his Suggestion. had worked out, -
‘ic. Hunt responded, "Yes, they had done a fine job."

At this point Mr, O'Malley Was asked whether or not fron’

his associations with Mr. Hunt he felt Mr. Hunt was in

the habit of making glib comments which were not neces-

sarily. accurate in order to pass over a Subject. Mri ‘
O'Malley stated that this was categorically so. He said:
he was sure -that Mr. Hunt had. lied to hin on a number of |
occasions and that, therefore, he was in no Position to

- be sure that Mr. Hunt’ had actually; in fact, used the
Services of Anderson Security Consultants. “Me, O'Malley

volunteered the Opinion that he Suspected the electronic
countermeasures C
Of the Committee to Re-elect the President, |

: ‘7. In response to a question 45 to whether lie had
ever referred anyone to McCord Associates, Nr. O'Malley _
replied that he remembered having referred Walter Brayden,
Nr. Brayden for a time acted as bodygiard to Mrs. Martha
Mitchell. As an aside Nr. O'Malley mentioned that Mr,
Brayden had refused to carry a firearm ia spite of the .
fact that Mr. McCord told him he could do SO On the author-

“ity. of the Attorney General. ~ Asked specifically ‘if he had
ever referred either Willian Shea or Teresa Shea to Mr..
McCord, Mr. O'Malley Stated that he. did. not recall spécif-

ically referring Teresa Shea and that he was sure that he

had Rot referred William Shea to-hin. So, contrary to,
-previous Statements, it is now Mr, O'Malley's belief that
“In-al] Probability Mrs, Shea was not teferred by this !

Agency. to Mr. McCord:

"sweep" was to ba carried out in the offices

!
3
$
f
i



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

8. Ret. ning to Mr. O'alley!s: provious
in coordinating funding for the Covert action activities.
Of Mr. EL toward Nuat, the issue was raised as to whether
Or not the funding of Mri Hunt's projects continued betwaen
‘July 1965 and Septenber (956 while Mr, Hunt was a contract voy
“‘eiaployce stationed at Madrid, Spain. Mr, O'Matley recalled : 1: ‘
z that at the tine of Mr. Hunt's assignment to Madrid the ‘
3 . " stuceneni Gisseninated tor Consumption within the Agency
7 “. Was that Mr. Hunt was Yetiring. Mr, O'Malley statod that
' this was not generally believed. Mr. O'Malley was quite
Certain that during this period his office handled no
project funding’ for Mr. Hunt. In response to specific
" question Mr, O'Malley stated that on Me. Hunt's return to
Staff employment the Projects and funding which stopped in -
July. 1965 were again resumed. Mr. ‘O'Malley was not aware ..
. o£ any project names or funding mechanisms or Post-assignnent
accountings in connection with. Mr. Hunt's activities ‘in
’ Madrid. - wo : , an a wee ees

~ a.
: Like ‘Lita
“Frederick N. Evans: -

a . , . ‘. .
Gitlin fare oo

me, oe Lawrenéd J. Howe _

4

ee



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ;
_ SUBJECT: Office of Finance Records - &. Howard Hunt. re

. lo On. the instruction of Mr. Steven L. Kuhn, Chief _-
of Operations, PSI, the undersigned made an appointment —
for the. afternoon of 20 February 1974 to interview. Mr.
William Caufistd, Chief, Cortification and Liaison Divie
: sion, Office of Pinance, and Mr, Joseph Hudson of Pinance
“. ° On the subject, of Mr. E. Howard Hunt. At the outset of
vi thd intarview Mr, Caurleld advised the undersigned that
instruction had deen recoived from the Director of the .
Oxfice of Finance, Mr. Thomas Yale, that discussion on
the subject of Mr. Hunt -was to be carried out only with
the Office’ of tha Inspector General. Mr, Caufield stated
that’ he had Anforned Mr..Yalo of the requested interview :
and had received this instruction with the-suggestion . s
that the. undersigned contact Mr, ‘Yale directly with any

Te

-Anguiry. : .
2. Accompaniad by Mr. Caufield, the undersigned : .
briefed. Mr. Yale on the natitroe of ths request and idon-- ao . So
+. tified the "Task Force" effort being undertaken by tha z . wy
Office of Security dn concert with the Offices of the od
- Inspector Genaral’ aad Logislative Counsel, Mr. Yates. .
"responded: that ha recognized the legitimacy. of the. in-
quiry. Mr, Yas explained that sudsequent to initiation -
"o£ tha complete audit being undertaken by Mr. Quinn of -..--.... see
‘the Audit. Staff, the Deputy Director for Management and
Setvices, ‘Mr. Harold L., Brownman, had requested ths
Ofzico of Finance to discontinue their investigation of. a
' Mr. Hint to avoid duplication. Mr, Yale added paren- . Tg,
-thetically that it was the ‘naturs of Pinance Officers- : .

not’ to Féave a job half idone dad that en “informal”. i
iaquiry iato Mr. ‘Hunt's Financ !al records had nevertha-s” . oy

- less continued at a more’ subdued pace, . Sot a

E2 IMpDeT
cours CL BY 012696



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

CIE aescvibes

ar

. 3. Avrevisw of tho ciréunstances surrounding Mr. -

. Hunt's conversion to Contract Type A employment and
assignment was then undertaken by Messrs. Yalo, Caufield,
Rucson snd the: undgrsigned. Tho Contract and payroll
filos of Mr. Hunt wore reviowsd for possiblo indications
of the nature of the operational activity undertaken in
Madrid. A review of travel vouchers indicated that Mr.
-Hunt and his family made accountings indicating departurs
fron Washington, D. C., on 5 August 1965 with un arrival
‘Madrid, Spain, on-16 August 1965. The costs of this.
travel were charged to the budget ofthe Western Heni-
- sphere Division,’ Deputy Directorate for Plans, Madrid
Station Support.‘account. . A subsequent accounting sume:
marized PCS travel: expenses and-included a payment for
apartment tental for 16, 17 and 18 August 1965 with a
payment in the amount of $125 to Mr. F, Reid Buckley for
this Purpose, mt . . _—

+ It was dotermined that an allottee bank account

$a Mr. Hunt's name had been established at the Riggs

- €©Xpenses connected with Mr. Hunt identified to date were

. Jeet activity,

National Bank of Washington... All salary and other non-
Operational reimbursements were made to Mr. Hunt through
sterile check'to this account. An Operational account
was established. for Mr. Hunt with the Chase Manhattan
Bank ‘of New York City. A review Of all paymants made to
Mr. Hunt through the Chase bank account: through Mr, Hunt's
‘operational advance subsidiary account, or 1442 account,
had been made. There Was no racord of any: operational
accounts. or advances being processed through this. channel}.
hir.: Yale statod that this fact defined his concern, He
felt that “it was daconceivable that Mr. Hunt could. havs
undortaken “operational activity without sone transfer of
Or ‘accounting for funds, _ To data, no such records have
been developed. ' No reference to a Project or project.

‘dizrash or Operational FAN number has been located, As

caarged to the Madrid Station Support. A Teview made of -

~ rv Madrid Station records has ‘not indicated any "Developmental

2nd Target. of Opportunity (D4TO)« funds or "Other Opera-
tional Activity {COA)" funds expended by or on behalf af

, 3 pun i mally be tho source
Of oberational fundin ;



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

. . ; (. Se . (.

i . 5.) A Savion Of allio£ ths travel vouchers on Tecord
. for Mr. jiunt during this veriog also failed to identify

a project. In addition to the PCS and retum vouchers, :
two orhor accountiags ara on Tecord, Cne accounting : wt
Covered a trip by the entire Hunt fanlly to Paris "for °
the renewal o£ visas." A second voucher coverad a TDY
‘trip fron BMadrid:to Washington with roturn to Madrid
hada by Mr. Hunt fron 5. January to 3 January 1966. The-. . .
Voucher’ States in. the spaca Provided for the citation of a . .

| the trayel order nugber - 9 travol order." The accounts — .
ing was -Approved and signed by Mr, Thomas Xaramessines,
‘then Leputy Dirsctor for Plans. Ho Justification or :
‘statement Of purpose for this TDY wa3 given on the account-
dag. - Soe so . mo

channels o
After d

bs taken to any items Connected with publishing or book
- Poyalties. Mr. Yajg noted that the royalty offset waiver:
provision amnended to Mr. Hunt's Contract was, in Ads ex-
Perisnca, Somewhat unusual, . a -

ara Paes Yala ‘was informed by the undorsiened o£ the
‘intention ta dnterview ur, Edward Ryan,. currently Chief, — Loe
Division D, who was at the time of ir, Hunt's Madrid assign- :
ment, Deputy Chist of the HeStarn Henisphere Division. Mr, .
Yala suggested that Mr. Davis Powell also be interviewed. -
: The undersigned inforned Mr, Yale that this had déen dons.

and briefed Mr, Yale oa the: generally noepativs vesults of. -

tho -interview, Mr. Yala’ then Feconmended that My, San”
“Halp et an .

a

d been an assistant to Mr: Desnond Fitigeratd when the. i : Loe
latter was: Chief, Vestezn Henisphere Division and had ae . Po ak
companiod Mr. “Fitzgerald When he becane. Deputy Diractor For an .
Plans, Mr ale recalled that Subsequent to Mr, ‘Fitzgerald's

: : ‘2 and acted as

. fy . snes. Mr, Yale
“Stated that from his éxperiénce, Mr, Karadessinas ‘Would ~
have dolegatad a21 the arranging of "details" surrounding’

‘an assiangent Such as Nr, ‘Hunt's. to Mr. Halsern, ¢ Mr. Yale



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

. . 8. The undersigned assured Mr. Yale that he would ba”
_  dn£orned of any information identizying any possibla project .
activity developed in subsequent investization,. Mr. Yale -
Stated that- any information in this area would greatly
Facilitate the job of checking Conputorized financial
records, : : wot

Lawrence J, Howe

oe a Lance

San Une meg ert to

Pea thes eae

Na ones

SDINTVE

f


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

)

CHASE MANEATTAN HANK ACCOUNT

- ‘Check Noes : Pate : Payee .
8 . 20 October, 1965 Unknown

(2 months rent as -Geposit plus 1 month
in advance at $550 per month. Substan-
“tiated by lease) -

a 26 ‘November, 1965, Caéa Guggenbuhl

(for storage of ‘trunks during 3 mos. . ~
temporary housing) .

: a 10 December, 1965 _ Security Storage Co.
: i _ (final destination charges per attached |
. .invoicé. Insurance charge of $1.00 is
" personal expense.) Q

#2 @ # @ 4

: Ex~Bolivian Ambassador and wife.’

: . - Expenses :
November 18, 1965 Flowers for Sra. de Max Borrell |
December 20,°1965 ~~ Dinner at Housé of Ming, ¢ .Ptas. 2250

(Per my letter-of-21 December, 1965) —

“Tpount
ae

$ 1,650.00

$69.34



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

, .
: . _ an i
REE even rye

SERVICES OTHER THAN PERSONAL | Terence S, CRABANAC” . [. vJUaDs Leu
7 oOrscR: tn cf Eeeewoitiag ~ ATTACH GECCIPTS and OTHEa SEPPCETING CocUNENTS. 7 —
OE SEENON TMTACMAECCIPTS an OTMEA GUPCETING COCUWENT,

‘1s Novil965 Flowers for Sra. de Max Borrell. Pesetas 150 @ 60/$1.00 - $2.50

20 Dec 1965 Dinner at House of Ming. Ex-Bolivian Ambassador and wife, : -
a Pesetas 2250 @ 60/$1.00 - $37.50*% | 40.00

& For cporational security reasors a receipt was not obtained. o —_ a

(Credit tho’ Uib.2 advance account.)

“SATIFY THAT. THE DISBURSEMENTS ITEMIZED ADOvE WERE SECESSARILY MADE OY NE IN THE CONDUCT
TSSPICTAL BUSINESS OF JA CONFIDENTIAL, EXTRAORDINARY, CR EMERGENCY NATURE, THAT f HAVE NOT
_.} Nor MILL 1 DE, SEIMDUASEO THEREFGR FROM'ANY CTKER SCURCE, ANO THAT THIS CLAIM AND AT.

SKUENTS ARE-TRUE AND CORRECT. , See try tuted nt)

BUeeatone OF CUatMaNT

___APPROYED -

SE AVAILASLE
COUNT NO.

6136+1347 (code 3)

SS
r AUTHORIZES StCNATURE

PAYMENT RECLIVED
INTHE AMOUNT QF

> id 7
aA . fr > oate ., ' J
Feb 66 Ae nina Japon nb)
ci} aa so _ SPACE BEic# FOR EXCLUSIVE USE OF
“SCAIPTION- ALL OTHER ACCOUNTS 13-93 eae
- z starton

SENERAL
LEDGER
NO.

DESCRIPTION 0°
DVANCE ACCOUNTS 13-27



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000 . . . .

i PCS to Madrid ~ Per dien/mise exp 3 998.30
: “Air fare. (setf & family) 2,257.50
HUE, POV, ete "7,547.76
a, . TLA, quarters, etc 6,662.00 — coat 4
7 oe Education allowance 1,440.00 $18,905.56 [f° -
. a / : i
wee ty oMadrid/Paris ; - " Rgentry visa . , * 384.61 i
oo ; ir fare only for self. & faatly : Le
PCS cto Has - Per 5 dicn/mise exp 3. 178,82 i
Air fare (self & family) ' 1,394.55 : . :
HHE, POV, ete = 10, 732,97 a
TLA . 599.34 12,908.68)

40.00

‘Operational entertainment ~ Madrid Nov. 65
Approved expenditure - ~ LxD - Madrid 1 L July, 1966 - 1,600.00
Total, expenditures. $33,834.85 :

33,500.00. §

- Less. advances received (bank deposit; $50, 0005
o cash - 3,500)

“Cash settlement to close AIC _ : oO a woo L$ 334.85



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

1S February 1972,

oo . LG Fb Bb TE
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD :

., SUBJECT: Interview of Mr. Davis Powell
-——--- ON the David. S:, John Novels

"ode. On the morning of 15 February 1974, the

_/ undersigned interviewed Mr, Davis Powell, currently
a Budget Officer .on_ the staff of the Deputy Director
for Management and Services. Mr. Powel] is locatod:
‘in Room 7c13. | During 1965 Mtr. Powell was Chief of - a
Support of the then designatsd Western Europaan Divi-~ rn .
Sion. .In July 2965 a contract was writton authorizing a
Salary and. benafits to Mr. &. Howard Hunt for an assign-
ment..under non-official cover to Madrid, Spain. The

- purpose of this interview was to determing if Mr, Powell:
had any information on Mr.-Hunt's activities during this.
period. . Le

v2. Mr, Powall. responded that from his recollection . :
it was Mr. Hunt's habit to deal only with the most senior _ i
. officer available, In this case Mr. Hunt dealt ‘directly :
with:the then Chief of Wastern Europsan Division, Mr. an
Rolf Kingsley. ‘Mr. Powell statos that, in his ‘capacity am ae i
‘as. Chief of Support, any activity undertaken to support - | f
-.. Mr! Hunt's assignneat to. Madrid was undertaken second . - 2
: >and thirdhand on: receipt of instructions from Mr. Kingsley'g' |
- office. - He further stated thit he was never briefed on a
the -purpose of Mz; Hunt's nission and could add little in +
L. terma of. speculation,. Mr, Powell recomnendod that. Mr;
Edvard Ryan, who wag then Deputy Chief of Western European .
Division, be contacted. ME. Powell also suggested that : :
Miss Martha Seville be interviewed, Miss Savilie was the. 7
Executive Secretary in Western. Eutopean Division during the “a :
tine that Mr. Hunt's contract was writtén and Miss. ‘Saville Boo Ge
subsequently servad in: Madrid’ herself, Mr. Powell unders 0
Stands that Miss Seville is cur tly assigned to the Le

office of the Chief, European Division, - 7 : i

Lavrence J. Hows


--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

OE Et

\

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Interview of Mr, Ro.

|

1. - At 0930 oh the morning of 15 February

the undersigned
Contract: Personn

- The purpose of t

Brooks jad any i
‘tract Persdnnel

quostion of offs
ukable to recall

- Suggestion that the Office:

on the David St. Jo

interviewed M:

fi
|

45 February 19

gers Brooks
ha Novels —

r. Rogers Brooks,

el Division, Office of Personne

his interview
nformation no
filo of Mr.

was to determine
t contained in the

74

1974,
Chief, -: -
1.

if Mr.
Cone

. L BE. Howard Hunt on the
“ datter's activities while a Contract Type A employee,

hough it was not common practice it -

‘to be adainistered without the contracting officer being -

objective involved, Mr,

et and Housing allowance, but he was
any of the details. It’was Mr

that their contract, personnel

checkéd for info

rmation,

- Brooke!

Financo be contactéd and

Yecords on Mr. Huné be.

a

Lawrence. J, Howe

Lb RL uy rat 30

j
j.

.
t
a
ei
o
i

a an


--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

la February. 1974
FO Fah lM, th 33

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD -
. SUBJECT: Interview with Mr. Raymond A. Rocca : oe ; .

on the David St." John Novels . ee

a 1... On the morning ‘of 14 February 1974 Messrs. :
Frederick Evans and Lawrence Howe. interviewed Mr. Raymond
“A. Rocca, Deputy Chief, Counter Intelligence Operations. .
.The purpose of tha interview was to follow up on infor- ©
nation contained in Office of Security files which stated
ithe belief that individuals in‘ the Counter Intelligence .
~~ Operations office had knowledge of tha writing acrivitios :

“of Mr, E. Howard Hunt. This: belief was a matter of record
in tha files of the forner Security Research Staff and wag
attributed to Mr, Paul Gaynor, now retired, and Mr. Edward
Sayla,. . : Oo are

-.. 2, During this ‘interview Mr. Rocca was specifically
asxad whather or not he had knowledge of the existence of
eny forn of official Sponsorship or encouragement to Mr.-
_E. Howard Hunt to write novels to improve the image of
this: Agency. « Additionally, Mr. Rocéa was asked whether

Ji or er not any assistance was ever requasted of the Counter -

3 /* Yntelligence Operations offico ‘to be provided to Mr; Hunt ed

v whether or not that Staff had-ever had any Trélationship..- © i; ..

it "Hunt: whatsoever. . ‘In response to theso questions. rar

, .  Mt. “Roeea responded: ion the. record't that he has no knowledge - a

ae .of any such. arrangements nor at any time was he party to any - : :
-assistance or any xequests for assistance to Mr. Hunt. - Mre
“|. Rocca stated that the particular.section which he: had been. Ld ct
"most actively concerned in 2 past years-was. responsible
|. €or handling a variety. of tasks categorized under the area
of “sotting the record ‘straizht." In this scnse, the ‘image’. . - /
mission of the offica was to Counter misinformation. cur-.-
tly in the media or-ctherwise. believed to:be part of an.

‘effort’ to discredit the Agency. (Mr. Rocéa-faels that any

assuaption that Mr.- Hunt waS -engayed in any form of Agency | |

- sponsored image activity would have. probably lead to the. : ;

conclusfon that it was done under the Counter Intelligence DOs ‘ 1
Cperations. . However, Nr. Rocca emphatically stated that To:
this was not the case, mo. . ,



--- Page 30 ---
14-00000

i “e 7]
oN _
Pa) f : { a
-¢ i
7 i
3. Mr. Rocéa was thoroughly candid and cooperative
: ‘

i . during the courso of this interview. ile was unable to
suggest alternato means of atteapting to determine if
‘any official Agency Sponsorship of Nr, Hunt did in fact
exist. Mr. Rocca did venture tho opinion that he felt : Bo
that in all probability an official acquiascence on the . ~ bo .
part of senior. officials afght~hava’ been involved rather . : ce
than an. official sponsorship. It was agreed, by all in ,
this discu3sion that tha nature of any informal support
.' given to Mr. Hunt would be far nore difficult to define
- adn the. absence of any formalized. agreenents.. a

:

.t

A
oF

Lawrence J. Howe. oo

PAN lw phere nite

:
“t
!

ob.
:

s



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

6 February 1374 -

So io.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD Te i
SUBJECT:  Possibla Agency Sponsorship of the . Lo

David St. John Novels

la The details. Summarizing an interview on 4 February |

e /1974 with Mr. Valter Pforzheimer, Curator, Historical -

“: : Tatelligence Collection, were sét'forth in a Menorandun
fo “addressed to Mr. Steven L. Xuhn dated 6 Fobruary 1973, Mr. >
Yr . . Kuhnivas briefed by the undersigned on this information. -

e _ suring the afternoon of 5 February, 1974, Later the sane.
afternoon, at Mr. Kuhn's direction, 4 Conforances was held
with Messrs. Scott Breckenridge and. John Richards of the
Orfics of the Inspector General, cs . .

; 2. During this: conférence the speculation was entertained
that 3 Lite

ca : Mr, E. Howard Hunt had, in fact, been under Agency. os
we Sponsorship vith the knowledga of Nr. Richard Yelms in his Loom te
7 ‘preharation of a Soriaa of spy novels under the pselidonym, :
: David St. John. IF it can be accented ds a reasonasia Lo,
Supposition that Mr. Nuat had some highly compartzented © . : 4
financial arrangement authorized by senior Agency officials : a
to-write these books, then it is likely that this relation- _ can
Saip continued after Mr. Huat officially retired! It is oe Et
Ua |. spseifically noted that Mr. Hunt retired 30 April 19701 oS Uae

“ Subsequent to the retires ‘a David St: John ‘boaX apneared :

:, in ‘print in 1971 and angther ja 1972. .Thesa flanigcripts .

_ Ware apparently prapated ‘during. the time that Mr, Hunt was

| @zployad by tha Robert Rs Mullen Company... ‘

we : t
BLS roa the Offices g¢- ;
references ‘toa concern of Senator Saker ovet an 2llaged
| £inancial relationship between ‘Mr. Helms and Mr. Hunt :
‘which continued subsequent to Mr, Hunt's fornal retirement.
Senator Baker has ‘reportedly made reference to a payzeat
OF some thirty thousand dollars vith the PAréntharical

fnutas - fr:

comment ‘that Mr.‘ Helas would aot have that amount of uonsy



--- Page 32 ---
1400000 *

EY Sete cee

SER eves sy

NS ees:

f
i
7

te provide Mr. Hunt from

his private funds. Mr, Richards
of the Inspector General Staff opinioned that if tha -
Ageacy had sponsored the St; John baoks, it was likely.
that Mr. Hunt had so inforned Senator. Baker,
: 4. Adding possible. weight to this line of speculation

his old Agency issued alias, Edward J. Haailton. The .
Suggestion is that this writing effort was done by Mr. Hunt
- Free of. any fiduciary ‘Telationship with the: Agency involved
in tha use of the St. John pen nase, : ur,

+ Mr. Howard J. Osborn, Director of Security, was -

. Mr. Kuhn onthe evening of 5 Fobruary 1974,

Layrence Je Howe

“is the fact ‘that subsequent to publishing the last St. Joan —
’ moval, Mr. Hunt published a novel entitled, Eduardo, using -,

: Ss
brisfed.on the above by. the undarsigned in the presence of

Pee do gs,



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

Mr..Steven L. Kuhn |; =.

MEMORANDUM PORT
SUBJECT: The David St. John Novels

Sfecyiymada as. :

. | As: Oni4i February: 1974, Mr, Walter Pforzhoimer, Curator,:.,

 - Historical. Intelligence: Collection, was. interviewed ‘by the,. 5
undersigned: concerning his Imowledge of a series.of novels...

"written by Mrs B.: Howard Hunt,. This interview. was.-undertaken.

' at your request..in an effort.to determine if Mr. Hunt had

. acted in any capacity in cooperation with Counter Intelligence

-, Operations, “It-has previously: béen alleged in Office of

Security records that Messrs. -Paul Gaynor and Edward Sayle

_- <of, Security Research Staff, believed that Mr. Hunt. had written .

novels at Agency request and that this: effort had been known. ---- ~--- =.

to. Mr. James: .Angleton,. Chief, CI Operations.-°....;- _ be age cet

Ok ee aac fos : het care

7

Parr)

Oh By Mrs Pforzheimer provided ‘a verbal. summary of. his..... te
Inovledge of Mr. Hunt's fictional writings under the pen... 6

, Mame, David St. John. Mr. Pforzheimer stated. that when the

first St. John book,.On Hazardous Duty, appeared in 1965, he
_ undértook to identify the true name oF the author. Mr. _
Pforzheimer related that he checked with a source in the copy-.. -
| right office only to-'find out that the true name was not given
_/on the copyright application. The mailing address given for. oe .

‘the author was checked against a telephone Cross reference . = = mo
‘dirsctory. - The address on tha copyright application. was... - . :
identified with Mr. .B. Howard Hunt. Mr. -Pforsheimer Stated. -.
that after making the identification, he called Mr. Thomas
Xaramessines and related. his discovery. -. Mr. Pforzheimer: | ..
s¢alled from the nature of Mr. Karamessines' reaction that <
3 had uncovered a sensitive matter of senior officer ‘concern, |
rv. Pfrorzheimer stated that he then reconmended to Mr...
Karamessines that "if the Agency is involved in this thing
ciwhy not sée to it that Hunt leaves his address off the ‘copy- :
“: vight- applications inthe future." Mr. Karanessines. reportedly



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

|

accepted the suggestion and Mr. Pfortzheiner recalls that

Co, ot, subsequent copyright spplications wers submitted without. -+iu:
sos aoe ” _ the address, Within five minutes of the. conversation with-

“Mr. Karamegsines, Nr. Pforzheiméer rocalls being called by | .
“Mr, Richard Helms, then Deputy Director of Centrsl. Intelligénce,
- -Mr. Pforzheimer recalls the substance of the conversation as ~
po ’ being, "for Christ sako Walter, this is the first book to...
a come along and. say something good about the Agency." -. y. |
. -leave ‘the. Goddamn thing alone.” _ a,

_..o “£3... The undersigned asked Mr. Pforzheimer, who to his - _
4 “!‘Amowledge, would bei in a position to confirm or dény whether ~
we Mr. Hunt was undsr any form of Agency sponsorship in his ~:.
: +>. writing of the David:St. John novels. Mr. Pforttheimer replied

- 3 that he was never officially. briefed on the matter and|that =
‘only Mr. Helms or Mr. Karamessines could provide. the answer. —
. My. P£orrheimer was then asked if either Mr, Angleton or Mr. .
“Recea of Counter Intelligence Operations. would have any | oud
knowledge of this activity. Nr, Pforzheimer replied that he soe
' doubted -it seriously. rn :

-4, Mr. Pforsheimer went on to rélate that he was):
oécasionally tasked to do research for Mr. Hunt, Hé recalled
on:one_oceasion being asked to research the Indian religious

. yites involving use of funetal pyres.” Mrs Pforzheimer |;
remembered that this theme: figures significantly in Mr. Hunt's
subsequent novel Tower of Silencd, which appeared under the!
St. John pen name in ° Tr. Dforzhoimer parenthetically

pointed out the origin of the pen name as being the namés of.

Mr. Hunt's two sons--David ‘and St, John. |

.° + §, Tracing Mr. Hunt's caréot assignments, it is noted
that he was assigned to the Office of the Deputy Director
for Operations then designated, the DDP/Operations Group, in. °-
February 1965. The first David St. John book was published. ..
_ during 1965, From June'1965 through Saptémber 1966, Mr,“ Hunt
‘was assigned to Madrid, Spain as a Contract. Agent. During.
_1966, three St. John books ‘appeared in print, the highest ‘out-
“put for any year. Mr. Hunt published one book under the
St. John pseudonym in 1967, and one each in the years 1963,
1969, 1971. and 1972. Mr. Hunt officially retired as an Agency = -

Staff Employee effective 30 April 1970. .



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

6... A check of Office of. Security records did not develop
any indication that any of the David St. John manuscripts were
ever submitted for review in accordance with Agency. regulations.
There is no documentai eyidence. currently available to the

. Officé of Security to
: ‘sponsorshij of: the
the: pen ‘DRGs. David. Se

eC SoA A Bees fm,

a re
a veneer

Ln a aS

ALY ee) senaractmumerign



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

ORME £

on the matter, and that he was
eConstructs the matter:

a steady fiow of ‘spy books,

” that this acti ty Continued later,

that he raised the issue “up front"
“he recieved to his raising the issue
-desized toi
2nd that Hus

image" materials,
sf all the de ails = on anu

Hes
p.to do

ed and. wh
better than his at this date: fe:
“ven while on a TDY was told by a COS
‘from the Area deca

. toid Morse to forget about rel,

tr

AL This date; ‘at your instruction,

«> to seek his recollections regarding his

Mr, ‘Hunt ané any official who tight be aware o.
‘of any Agency involvement in that éffort,

2. Gen. Gaynor advised that his memory is
. "reaching, “ but stated that has he’

a. He became aware ‘that Hunt, While in WH,

and that security approval was not being re-_
quested on the manuscripts efor ‘submission t 5

; as he recalls
2greeéd with idea that the volume of writings was
that a great of time Was involved in Hurt!
on several occasions,
was that "keap your stinking noge out

- | Of this business." He stated that.he was lead to be

prove the image of the intelligence pr

d0kS- Were of the program.to do so.

was the case, ;
Was: the éase,

people might be able to-assist in clearing “>
Pforzheimner, ‘both of whom were involved,
ated that Piorzheimér. sestned to be aware
te basis - of Buat's departure from
relations firm, to the degree that Gen. Gaynor. -
twas merely moving his desk outside the building,
urée as before. :
ierént on what he was learning about Hunt's
1 the case for him, and suggested that her

ddle by complainiag,

ntionsd an incident in which Morse |
to ask Headquarters ‘to remove Hunt
use of his direct liaison with the pre
and othar activities which were Confounding

,
Copy one of one copies

€
(,

¥.February 1974

26 FL G4, MLS

, SUBJECT: General Gaynor's, Recollections

Tcalled Get. Paul F. Gaynor,
‘knowledge of the writings of
f the circumstances

not altogether clear

was accomplishing’

O publishers. (He stated:
it, in CI Staff, and

S sulficient to indicate

8 writing. ). Gen. Gaynor advised
- The reaction

clieve that Mr. Helms
ofession and the Agency
He

he

He also advised that he Kept

and what. resulted, might be

ont of the conatey,
station operations, Later, the COS

ing the message, with the inrolication that
hority in the Agency and the COS did not
He said Morse ~aoutd probably



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

c. He also suggested that another person--definitsly no frtend of
Hant--who might have sore recall or have picked up information about.
the book-writing matter might be Anita Potochki of Cl Staff, formerly of
Division D, (I gather that she did not have official knowledyé, but because
of her dislike for Huat, ‘she made It somewhat her businéss to follow his -
“career, Yoon: re ~s Sep

if

ewcnonr


--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

Nien} ’
SSIORANDOY FOR: Doputy Director for Support :
SUBJECT; — “Requawt-for Zxcogtion to Frovision of Jf :
a , “AS-10D =~ Taresce 3. Craze (PR) - - anaes ‘ 7
: :

ne 3 Tala xéioraacum contaizs 3 Secomsendation in parae 2°}.
Graph 4. for the approval oz tha Daputy Director for Suppers. 6 1 | -
°

_. . 8. Serence 8. Cue (3) 49 a Contract Employes as- 2 Uj
., Signed to the Madrid area in Spain in a sensitiys essiznoent. . .
. 3inge Als Gonaversion: from a St222 Savlozse on 4 July 1963.

- CRABANAC vas a S-15, stee 7 (319,830.00 Per annum) and ta
is Delany ypald at’ the same sate in his present contract :

status. 23 contract provides that tia iil bos eatitlad to
al Living quarters alorance in convomance. ATM rozulations
o® this organization applicrdle to its aprotated personnel,

The bagtc lying quarters allowances for Class YI
eeicersa da Uadria ig $2,900 par napum,. Tho hows? whiela
CRABANAC has located, with 2 one year leuse from 25 Zovenbes
3385 to li Novenbar i865, ha3 an ananal rent of 33,500.00
ofeludiag utairtios., Therefore, Jor ‘rant RSione, the Fil be ve
$1,989.00 ter year over She 150 percent sasinun allowed ~ :
“wader tee provisions 02:FR35-10b.. On 2.75 '23 pere
. -ghariag deals ofthe 69: serceat o7s ai
AS Would-be sut GYipoekSt 32,59 :
Bux to the operational Sensitivity of CRindyac’s
est’ for ssiie? on Ris orsign. costa was
33 Saranessines, ADD», . on ‘35 Sevtenter — :
ACE?, Avoroved his betas zeinbursed -
fox the exces allowable costs io. -
9 persant above his quarters S12
ikelsded 12 a latter to C7ABANAG Shon |
/Sequestiad Chat. cao Dapuiz. Director:

i
4.
¢

be
4



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

toe a Tyree ‘ ° > . “;
\ (. :
~ : ~ _
Sor Support adtzorizo ‘tha 73/2 3 percent shariag v2 the oxc rsa
Allowable bosts up ta so yertent shove bis quarter: u allowance,
7 S/. Te _
Swe Bévard, 3yan De
oe _ Acting Chiez © : Lo .
: uO : Bolsters Europe’ Division. cena 4 ‘
“ Poceaseniat tion da paragraph a “
7 a3 Butaorized: : i
~ , : i
. . son : . 957 ee 3
oa . Cherles MW. Dafa . : 83. tee a :
aa Biree or. vor - SeRperE ae Bate ; Tg
_ pot
i tr
orig’ - pont
j 4

Srags __
—2.= S5a-DD/S_
le C27S/38



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

yy
/ t wert, ~P .
: ( v
¥ Chis?, Wastera Fureps Neisioa re : 13 Ceteter 2555 _
AIR. .2 Support Stage :

Compensation and Tax Pivisicn
C£tise of Moance . ”

Doty States Naberts-Tereace 5, CRARANAC, Deplozaa
duner 179¢80 ; . :

RePerence ry FHa 20-20C0-2, paragraph 5..

/ 1.75 date tiers ts-no record of receipt of Perdis 74,

Buty Status Peporta,. for Terénea S, CRABARAC sidce his TOD”

“ & wud 1965. Thesg reports ore Tequited in omer ty Taintain ..
Bis leave asccunt In e8cordanss with the terss of parsers fo.
6(c) ce hag Contract end to preslade action to withnol? pay gal

" atcordanes with Tequirsments of tha refersiiced Rendbeo'e, :

ttt requested ‘that tats oftce te advised a3 to ee wb
the reason: ror the delay in the’ submission of ‘these Duty statny ae ce TF
Rozorts. oo

| LUCIE PL pucedea.
— . : Shier, el.
ae * Sentract sployeea Acconats Sacticn _

Lo Agent Payroll Srancy -
- Coypansatio: aad fs Diyisisnt ~~

S22720°33193, ad ca “Division -
vn Prpgped
- Calo? 02 Suspect, iy Division :

at

“‘Luciis:. ¥.

Per conversation vith
there. yili ‘38. 20 Dr ty Stat forts (Fern 734

Sa Ferencs S$. CRARNIC. Daig ld be used ag as
to continue nig 87 Without thése bovorts. ae

Ores.

Davis §
x)

Phoms® Sranessines

. Fovel2
‘Cals P :



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

sa. . . . .
. - ower. 2 T. .

3 Senterber 1945
\ . .
| coy Ve ‘ , So : . . :
sara FOR: Cater, Contract Personae Divietoa,, .

SURECT =: Generdl | - Terrends 5, CRABAAC = _ Supple
\ Specific ~ Paragraph Entitled "Oftsat™.

t

REFEREICS. As occ Opinion 65-2h76a, datea 12 Augirst 1955

7 B. Our e205 dated 8 uy 1965, Sane Sugeet
poe

~ Xs This oftide hereia- recomends on ancendzent to CRADAE LCts .
Supplement dated 4 July 1355, to delete Paragraph: 7. entlélea "Offset."

- a, This offic delaciisages the occ opinion, Reference A, which
deternixea CRABAHAC my retato without Agsacy salary offset: any future
royalties earned as a result of bis literary effarts based On the fact

Cover doza not includs role pr a writer,

a . .
3. As Subject’s cover "activities" Hsve been officianry clariftea’ Dg
aq vaing only a “Ligat One of a retired Foreiga Service O2ficar for : “}
atte ths Ageacy will Be baking all anbitlecedt Bayzents and actully
be will receive’ ne funda fro any cover, tals Paragrapa, which is mae tee
has no. teantoz- in Subjeds's contrac’ and it is berebdy recoanended teas .
it ba deleted ty fEod | caasducts Supplesent, _ ee, .

i
Fultner; in fintiee: cases whsn 3 éover is so Light 1 ‘that Sisjece
receiving funds fFon Corse {tis recomended that no "Ore. set” ,
includ lin Supplecents. or = Contrasts. me .

(2 WIR. ouursisia
_Chier, Covert Clatas Breach:



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

8
. i C8
\ a : ge *. OCC 65-2476a
\- | -E2 Aus jogs

”

_ MEMORANDUM FOR: Chiéf, Contract Personnel Division - a
SUBJECT: Terence S: CRABANAC - Retention of i
i 7 . Royalties bya Contract Employee 4
Bye OFS ee eey a
x ae
at
1, You have requested the opinion of this Office in regard ‘to - 4

the retention of future royalties which might be earned by Terence S,

CRABANAC as a.result of his literary. efforts, We believe that he is

“entitled to retain such royalties without an offset @gainst his Agency -
salary, —~ ar mo OC

. o 2.. We have been advised by Mi. Gene Stevens, WE/Support, that
CRABANAC's cover does not include the role of a writer; CRABANAC!s
“cover for status will only bea light one-of a retired Foreign Service’ ,
‘Officer, Therefore, ‘patagraph 7 of his contract dated 4 July 1965 may
- remain as written, Royalties from the fictional works, that he writes as
“a profitable hobby will not bs emola nts received from or through his
“cover activities." oa . ra an

1 ~

see

!,

-NORMAN'D. BLOCK |,
| Office. of General Counsel.

si Ee a

“ee? ‘Chieé, Covert Claims. Braich
7 Nee, Gene Stevens, WE/Support

Awan



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDUM FOR ; “otites ot General Counsel

ATTENTICN "  y Norimaa Blocie

i
i
4

Torence S. Crabanaci-- se ,
‘Retéation of Royaltivs by) =~ + oe. oon
8. ‘Coatract Employes : a

_ SUBJECT

. “oh Referonce is mace to the ‘telephone conversation’
of 28 July 1965 between yourself and Rogers C. Brooks of
this Office wherein backgrowd iaforreation relating to the.
assignment of Terence S. Crabacac was dlacussed. :

aa ate ith cin ea can 175.69 end

- 2. Subject will’ apparently: ‘develoa a Cover a3 a writes, ©
a fleld waereln he haa an already demonstrated talent based

_ upon several publications. “The objective of the cover is to pro-

“ vide-a basis of attribution for some of his jacome, At the time
ofthe preparation of Mr. Crabasac's a contract, the specific

" . detail of his cover was unknown.

oa

t
¥
i
4
L
oy

: 3. Request your opinion in regard to the retention of —
. possible royalties earned by Crabanac as a reguit of his.
Mterary efforts or whether such i income should be properly ~

- olfget.

. Josesh. 3. Ragan
Conte ract ‘Personnel Division

" Attas chments. _

_ : oP/CPD: RCBrooks ow: ‘2 August 1985

7 | Distribution: .
mye . . Orig & b-- Addressee
. "2 =. CRD



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

of your services and the performance of duti,

- and the performaace of Specified considen

* antes in conformance wi

" the course of all travel periornied hereunder and, whea auth

“assignment. All tr

vk | .
‘ 1 .
Nr. Terence S. Grabanaeé ¥ : .
a i : : . : 2

4 .

Dear Mr. Crabanac: - 2
— 7 : : : ut
a: . a
’ The United States Government, as

e I Tepre'sented by tha Contracting:
Cficer, hezeby. contracts. with you a3-a Contract Employee for the use
e3 of a confidsatial nature.

under the following terms aad conditions:

1. Compensation. Ya full considevation for. the use of your services - ‘3
Hal-duties you will bs compen- :

sated in’an asiount calculated at the rate of $19, 830 var arnaum. "In addition, -
“you are herein authorized legislative salary a¥justments, with’
Promotions and, iz Applicable, a post differential in substas
with rules and regulations apslicabls to Government aproiated employees.
Payments will be made as requested by you in writing dn an apotoved man- 7
ner. Taxes will be withheld therefrom and subniitted by this organization.

2. Allowances, You will be entitled t ta) Living quarters allow--
ith regulations of this OF ganization apslcabla to
its aopointed Personnel, In-tha event you are furnished quarters by the
Goverament you will not be entitled to tie living quarters atlawances herein

indicated... :

. ; _ Se (b) Cost-of-living allowances i~
in contormance with applicable regulations of this organization including,
but not limited to, a Host allowance, a transfer @Nowance aad a home ser-

vice transfer allowance. .

You will ba advanced or yelthburasd funds for travel |<
trans Hon‘ expenses for you, your debendents, your housahold ..
‘eiiecta and your perséaal automobdile to and from your permanent oost
of.assigsment, and for you'alone tor authorized Opstatonal travel. In.
additioa, you will be entitled 5 storaga of such household and personal
eliects as are not ‘shipsed, in conformance with apslicable Govésament
Regulations. You ray be enticied *9 per diem in leu of subsistence ia .

4 rized, for -
you alone while on ternporary duty away from your persianeat post of
avel, transportation aad per @ian provided for under
ovized, and expeasas incurred here-
ing in compliance with apolicadla |

this paragraph raust be properly auth

tadsr are subject te sa mment ant accouat:
J Pay

Goverameat Fegulations. : :

4. Operational asc3. You wil! be advanced or reimbursed fends
g. but not limbs to, ents

HATY ODaraAiional exzeases tn
vd the purchase of info io. ally aprroved dy the Goyv--

a
eat. Such funds wilt be subject
with avalicadle Govecnment r

3 Spechic

to payment.aad Accounting in comoli.
Nilons, .

ed that youe failure to Aceozat fos or
Maallentiidls the Covetar. ant to

te4B Or an isn Lrasool

8 comiove: FEN Bates as



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

. butions (presently six and one/!

-will be effected either by payroll eduction or
‘periodic intervals té ba astabli

~ of necessary hogpi:

| by you and your @speadenta in the above

under hia agreemonatand are ackaowied

6. Benefits. (a) You witt be entitled to death and disauility bonefits
equal to those authorized unde: the “ederal Employses' Compensation Act,
ea amended. Claima by you, your helra, or lepal Fepresentatives under
this poragraoh will be Processed by this orginization in Accordance with its.
Procesures in ouch manner as not to impair sacurity, * ,

“(bd You will be entitled to the continuance of pay and
allowances Ina manner similar to that act fosth in the Missing Persons
Act (50 U.S.C.A., App. 1001-1015). ct a Oo

- |. (¢) You.will be entitled to sick, annual and hom leave
(including travel exorases incident thereto) equal to. and subject to the same
rulez and regulations applicable t0 Government appointed employees, .
aly be taken at times and places approved in advance by
All accrued but unused leave
credited to yout ‘former account aa aa appointed employee of this organiza-
tion will be transferred 'to the leave account established for you hereunder.

: . (a). Aga Government employee under contract converted *
from staff statua without a break in service, itis required that you continue
to make contributions to the Civil Service Retiremant Fund. Such contri-~
half per cent (6-1/2%)) will be deducted by
the Government from ths basic compensation due you hereundex, i.e. ’.
presently $19,830 per annum. an os . :

. - - . fe) You are herein authorized to apply for enzoliment
ina health insurance program for certain selected Contract Employees of '
this organization, évbject to all the terms and conditions of that program. -
If accepted, this organization ia presently authorized to bear a portion of
the pre-nium. cost, you. will dear the remainder. Your financial contribution
by direct remittance ak - :
d by this ‘organization. ne

(9 ay This organization is aythorized to pay the cost .
talization aad related travcl expenses for illness o= fajury
‘States citizen full-time Contract Employee in tae line

jncutred by a United
of duty while abroad. : . . _ a

. . 2) This ofganization Thay say certain necessary
costs of hospitalization and relited travel expenzes for illness or injury
incurred by tha dependents ofa United States citizen full-time Contract |
Employee permanenily assigned abroad, while they ara located abroad. . os

It is understood and agreed that the eligibility and extent of the Particination
saedical programs will be tn con
formance with the rules, re 23 and policles of thia organization ta
effect at the time an illness o: injury is incurred, thai all shims will de
submitted only to this organization and thac Adjudication of such claims by

this organization shall be final aad conclusive.

ta fa hind) ressived fram or
ty of the U.S. Gavernment.
setagaringt amounts die you

to be payment by tia Governa-
tpsurpeses. {fC caver emolumeats
Seess

ra Ollaas. - Emolic {ia
trough your cover activities are
Procedurally, ouch emoluments will beso

‘oeauncer and far Tedeval income.
fF tals soviravce, vou wht dispose of the &

ea wis Covecasreniab bisteuctiong,



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

_ Se i

If, in the berformance of Services under
act, you a ue tie cusiedy of Goverament funds or trike tisls
_ a of Fecord to property of any mature wh *soever and wheraver dituate, wii

. Proderty has ja fact Seon purchased with monies ofths U.S, Goveram
you horeby Frecogaive and acknowly Qe the-existencs ofa tual relationshis,
. either express or Constr You agree to execute whatever Cocu- i;
; 83 may be requiroi dy the Government to evidence? this Felationsnis

v9. Seevecy.- You will be raguired to keep forevex Secret thls coatrace
and all information whiey you may obtain by reasoa hereof (unless relsazed
- G writing by the Government froma such obligation), Witt full hnowledye that
_ Violation of such ‘Secrecy may subject you fo criminal SFosecucioa under th,
. Espionage Laws, dated 25 June 19:42, a3 amended, aad other applicadls lau
y. and regulations. Lo a . : Oo

eaten

: 10. Instructions. “Instructions received by you fc0m the Government ©
fe an briefing, training or otherwise axe a Fart of this contract and ara incor
. _” porated herein, provided that such instructions are net inconsistent wiry

the terms hereof, . oo : ‘lous ae

Ml. Unauthorizsa Commitments,

: filning’to rights, privileges or :

o. "in writing in this agreement or any amendm
: the Government, : ao

12. Term, This contract ts etfective as of _4 July 1965 | aad shat.
continue thereafter for a peviod of two (2) years uniess Soonet terminated: ;

4a) Upon sixty (80) days’ acnial notica by either Party hereto, or

ee _ {b) Upon aciual notice to. you in the event the'resulta of aa initially .
. Trequired medical wamination are determined by this organization .« .-
to be unsatisiactory, or vo es hoo

{c) Without prior notice by the Governmies in the event ofa.

+ breach of this contract by your violation of the Security orovisions
hereof or by your “Otherwise rendering yourself Unavailable for
acceptable outvice. . “ ets oe

Subfsct to the availabitis, of approoriations, this agreement may be extsnded!
Upen notice from the Government _ in the evant of voluntary terminatisn on
yOUr part or termination for cause by the Covernmeni’p for te ths as
of this.agreement oF aay renewal they 20f, you will not bs eniided ¢
tra‘vel expeases to the Uaited States, Termination of this agreaams
not release you from the obligations of any security oath you may ba re
to take.” : :

ited
i
i

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

Pr DWE

Contracting CG

Se wn ene, . -

VIENESS: - APPRSYED:

two

BA ais SE seta Ries

