
--- Page 1 ---
£ —
“(104-10216-10234 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

7,
‘

Fa ste ¢ .
+ rat re Ad Fs ae ptt Sette he ory,

i July 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD :
SUBJECT: Test of Open Sight Hood for 7.62un Belgium (PAL) Rifle
REVERENCE: A) Memo for Red. dated 25 May 1964, Subject: PAt-
Bilencers/8ights, frow C/WH/8A/MOB/PX

Lycee. B) Meso for Bcd, dated 10 June 1964, Bubject: Teste
ee of Modified Sights for 7.62 Belgium (FAL) Rifle

ee SET AMLASH-/ |

2. On 15 and 16 Juke 1964, the undersigned and Mr. Bob
Ricker, T3D/SDB went to Isolation to test an open sight hood for
: the 7.62mm Belgium (FAL) Rifle developed in answer to Ref. A.
j The Modified Willians peop sight developed previously in answer
i to Ref. A and reported on in Ref. B. proved unsatisfactory to the
: " requester, The snap-on 6ight hood was then Geveloped on a quick
reaction basis to bo simpler to install and easier to use than
- the Williars sight. In addition scna improved underloaded 7.62em
RATO rounds having e@oft. annealed cases and cream of wheat filler
. Were tested for performance, These vere developed in hopes of

tho erratic sommnétion psrterassce, 20%06.48.R8f «,Be..x,- —

‘ 2. The open sight hood Snaps over the existing rear sight

_ Of the PAL rifle, and in theory makes shooting in poor light or
8% Bight easier. It can be used with either atandard factory

i.-1.- + loads or the underloaded asmunition in conjunction with the muzzle

: ‘attachment silencer, The notch on the rear eight hood is "U" shaped
. and raised to compensate for the nore curving trajectory of the low

. Velocity ammunition. The hood is easily detached making the con-

*: wentional peep sight evailable any tine it is desired. -.

i
3. The attached data sheet suznarizes the test results. It.

vas found that some familiarization vas necessary to get used to
2 thd open sight. Under ideal conditions the sight was as easy to .
- Use as the peep sight although it was nore difficult to maintain %
uniform vertical grouping. The relationship botween the eye and
. Year sight was found to be very critical. As the tests proceeded -
& change was noted in the point of impact ws. point of aim which was |

ee teeter

aoe Sane

thought to be due to a change in sight picture on the part of the
undersigned, . Oe

- 4. The improved axsunition was found to be quite consistant :
in performance. The use of crean of wheat filler to tamp the powder ot
charge against the primer was ag attczpt to get mors even ignition a
with correspondingly improved accuracy. The expended cartridge
_ C8868 were checked periodically and no evidence vis.found of the ~~ =
Soft ennealed cases not expanding properly. During the teste the ~
\ : wile and azwunition combination instilled a dogree of confidence

in the undersigned not present in the Previous teste.

Lanliie? 2. A aoe Be fe


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

och

“
=n

af.

S. Tests were conducted in the evening to determine the degree
of usefulness of the sight in poor light. In this respect a 22
Caliber Hi-Standard pistol with folding shoulder stock and Bushnell
1.3X Phantom scope was tested in comparison. The scope was
equipped with yellow filters to brighten the sight picture for
: low light level use. It was the opinicn of both test personnel :
i-- +. >. that the scope was superior to either the peep sight or open aight a
: foz as long as their vas some illumination on the silhouctte .
targets. Once the light failed the scope was completely useless
although the undersigned could still discern targats with the naked
eye out to 50 yds, All actual shooting was done with the open
- Sight and some difficulty was experienced in hitting the targets
: at ranges of 100 yds. or sore even at dusk. The closer targets
. could be easily hit up until it becass too dark to seo them at all.
A large rain cloud poving from behind the firing position Gradually
. obscured all available light. For the final shooting at 25 yds.
.’ | @€easional lightning flashes gave only a vague awareness of the
__ target location. At no time during the night trials was there an
7 "mugele flash visible from the under loaded ammunition and muzzle Z
: pYlencer combinatios. @ g45 por was '@ Old position
luring @ day Tials was turned on at night but no flash was
visible at the breech. A fine white cloud of cream of wheat
povder was visible in front of the muzzle at almost full darkness
- but could not be seen sore than 30 feet avay. .

6. Listener trials were conducted the following day to deter-
Sine bow far away an alert listener could discern the mechanical
‘ Boise of the mechanism and that of the round being fired. Mr. Ricker
Walked away downwind at an sagle of 90 degrees to the line of fire
and stopped to listen every 25 paces. The undersigned fired
_ Single rounds, (hand actuating the nechanise) each time Nr. Ricker
y Stopped, At 425 paces, or roughly 275 yds., Er. Ricker reported. _..;;
he could still hear the mechaniss being actuated, the round being.
fired, and the bullet striking a concrete pillar 200 yds. down~
range, However, he stared that he might not have noticed the sound
at that range had he not been listening for it specifically. :

* %, One of the major causes for concern at the start of the
tests was that the cream of wheat filler sight clog the silencer
and render it ineffective. A total of 200 rounds were fired with
the silencer in plsce and the noise level did seem to be higher at
, the finish of the second day. (Round numbers 180 to 200 were the . :
ones expended during the previously nentioned listener trials). nt
Inspection of the silencer at a later date revealed considerable a
cream of wheat residue in the screening. Sound level measurements
Bade in the AHF sound lab showed that while the total noise levei

". was no higher, the duration was relatively longer, This would

mako the silencer seem louder to near by observers but not increase  —
the range at which it could be heard. However, from a stand-
" point of tho ability for a listener to discriminate a silencer
being fired from random noise, the longer duration gives hin a
better chance to recognize what he hears.

+A ree mmm care. etna. erence te ek eh Sm scene eal Ss

Eee]



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

1 ese oe

laeeee cteemarie sO mmrnensninecen +

+ tan

3 Re 98,

‘od

8. On 19 June 1964, the undersigned vent to the warehouse
at Franconia to try to fit the sight hood to other 7.65mm FAL
rifles. It was suspected that the fit might be a problem when it
would not fit over the rear sighta of three FAL rifles at Isolation.
Although it was later determined that the throe rifles.vere of a
@ifferent lot and say therefore have different tolerances on the _
rear sight casting, it was felt that further checking was necessary.
Mine PAL rifles from the sane lot as those obtained by WH/SA/MOB/PH
were unpackaged and the sight hood tried on the rear sight. Of
the nine, two were perfect fits and the other seven too thick .
for the hood to fit. ‘This created a problem in that the sight
hoods bad to fit rifles which for operational reasons could not be
measured before hand to determine the thickness of the rear sight
blade. Providing adjusteent in the slot of the sight hood would
have complicated the fixture to the point where it could becoze
operationally unsuitable. Therefore it was determined that the
best solution was to provide several small files with the hoods.
The peep sight on the rifles, & soft casting, was found to be
quite easy to file. In most cases it would be necessary only to
file several thousandths to obtain a proper fit. This proeceduro
was explained to B/FM and he stated that it would be

acceptable. : -.
—w ye Ss . . .
ree Co 9. On 24 Juno 1964, three open sight bocds with accessories

© C/WH/BA/MOB/PH. In addition, 400 rounds of improved under-
loaded ammunition with cream of wheat filler vere provided as a
yoplaceszent for the original 400 underloaded rounds.

te ARE thee er

cad fro erew/en of two files and a small screwdriver were turned over
~ jt

cy 10. On 39 Juno 1964, it was discovered that a scope was availab]
for the 7.62mm Belgium (FAL) Rifle (Sniper Version) and in the Agency
supply syetem. Steps are being taken to obtain a scope for
evaluation, The results will be forwarded to C/#H/SA/MOB.

eat ced tet. ae

cee upp tatbdvadie at ebbet Sta sac


--- Page 4 ---
1400000”

io . : . 7 leak a calde

ae oe, si a aemtanep catenin

ote

STANDARD VELOCITY AMMUNITION, DAYLIGHT:
4 POINT OF IMP

“7 "+ RANGE RAMP SETTING Sigur TYR TYPS - (RELATIVE TO rou or AN
100 yds, No, 2 ‘Peep > | On
100 yds. No. 3 Peap On
100 yds, No. 2 _ Open 24" high a
100 yds, No. 8 "Open mood 26” high a

{ ‘SRLOADED AMMUNITION, OPEN siont,3000,, DAYLIGHT:

. POINT Of IMPACT
RANGE RAMP SETTING (RELATING TO POIWE OF am

23 yds. No, 2 3" nigh, :
25 yds. Ko. 6 3° low + ot .
$0 yds, No, 6 Ona ¥

75 yda, Ko, 6 a" lett’. 4" low

100 yds, Full Elevation 6" left, 8" low

100 yds, Full Elevation On (Diff. Shooter)

100 yids, Full Blevation 8" left, 8" ley

125 yds, No 2 8" left, 18" 1

125 yds, Full Blevatiog . On (Changed Bight. Picture)

5 (2 missed
target) | :

150 yds, ull Blevation On (Cacaged Sight Picture) ;
. Y oo
. . J» yds, Pull Blevation 6" low-(Changed Bight Pic- o- . 8"
. & ture) Sy



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000 te . 7 . . _ wen

: UNDERIOADED AMMUNITION, OPEN sicur ROOD, DUsHE foie ‘
. RANGE KO, OF ROUNDS Ws. OF HITS BOR MeOWTAL srneap VERTICAL SPARAD | newancs *

RANGE , CERTICA Bee “4 t

‘208 yes, 10 |. - ‘ si target | more | AS

Paes a |. clearlg through Peep -::+

ReOB ; ~ *"pight Gat mo rounds *:
2 - a - were fired.

oor” yds, 0 : Could ago target Rid
“clearly vith 1.39%

peepee

* GRDER:OADED AMMUNITION, ALMOST FULL DARK, ors
RANGE  - NO, OF ROUNDS KO. OF AITS”

~ 78 yde, 10
; . a :

238, yds. 0 * Could pipes targets out te

. -. 200 yds, with tilsered:
scope at start of L

“ £iring, could not wes.” ;
“ati ali. w/acope at

. _ Paatans ~
r . a I 7 . gO .
: “OERLOADED AMMUNITION, OPEN SIGHT ROOD, PULL, DARK: ; LO i
. RANGE NO, OF ROUNDS KO. OF HITS REMARKS ; i a . ee, ak
28 yds, 10 5 (scattered) Targot in total darkness, rain cloud overhead, inter.
my tat . m&Stant lightning flashes gave 8 vague. avareness of
so, k- ve vey Ss target Rocation. my . Hote

‘Spe _ - we

‘at


