
--- Page 1 ---
‘froamt0308-10044 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
: : : ro

yo i SECRET

ry

é

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: AMBRUSH Organization
Job # 63-345/6

File # 19-5-6
.. Dated included: Apr 61 - Jan 62.
Volumes: 1
1. Description; °
Revolutionary Council Anti-Castro Security and
Counter-Intelligence Team,
2. Findings:
No findings in relatimto the terms of reference.
Of possible interest: A document dated 19 August
1961 source: AMPAL-1, hand carried to Hqs. from WAVE
in August 1961. The document mentions "Cuban Communist
penetration agents in all branches of importance of the
U.S. Government" ... Mentions a possible "Castro
penetration into the Frente (FRB ~ Revolutionary
Democratic Front) and U.S. activities".
3. Other Agencies with Knowledge of this Activity:

Apparently, none,

. 93
Garbara Boyle)
\ Researcher

: o2 / CDH comment: Check out Eugenio MARTINESX again,
(sDIPSTREAM-1 said in 1976 that one Eugenio MARTINEZ was working
for the Cubans. A Eugenio MARTINEZ was involved in the Watergate;

a former JMWAVE Station agent.7

z(V


--- Page 2 ---
Phy jpnre- £

August. 19/61 06 )
Enclosed find an approximate list of expenses ‘that (Armando Nuner

|, Dee: GALE ance

Gave ind for cofsideration. However, he would like to talk it over
j}as to the. rest of: his: stay in the U. S. |

Armando Yunerojenclosed, a note he asked to have sent over, "Le Voz a
las Americas"(onda corta-~h ort wave). This is supposed to be some
| sort of signal to his O- Pe C. group in Cuba to get behind end

I. cooperate with information and sabotage. emer ren-
I did mt ‘talk to him as yet since 1 am awaiting word from you as t
this Monday's meetings with him.-----

August 19/61 ;
Jacinto Luzerraga, a friend from Cuba end former sugar mill ovner,

and father-in-law of Lino Fernandez(KRR» now in jail at the Isle ~«
Pines), told me that Dr. ‘Gntonio Valdes Rodrigued( 30th of Noviembr
Movimiento) was, taken to jail after returning to Cuba from Hiei '
_ Yast. time here, and not. es yet released. Jacinto arrived here wi!
“his wife ‘and-3 grendchildren about 5 days ago. He was formerly a
member of. ‘the fone old Cuban ABC Groupe It should be remenbe:
that Dr. (verdes) » received training in S/i, his last trip here.-----

August 19/61 |
Ben Volpe, now working at Holiday Tours, Biscayne Blvd., Miami, t:

me that his father, having come from Cuba a few days ago, told hir
that Federico Claramont, 1100 10th St., Miami Beach(living close —
them), is a suspected member of Castro's G-2 and known as such si‘
being in Cubae He arrived in tls Ue S.; Miami, as a political ex
“hich is & cover for his true mission herey and statuse----“=

August 19/61
‘Jacinto Luzarraga and his relative told me that it is being rwnor

that since only men are teken to Opa Locka by Immigration for 48
Fidel Castro is sending in many G-2 women instead of men for his

“elendestine operations here, between here and Cuba. I also heard

| ;
| |. | pumoréd that some of these agents are sent to tie in with Communi
in the U. S., various regions of the U. S. I have no other info.
this as could not find out more since it was told to me as a runc
. i

oo ' t
! &. August 19/61 ~
; —_ (Armando Munero) told me that ke gets information from his uncle

Guillermo Rojas, a-long time Cuban Communist who is nresontly wo:
i .
| an in the Imprenta Nacional at Havana.e He helped(supposed to be one

are Seniaas A



--- Page 3 ---
13-00000

an a od

v

“Cont 1a.6,-- the main) organize the library of the ‘Communist throughout Cube

. his uncla told him that Kruschev promised Fidel Castro that he -

|
| have missles in Cuba(this was a few months ago). Also, his unc?
|
t
{
i
\
i
i
i
{
!

that the Russians have spies in the Pentagon that pull for Fide? ;

Communists in all branches of importance of the U. S. Gov'te, a

Castro, and they have already plenty of agents bel nging to the
even in the Cla.
PS

He said that all people in Guba that worked vi

, the CIA were picked up through their agents end those presently

working with same are being watched closely. (tenerd told ne th!
he is kind of suspicious of Eugenio, his being Cuban and because
a sort” of sixth’ Sense, as he calls Bere n cess ennen aes

August, 19/6. | ; ae _.
-Bart told me last week that Juez Garceran was the one that sent °

letter you’ ‘received to Carlos Prio as. “he recognized the handwrit

on both envelopes. The above judge bold Bart that some have bee

: ‘given Salvo. ‘Conductos to Hext co and ‘that ‘the Italian Embassy is
emptying’ out some. This judge is ‘the’ one that made the list of

| people held up in the Italian Embassy, that you received from Bar
-Bart told me that he thought that Alberto Del Junco(KDC),that I «

in touchysvith is getting aid from ‘someone from tho Ue Se Gov'te <
Del Junco's sister saw him this past Friday night at his hore anc
ave him $5,000.00 in U. 5. Dollars(money) to send through the Po
to Cuba to be given to her brother dorm there. She didn't want t
disclose to Bart where and from yhom she received the money, and
| ‘ony said that it was from his group(DC) here. Bert thinks that

j this is not true. Ee sent the money down elreadye

‘ peace ee nme me eens sm tan il tine ata omnes
. my

~Enclosed(marked in pencil, #7) find photostatic copies of letters
sent to Oscar Diaz from former F.Castro Pres. Urrutia and from a

Macaroni that Bart kno ws. It is self explanatory in Spanish and
Bart says that he knows that the air strips showm on enclosed mep
are truely in existence. Part’ received these photostatic copies -
to his suggesting same to Oscar Diaz upon delivery. I couldn't tr
this letter to you a few nights ago as he had to deliver sane in =:
nour of the time I visited him. However, I suggested his trying t

stand by when the letter was opened. Oscar Diag liked Part!s idee

‘maki hotostatic copies of. sme and Bert asked for one for hime
ma ng, pote bats. pi SME Y coer

t-te on Pm em we QT oe ae oe


--- Page 4 ---
13-00000

od

oo so a

“

Cont td. ‘Se It seems that Captain Despain wants to break up the Intell.Serv:
. @ | of ythe Frente due to lack of funds, sty s Dr. Fideze However, dv:

having tried to find out whether this Captain Dospain wag Ernest

we were not. suree Having been introduced upon our 2nd- visit las :
F Friday 5, 9:30 A. K.(first visit was 2 days previously at 9330 A.!!
we \ were presented to. Ernesto Despain, the person we were looking.
some tinie ‘ho w(due tovhis relations with Ceferino Alvarez (G2) en:
‘Josefina: Socarras(Ceferino's girl friend, of whom I have been wri
abo ut for © me ‘time now). We started to get places,with all ful
cooperation,the first: time there as we spoke only to Dr. Fidez. ©
second time, with Despain present, we felt that we should not fo
many ‘details. Dr Fidez. ‘told us that Despain was planning on sx
him with a delegation to Puerto Rico. I feel, as well as Frenk,
this Dr. Fldez. (around 60 yra.’ old) is a person that could very «
_ organize his office to be of very. valuable service against Castro

‘ his Communists here in the States, as well as in Latin America wh

_.they al ready have. their, own agents operating. It is felt that De
is trying to get Dr. F'dez. out of the way because he recognizes |

importance of the planned Intelligence Service the Frente , throu:
Frdeze, gam which could produce a very strong arm against Castro.
| Dre Fideze ‘says that they ‘ere now working on the ABC form as used
against a former president of Cuba known as Machado. Enclosed is

an idea of how this group functions and are placed into many walke

>

life of importance to this causee. Their work is mainly of Intell

ac aeinmnaatan Ht 8 ARMA a REA RA

Service and in a form of cooperating with the U.S.Gov't. in all we

possible witteut trying to get monies, if-possible, to function. 12!
presently trying to get donations to: $300.00 to keep his office fo"
for a month. Upstatrs in the seme building, they have radio operas!
(very well experienced) continuously monitoring all phases of impo:

ance in Cuba( sugar mills, etc.). Frank Asked Despain if the file °

had in his hands was for use Despain was caught a little off bounds
as he became somewhat unnerved, but soon rallied and opened the fil
showing data on boats, but taking creat pains to keep us from secin

‘the contents. I didn't went to press the point arousing ony suspic.
- Dre Fideze introduced me as a Joe Anderson, FBI mane I had former]

cautioned | him wapainst. referring, to me as anything Special, whieh ha

4S

pe | |


--- Page 5 ---
ow

. . ~
a “ .

| Cont 'd.8---4-dta anyways JI let it go at thet to see the’ ‘developnents as it vr
4
| no ‘use to refute him again, However, when we parted, I aia nonti.

him agein that he should not do so at rendom as I did not think 1

necessary nor what we had agreed upone Dre Fideze did say so 9s

iritroduced us to Despain as his Jefe(ch rief) and. wanted to show hi

loyalty at the. same tine explaining to him that he wes cooperatin
with us in all ways possible against Castro and Cormunism, which

plainly ‘seen that Despain didn't like at alle Despain sat silent
‘no questions asked, hard, eyeing us as if. weiting to see how far

‘FBI had gotten into matters of the Frentee I did not ask the Dr.
questions I wanted to and only seid ‘that I would like to be in to
with him at all times. Enclosed you: will find photostatic copies
letters sent by Cubans here to Prague and the answers of same. ¥
“told me to ask him how he got this information. Idid not feel th
‘should. have done so at the moment. However, I will be in touch +
Dr. Fldeze again soon as I said I woulde ZI will not go to the of:
of this Intell. again.as I was elmost seen by a Frank Paez, Pepe

: Aguero's friend. Pepe Aguero is Paula Grau's husband, now heree

turned my head. away, I think, in times Dre Fdeze says that he hea
| of more information to give me and that loads of stuff reaches hi
| daily, all of which he can turn over to me for study. He said th:
“| will get for me Cla files that the Frente has hidden and vant to:
with him. I feel, if Despain, is out of the way,. I could do much
Getting vwhat.is needed of them. I do not feel safe with him arou:
| I may be wrong, tut that is the way I feel at ut security with h
T promised to return the enclosed photostatic copies but feel thai

‘| of: the-files-can-be taken over for copy for the asking, as Dr. F!-

| said he would cooperate to the fullest.

i Dre Jose Julio Fernandez: Office(9 to 1l A.I.):FR-1-5133

—-----—. Homeffrom 8 Pelie to 8 Aste) 1-4-1853
Frente(from 11:30 A.il. to 1 P.it.)s

| FR-4-2650-358-59

Ee holds a: Frente Carnet No. 102, Frente Revolucionario Democratic

(FeReDe), Delegacion de: £1 Salvador(Rescate) and receives #20006



--- Page 6 ---
13-00000 Rat -

a
4 ow

t

at i . “

8. i| August 19/61 . , ea aet) «
i | Fomk Arias has given me the following information (alee! DESP net)

(x .
; o _ Cap ‘toin(Lieutenant, known: fomeriy as) Ernesto Despain, head of +

Frente Intelligence Service at 14th Lane Hiei with, ontranc
197 .
in back of building at,15th Street, off Brickell Ave., worked for |

with Ceferino Alvarez(G=2, known as) in Government Insurance(Segu:
Gobierno) ma formerly in the now non-existent BANSECO(branch of”
National Bank of Guba). Josefina Socarras worked with them also :
Seguro det Gobierno « I have written of Josefina before through !
findings of Frank, who kmew them all in Cuba(not Despain directly:
only his family). “This Captain Despain is an intimate friend ‘of +
Ceferino and Josefina(planning to go to New York soon). She has r
trying to get mothing started here, as reported before. It is

strongly urged thrt this Josefina be ‘surveilled constantly as I,

as well as Frank, think that she is affiliaged with Castro ts cland

Jactivities here in jhe States. She received monthly checks from +i
of Centro Refugt ado, Cap tain Despain is planning. on going to join t:
|U. S. Army. “He 1s definitely strongly suspected of giving everyth:

of Intelligence to Castro and is tied in with the Communist end Co:
groups heres He may even soon plan to disappear from the scene -and
should not be allowed to get off easily. He has been kseping Dr.

Jose Julio Fernandez from organizing his enti-Castro and Anti-Coiui
‘files due to lack of funds(says Despain). It seems thatrhis was ju
an excuse before and was done to keep the ball functioning, as.shoul.

bee -2 think that this Dr. Jose - Julio Fernandez is very sincere m:

is innocehtly giving everything into the hands of Despain without
| knowing. How Despain got into this position is not Imown by us vet.

| As far as we are concerned he | is a Castro penetration into the Frent
|
|

land Use S. activities.

The above is the, result of being gent to see Dr. Jose Julio Fornande

|

i ce i| head of Intetligence Seryence of the Frente(as told us by Fopacr
| Guban Gri. Socallanes, friend of Frank}x I went with Frank to try t
1

find out abo ut a woman whose Egntone of two of them) had talzen data
and: pictures. for Castro of al military end naval installations in t°

State of Florida.

ea ag ne ae ew meee ae


--- Page 7 ---
1 enyrorss tO I Ot et

ow

~

‘Enelos sed find the groups belonging to the Frente that yas writte
for me by this Dre Fldeze .
“Enelosed find(# 8 marked)"Reporte and Informe"(2 sheets) Given me
Dr. F'dez. to. show what they are doing now.
Dr. D'dez. informed me of the following:
‘(aje A Communist militent; Alberto Iglesias, 425 Cedar Lane, 2
__ Meadow,’ New York (Phones :1V-1-4368 and 1V-6=4547). He is a
“Resident of. the U. S. for more than 20 years. -He has his
, business,"Amorican Welding and Boiler Yorks Coe". This i:
man to’ be watched as he even uses his business ‘as a front.
(b)« Mario Garcia, Miami Ventilated Awning Coos Ines (works at):
. presently’ asking - Immigration permission to ‘£0. to Cuba end
considered’as one of Fidel Castro's heads here. with a gre:
"many ties. eke
-Brielosed. find a break down of exp enses of the Frente Intell. Offi
- given me ‘by. Dr. Fldeze, my asking him for same. Frank Aries is
helping the Dre bet funds for the melntenance of this office for
least another months I think that this set up should be taken In
studye -cenn--- | .

August B61 a
} Enclosed find marked: #/9, 2 documents, given me by Emanuel Cervajoa
‘last night which are self-explanatory in Spanishe One is a list
exiles in their Costa Rican Embassy in Havana, and the other is 2
éocument(copy) signed and given today to the Minister of Foreim
Relations of Cuba in Havana. It seems that there was very much
discussions concerning sane amongst the foreign diplomats. in Cuba
The Egyptian Embassador(RAUsSyria, etc.) went to the first meetin
the diplomats had in Habane concerning the new monetary exchonses
Ee first agreed strongly with the rest and promised to sign the
£nclosed type document concerning the new $ exchange in Cuba. TT
first meeting was held last Monday, Aug.l3th, and they met again ‘

‘a second time on Thurdéday in order to sign. UHe(name not Imorm b:
Carvajal) then refused to sign and did not even ‘show up which ind:
ted to the remeinder of the diplomats that his money must have ber
exchanged in the full anount to keep him off the list of simature
The Swiss Charge D'Affairs informed at the same meeting, to the
Diplomats, that he received information from his Government that ¢
Swiss Gov't. was checking all present: Cuban bank accountants exist
in Switzerland and were readying themselves to act accordingly in
case the Cuban Gov't. should not reach any agreement in regards to

the ‘exchange with the Diplomats.


--- Page 8 ---
aa

~

oo , fo

j--4— The Japanese Embassador said he informed his Gov't. about these

oh fftoulties as a protest against. the behavior of the Cuben Gov!

“mis he. told. at the Diplomatic meeting.

| ~* About a week ag; there was a hunger strike at the Brazilian Smt
by the exiles there. However, they gave up as a gesture to onlF
obedience to the Enbassador. “They protested against not reccivi
salvo conductos ond other things.

- This coming week, Monday or Tuesday, the Diplomats again are Cet’

together at a meeting to protest before the Cuban Gov't. about t

lax ‘end puEgesefuzt desi ming ways of handling this (affair, and

oa remind the Gov't. of their obligations: ‘in extending the courtesy

“according. International. agreement se ot

- Carvajal asked me not to mention this, but later said that he
informed us about Bnbassador Guiros leaving Havena this Thursday

“ashe was being recalled by the Coste Rican Gov't. for cnsultati

/ Carvajal will be in charge | of the Embassy for the time, bat said
he ‘didn't expect the Bubassador to return as he-is teleing 1 his fa:
and house nold itemse — . .

. He slso told me agein that Eduardo Odio, Gosta Rican Consul ine
“Havana, was a’ ‘person not: to ‘be trusted by many experiences they K
already ‘had with hime ,

= bo wer a eiren Stews pos ¢ ;

4 Clem a uo Mearkes) Oo tAe calles Lp PST pene hr Pages

he avrence Cmte Tieneh | RIL a hoy een sors

Hivhgel a af cb hon CES Pree Po -ttee
WE. Of. P pone!

rt he ve ety Lo on Gy Aw?

ee _ iad ¥ ¥o hiaaen te hay
| Yun. | or sar UGS VE ah, “ys OHM fey Sao!
i PEO INE fer ORBLE BE

yo vo fe poe feel VELA
7 : 7

Weer

