
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

i
104-10182-10003)

2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | i

HOUSE SELECT COMNCLTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAPF MEMIERS-

FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: £47170 ¢

_ DATE. DATE
’ -RECEIVED.{ RETURNED

222007 >4

2 FOG ANS


--- Page 2 ---
possesses no right, ‘title or ‘Interest
‘out of. said relationship and he fure
ther solemaly. swears that he will never “divulge, publish or reveal by word,
conduct or any other means the fact of eaid relationship mor any such knowledge
_ “jor information arising. there except as authorized in writing by the sane.

. off total of the Governnent as that who. witnesses this oath, .



--- Page 3 ---
-Of .the safe_house
at 51 Kuhwaldstr which WIROGUE occupied during his 1 1/2 year
“association with HA RD ‘(this is-no ‘longer a. HARVARD safe house) .
o me . a , < Cl0.:did’ not tel his. name’ over, the: telephone and indicated
wae . : a that he would be able to recognize “Dave”. ‘C.0. picked "Dave"

. oS - up on the corner of Volta.and Kihwaldstr and drove: a couple of
blocks - to a parking place where ‘the’ conversation took place.

C.0. learned that WIROGUE was. no “longer employed by the
Compaiy - -in Munich, ‘He apparently has had ae -couple of

work, “without ‘friends, without
ola: office because he is
Subject stated that he had tried hard
an- Germany, but that there was

N 2 ' Lt ‘was obvious

there. was no: sibilities 5 of future one igyecat. with the ‘Agency.
Subject’ said that’ the purpose of his telephone call was to advise
us of his plans ‘to go ‘to Paris and atte to contact. the: .
; his ‘services: inal

”. Had no ‘Control UE vould aétions it vould seen a “pit: surprising
“that che wo  delibertely place. hiniself in ‘the. hands. of the
French. aut {ties whee ‘he. was"known’ to have a criminal record.
WIROGUE implied that: he.. yould obviously” tell all. to the French
-- and indicated, ‘that che was nd& concerned about. any actions that
: they would ta against him....He. appeared sure in an extremely
vague. and confused way. that. the ‘French Tatelligence Service could
. use Nim. ©



--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

aa

‘of thé length ‘scusSions WIROGUE let it’
as not very happy ‘about ‘the treatment He _—
he. Anicricahs+-that. he felt he had been .
ppéared’ obvious to.C.O. that ‘if ‘we had no .
‘s. threating to tell-his' story to the | —

hitch he presumably feels we would ©
‘ _It should be stressed that ,
“ plintly presented. It was. ~ oe
sof his. plan to leave for.
id and that he ‘wished

: In the. cour!
be known that
had .recéived f
dropped, and it
“further work f

. “appealed to ‘him share
biy’ bé-unhappywheréver he ‘goes.
Subject’s belief§ that “intelligence work" was
the only ¢ which he was suited. C.0. @p expressed the view
that he should get ‘his head out ‘of ‘the clouds and his feet on
the ground--that_he should: find a job, however BeN¢Mar, and throw ~
himself into it. At this point WIROGUE said that ££ at one time .
he had told Mr.°Murman:of-his’ desire to ‘become a driver or
chauffdY. b hat Mr. Murmann told him he could find much more

t. With a certain amount of disbelief C.0. : '
with -him telling. WIROGUE that-Q@if he waza was
axna in believing that this kind of employment
g to-him,that it was the first sensible thought
he had expresse n “the: course of .the discusSions and that c.o.
would: determine whether it would ‘be possible to assist Subject in

_ > obtaining. a Wes jerman driverfs’ license (Subject indicated that-
‘ -he had.a Congo drivers’ licénse when ‘he arrived in Frankfurt
ts Loe, jough it was issued in ‘another name). While Subject pretended
ee “~~ to have va genuine. interest in obtaining such employment-- and
: ‘used this. to refute ¢C.0."s accusation. that he ‘only wanted to start
at the top and considered most kiftds 6f honest employment as
being. beneath him--C.0. is highly skeptical of Subject's motives.
‘WIROGUE was told.to call Makes (xkisx Mac (this is the only name
~ Lis .-which.-C..( i) oO. WIROC oO! e following. day (Thursday, 1
7. October) wo et him know whether hi uld-help - ~~ 2. ..2-7 3
“him obtain a, West German licens #IROGUE-was—quick—to—point--out———_______
: that a : aio a : : a :

satisfied
°C.0.: disco



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

: : Pp
he merely wanted to visit with C.0O. whom he. considers. to be
his only friend, at least in Frankfurt. He \said™ that his work

with the Munich ‘firm a ae very well and :is coming along

fine. He received his rst month's salary and expects to go

to: Munich .. on’ the first: part of May for consultations and

.Would then, around 30 May, move to Munich: permanently. .C. 0. :
told. Subject. that he. would be leaving for the U.S. probably ‘
the first. week in June and Subject asked if: they. could have . .
dinner together at least one more time before he left. :

Subject sate the’ ‘had signed the contract, detaiis of which
: previous ‘given_C.0.,. but -was sorry. that he. had not
brought the contract with vhim and promised to. show it ‘to’ C.0.
the-next. time they met. Subject thanked. C. 0. for all the
help~he had given-him to enable him ‘to make a new Start and
anted: the Lunch to. bé- a small token of his appreciation. He
also paid’ C.0. 20.DM: which had. been loaned him a-year and a half
arlier. and ‘gave C.O. ‘a- ‘small French cigarette lighter: as a.
rememberance. °C. -O.. dropped Subject off downtown And suggested
they have lunch, perhaps the first or second week in May.



--- Page 6 ---
: reports) and. his European sales representative had met with

‘director of the firm ‘in Munich "(reported in previous contact .

the Munich firm. Subject said the following had been agreed
on: .

- Subject would reccive:.1500 Dif a month salary,
free living. quarters in Munich, the cost ‘of
maintaini his'a rtment in Frankfurt, expense
account, #ies perce! ge of the profits realized.
from any of. Subject 's ‘inventions. patented, by the

. firm, a work shop in Munich plus. absolute personal
freedom of movement regarding working hours, etc.

ete.

c. 0. told him that. the ‘above. was very “hard to believe,
“that he should have this in. writing. ‘Subject Said that it”
was to be drawn-up -and Sent to him for his signature.

Cc. 0., of course, expressed his jelight wity Sybject" s
perspicacity and perspicuity and t but not Get? boundless
Cc. Qo. asked if this would mean he would be ‘moving to

tends to spend most ‘of his time’.in Munich, however, and
“will. ‘come to Frankfurt. once a month to oversee Nagely's work
on the. production ‘models of his. ‘projects. Subject intends. to
do the research and development. work in Munich with Nagely in.
Frankfurt: making “the: finished model. : , .



--- Page 7 ---


--- Page 8 ---
14.0000 . . . . : * . ‘ mt

li March 1964

¥ ROGUE s background prior to cei no

his activities while associated with KUBARK, \ °
HARVARD 's attempt, to prepare Subject for a \

> nd Said that we are now in a position to quit

claim him and close the ise and ‘that we wanted to bring OCA \

up-to-date on the status of-Subject's case and to find out if 4

‘there are any loose ends. from. Bonn's point of view or HARVARD's

hich Should be tightened, up -prior,-to cutting Subject loose. a

- ince December 12, 1962 when OCA
ve Teceived a. “query. from: th: BEY. ‘regarding Subject, HARVAnD had
: ibeen trying to. reach the po. t Where Subject could be ‘on his
: d thi d-redlized that after the.
gnition interview fiasco had brought
n of the BFV, that to enable Subject to
to Stay here without continuing
yuld require. preparing a complete life
with a new political recognition interview
Both the-Lebenslauf. and a new. interview story were
an : and copies of the: old story were removed from the
various iles and replaced by the new. C. O. said that HARVARD
' Bad two questions for Bonn #ad—tkat (1) at the time of the
original BFY terest in Subject id OCA promised Subject $e .D



--- Page 9 ---
a copy... -
‘cal recognition



--- Page 10 ---
\ REPORT ON CONTSIT W.

‘ susseery. . WIROGUE

“patsy «M0 March 1964
"1500 hours -

‘Oderweg & Glauburgstr. |

ti * ste no time since an

adividual is required to: deregister and re-register within a

ad of 8 ‘days: ‘and. it: “now the 10th of March, Subject.

: -that since-his rental contract. dates from January 1 and
that: date is indicated: on. “the. ‘régistration Slip,the police

: will question why -he waited so. long to register. C, 0. told

‘ him-that the anSwer was Simple and that he wished Subject would

not ‘bother ‘him with such small problems, C.-0. told Subject

to get an Anmelda-fornm and fill. it out:and have his dandlord

'$ign that he inov into thé apartment on 1 March 4

 tomthenkasdlardethst he: ‘had- been deregistered as. of ‘2- ‘March.

"Subject said that he ‘had already _ figured this out but that he

an excise to meet C ‘O. and. ‘talk to chim, _ 2.

He showed c. 0. unich Konto’ “check for .4, 000 DM which ©
d received -for developing a dévice: reported. in previous

t reports and: went on,-to say that his business trip to

~, Mur chad been ‘reasonably ‘suécessful. He had discussed the

' development | of several new devices with, the director of the
Munich firm and was now in the process: of working on another
device for the firm, He had made. arrangements whereby he would

receive no eaypept for the ew device but that the’ firm would use

: je =
‘come to: “Munich to sVive-and ‘work. Subject has” agreed ‘if the’ offer —
“turns: ott to be- w rth his. while, C.:0. congratulated Subject
and told him to. continue the good work.



--- Page 11 ---
14-0800

given a.copy of his new political recognition

nd was asked if he=had any questions regarding
Subject replied that the story was so long he

could not pessibly memorize it completely. _C. O. told him that -
the intent was to provide in detail any and all facts which in

the future might be of importance to him in thé ‘conduct of his

affairs, ° - a ; ; oo sf

os ..- Subject. was asked. about his plans for the: future. His

answer was that. the Director ofthe firm (reported in contact

re 17. February 3} 4) had: invited hin to come to Munich on
6 > di: among. othér things, the possibility of

engineering department, This plus the a

a agreement. with BOHLER-& CO, :

i ‘as an éngirieering consultant might

calize his ambition, ice, to have a position

ordinary job. ,

Cc. O. quitelaimed Subject and wished him luck,

Subject asked that .C. O. be sure to let the higher echelon
know he eciate for—hins—.

b act. is at an end.

ject an invitation for a friendly .
. . - get. together from time to time. C..0. replied that if business

Te oo, matters permitted he would .be glad to meét Subject. coe,

ul x ’ I ; cia
he hoped that C. 0. would not ré

«Subject jovially announced that thoy would probably meet
“some day in the U.S.. C. 0. reminded him that. any action on his
part which would involve: ihe taking’ of fingerprints could: have -

dire consequence. for Him.. C: 0. went’ on to report ; bad

‘told Subject months Garlier and that 138:



--- Page 12 ---
a,;. Australia, ‘ete.
ERPOL -&: O co 7

é £/HARVARD
“Such a letter it
pose him to any more of our M.O.

- Wevcan : if ubject néeds + Such a letter he will
contact HARVARD. eS .

rae of to inet Case bat cate sable ne B tatrsis, none
: 5 p a ° mot . .



--- Page 13 ---
‘ms
Sub db the -impreé
anxious to get r fe) im.and also seemed to have doubts
“as to his ability -to:take care of his em financial problems.

C. O. laughed in turn’ and said hé would indeed be glad to see
Subject on his ownand added that he had‘ no doubts re:

Subject's ability to get money but that he is only hoping Subject
_would use.‘methods acceptable to society (chuckle).

7. Since: Subject ‘had both. English and German versions of his
legend,.C. 0, ‘took. the English copy with the explanation that .

.. if ‘Subject ‘Should: submit a.Lebensiauf,.'in connection with a
‘job application, -th ».German version would be more appropriate,

bject to Lunch and dropped him off in the

C. 0. took Su
evhim-on the 2nd of March, -

city after 2 mising t “8
NK 0.0. pub Pp Shits Restacenes LEG Rat wastf)



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

a C. 0. asked if the new copy

\ have to be: changed. or replaced. John made’ a,not of what

: the. change ‘of name should. really be and told C. o Aa ave all
the new copies é¢hanged to read Frank Simon Sanders. John said
that ‘this sort of thing happens from time to time; that it is

_ just a. Simple error and will. raise no eyebrows.

7 then brought up the point that Subject’ s.
pire in October 1964 and we-and Subject were
ould run into any. problem when he went
to get a ReiSeausweis rencwal. .Jolin
50. problems that: he could see: but to
$ 2». we’ Should pick up Subject ' s

aN Retna.

ne or. two days, dated
ip ick up Subject 's

Lohnsteurkarte Jand deregistration slip. If this works ‘cut,
‘our plans to wesxuith Subject will be accomplished this coming
.Friday : ,



--- Page 15 ---


--- Page 16 ---
 WIROGUE . ;
“17 February 1964 -

”-4345 hours:

. $Y Kuhwalastr. | |.

resolve any q ons i
would -bring a Sovi realities'expert with him who could
‘answér ‘any. quest: n¢ he might ‘have. Subject gave c. 0. his
copy of the old: political recognition interview story plus

‘receipts which indicated he had~paid 390 DM “Caution” and a
rent receipt: for 300 DM.for the month of February. He also
showed C.:0..his_.re! al’contract for the 6 month period
starting February 964. Subject gave C. O. a bill for
410 DM Slower plate. C. 0. gave Subject the '
i : the bill and get the réceipt |
to-C. 0, Subject was. told that

ay ch of March, deregister him

atter part of the * ék, and give him. the |
jion-slip. ‘He was’ also told C..0. would. deliver -

itical recognition interview story. to hin
‘ . ect was not too pleased to hear that
d because his Reiseausweis expires in
c tobe . feels that it might not be ‘renewed
. unless he is under the protection of the U.S. Army. .C. O.
“.gaid he feels there is no réason to worry unless Subject is
not working and, thereby ‘proving that he is not an industrious
law-abiding citizen. ~ Subject. Said that he has been trying to
nd .tol O. the f llowing story:

: . Subject, ‘ igs “about=the: city
accident met the Frankfurt epresentative of a. Munich firm

-which: manufactures a device ‘called the -"Starlettograph’ which
is used in the printing. industry: Subject told the sales

. representative how. his product could ‘be improved and, as a

Towel

on)

%
;
|

Pp EP, pe



--- Page 17 ---


--- Page 18 ---
the apartmen
repapered.

2. O, paid Subject DM. 1,000, DM 800 of which is for |
‘subsistence. and rent ‘for: February and the remaining DM 200
‘tobe applied. to the one month's rent in advance required
by the landlord, : - .

, C. 0. told Subject’ that all copies but one of his original
political recognition interview story had been recalled ‘and
‘the German ‘language version’ of his LRbenslauf. was ‘now being, ut
used to provide the: basis fora new story. €.:0. told. Subject .
that ‘as ‘soon ‘as the new story was prepared, copies placed in

.the various files. and the one remaining copy of. the old story

sméved from its file, Subject would be for all _practical
“purposes, his own boss. — . _ so

-° \G,-0, told him. that: we have decide lp hin get a new
start by (1) paying the cost of having his denture repaired,
(2) by paying DM 200°on the DM.300 one month's rent in advance
Subject must. pay, (3) by providing DM 800 per month for
‘subsistence and housing until he can be legally on his own,
4)_by..giving hin. th' pri to - ;

: 1 (the Household =
Y ron, ‘the. vacuum” oo
cleaner, ~ ; rather, perfunctery. thank you

was: Somew! t , O. had..expected.and when €. 0.-
expressed surprise at Subject's lack of-enthusjasm, Subject:: |.
stated that he was most appreciative but was. not very demonstrative.



--- Page 19 ---
SET RARE ARI EN NRE SOO

14-00000,


--- Page 20 ---
14-09000

B. Household furnishings ‘per attached
list on . mn

1
if
C. 1-2 months ‘subsistence :

| Do you concur?

Beplean DA AUU Forms 1 Ate a aod APE
DD wit, OS Maree ness ease



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

Sette

“approximate « €ost. DM 400, ‘make Subject’

of the femainder as part of his’ resettlement.”
I have been enpliasizing to Subject over the past weeks

that Presideat Jobiison’ s econony. drive has: affected arr

"agencies ‘and departments. ‘Subject, therefore, has ‘Been

cond tioned not to, expect money for BKZ or for furniture or

a termination sun, Any- or all of these would normally. be

provided. dn al case of this. kind.

s feel that “48 we pay to: ‘have. his lover denture repaired, ©

present. of the house-_

‘hold ‘itens listed, ‘and’ continue to pay him subsistence for a

‘month or two after we notify him he is on his own, we will,

1 believe, get, rid of him. as. cheaply. as. possible. and. without...



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000 : : se - ~e

ont and ‘take’ over thé DM 300 rent.
nsible enough to use this Opportunity |
Subject’ S answer was that he feels:

ford. that “much rent he might as
id he could not. understand why C. 0.
) ject, that all he was asking for was
--one month's -ad ice’ prior to. being turned loose on his
own, he Was willing cto! drop, the matter as ‘long as _ .
. Subject did not cone crying the ‘blues to us later about needing .
ype money .- ‘Subject said: ~that- things ‘got’ really, bad.he ‘would
so los! get a-jab.. ¢.' 0. applauded and. offered ‘his congratulation:
~ .°. but sai he. asSumed this Would only ‘be a desperation measure,
- § bjec 4 rt: Lik wthe- ‘Joke. ao .

well be dead. Subje

was harpin

‘WIROGUE proudly announced that ‘he. has. made nter ive.
efforts. the last few weeks to sell 4 of his inventions. C. o.,
Somewhat: exasperated, “totd’ hin he would never understand how

le so many years, refuse

on what . ay .
' because $ rue friend) does ' not, have’ faith in him. : .
C. 0. told Subject that he ‘isa great actor and added that he;

"Would think much more highly ¢ of -him if: he would think



--- Page 23 ---
Rare AEF al eA eee



--- Page 24 ---
3400000”

drive was affecting
¢ What kKind.o L

id Subject that upon his final’ termination we would see
‘what help cold be given him’ towards apartment rental, dishes,
furniture; etc. -C. 0. felt that it would be a good idea

to tell Subject. that he should not ‘expect a great deal of "2
‘he leaves ‘us; that he might. receive very little, .

-.' €. 0 tried. to discourage Subject from taking over the |
“Kuwaldstr irtment, but Subject said he is working on an
n owner of the apartment and would try to
ort of deal. Subject asked if hé-could expect
ome Help. if he: to pay rent in advance when
r : told himdte would pay the

ance but would require the receipt .

‘Subject said he would call C. ©. as soon as he has
made arrangements for living guarters for himself.



--- Page 25 ---
on to Say. that
1 ‘not’: be “done and that he would: talk
to: his ‘pousing ‘people and would contact Subject early ' ‘the
following week.

€.0,. told Subject that his “Lpenstaut had been ‘completed
‘and was being. translated inté Germah: C. 0. feels that the . '
: final step. towards Subjects: permanent resettlement can be
taken within the next two: months, :



--- Page 26 ---
te establish it, as Wins, told us. "Some: tonths | 2BO,. “it would

be possible to prepare a new ‘political. -Fecognition interview ‘

story, and replace the ‘old copies with the new ‘Story. Wilms

said it week would. be necessary to recover “Tout <

‘copies of the

ee See yen : : z o oe
nts aa extract of th feternce Le subset a activities | . :
with ‘eh Georgian, Resistence. ‘Group. It was decided, therefore,
that, this, Same. information should definitely appear in the

new Labenslaut. : This was to ‘be taken care of. by vhaving’ a

_ ‘Subject’ s ‘father! S name be Frank Simon Sanders (since Subject’ s



--- Page 27 ---
ac tivity :
soup

re Lo ott
realize that if. avebpy has. been made of ‘the’ ‘story there is

_néthing we can do about it anyway. — ; : ; '



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000 . . ' “ .

‘he knows ‘he.

abd askéd C:
sufficient notice so he. can ‘make. .

jini that. he would try to.give him at
least, one ‘month’ s- notice. :



--- Page 29 ---
14-0900

AGEieT UR Perera’

ORGS EE SEP ATE PhD

$ life ‘for a.crime. when technically he ‘had paid

g. his: prison term. - ic, oO. told ‘him ‘that unfair’ or not
's misdeeds -have. placed: certain ‘¥estrictions on his.
activities. and nothing could be done to change that. He was : :
~- peminded that wit ‘new identity he will be in'a position to — oy
a establish himself and be a contributing. member of society.
Subject's answer-:waS' to é effect that he was not too happy
‘to be contributing. da G any.

. Cc. O. knows tha the above is Subject's way of letting
C. 0. ‘know he would like to be cleamas a whistle, be able to
‘use his true name and go back. to France.

ld hin that all” things conSideréd he could be a
ff ‘and: should ‘think’ about vbuilding his future,

Stated: ‘that’ he. would. repay all the money. we
‘told’ him. that we: ‘did not want the
money repaye ould only.. foul-=up our books. ‘He was
told that ‘the St way for him to, repay the debt would be to
work hard. and. ‘lead a decent life... .. .

- - Subject ther
had: spent: on

c. 0. left after promising to have Luach with Subject . -
soon.



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

the: [ony O:,. would’ find ‘out: if any ‘tel could. be > given Subject
in” this” area... . . : : :
og

“Subject ‘backed awa’ and then stated that his wish had been

to go to South America: and that C. 0. had promised: him this mo .
ot , '

"would be arranged.
‘to; arrange this for Subject but that it is impossible to

. accomplish and the: matter would have to. be dropped.

C..0; told him’ that ‘our. intention had been

Subject was

told, as -he has ‘been told several times, that: if he desires
to go to South América he will have to arrange it on his-own
and: after he has” barlt up some work experience here in the F.R.



--- Page 31 ---
S-E-C*R-s-7.

1 November 1963

- (1100 hours -

PIACE:  Kuhwalds¢rApartment *.
ee ORME 1

trying everything he :can to keep ‘from going to
7st placing. too much emphazis on’ "get rich t
t denied. that this was- ‘the case but
i. 0. does not believe ‘him.

a ee “0. wished ‘him luck in his “plans . -but advised him that .

~ when it.was’ time for him be on his own he would not be given | . :
a long. transition perio Subject said that up’ to now he has
been - working for. the Wo: owner. without. ‘receiving pay of.

of’ Sanders and cash it:

‘Subject’ said-that it: ‘might be n.

_.... directly: to ones bank account
we to that was simple,
. account.”

registered at Camp- King.

kind of. a check that is paid

told him that the answer
that’ he has no bank

: Cc. 0. doesn't know what Subject. ‘was ‘trying to get at but - So ote 7
is sure that he has Something in mind. He then asked C. oO. to a
find - ‘out what the. rent. would be on ‘the Kuhwaldstr apartment,



--- Page 32 ---


--- Page 33 ---
PETE ENN BD ONY Mei ORS Vist



--- Page 34 ---
P OR DE!

20 September 1963 eo, OF
/ 1130- hours.

J

“technical ‘people here: : Ce
at 7 . ‘that he might be offered - eo -

a’ good eb and won! t be ‘able’ to: accept it. since he will ‘require ’
‘a Lohnsteurkarte and a; ‘Versicherungskarte,. Re then asked C.O.
advice as to what could be done regarding this problem, C. 0. .
: Said that he is hoping” to have an acceptable Labenslauf completed é
in the near future and a on as that story is substituted for .
the old he will receive’ t! necessary documents. At that point

che will be free to do anything he wishes as far as work and

‘housing is. concerned.

NOTE: c. 0; has the. necessary ‘tax and insurance cards in his
possession bu ill not: give them’ to: Subject until his L9benslauf
and .legal position’ in Germany is satisfactory. If C. 0. kives |
Subject: the. documents now-he wol iT ‘obably go. to work and besides
earning: money . would. accept our -subsistence without ‘notifying c.0.
“Subject. said’ he: wanted, 0... to. understand that he was not__
. complaining, that he wa indeed most grateful for. the teakeang opp
: eived over the..past: “months, but he is “just as éager as ‘/
.we are to-be on his. own’ making. his. way in ‘life, C. 0, said he
undérstood and appreciated this fact and hoped that everything
would be in order within the next couple of months, .

LENT BS FBR RES Ve 2B
.



--- Page 35 ---
ra0bagp

i

3 September 1963 -

[ROGUE ‘Headquarters:
chad. authorized HARVARD to assis! Subject in his desire to
‘immigrate. to South Anevica, AsS:the first Step in this .
rogram, Subject. was interviewéd at Camp King and a story
adequate to insure. We. -Gerfan political’ recognition was
presented to the German interviewer, | Certain details of this
used the interest. of the German government and it

a to be taken to kill this unwanted
interest, This” developm 't would not in ‘itself have been _..
too-much of a. -problem, but in Subsequent. investigation of

he rocedure - tobe, followed ‘for: immigration to South America,
HARVARD learned tha applicants- are scréened very thoroughly,
given aptitude ‘tests;: etc. etc, This screening, is performed

_ by ICEM: harged” by. the South - American countries with
“othe! responsi uring

anion to withstand. detailed
lify him in :some profession

: ty '= - the existing political
recognition story ‘doés not provide this, ~

2. In discussions with: Wilms and Wagner’ of the 813th,
it was. decid that a ‘detailed: life story should be prepared
by CABEZONE and “on the basis. of this story a new ‘political



--- Page 36 ---
nitio’ ddterview Should be writ én v hich

is vit 3 € € ; a new lite as. -
letely different. per son. -Only by, doing the job Properly

- how will we be able ‘to. place ourselves in a position. to
Satisfactorily sever ‘subject's dependence upon” KUBARK and
reduce to a minimum the need for future: contacts,

os bet Aecattin co ‘

Ge Donald NeLaughlin

Attachment:
Legend

ec: Chief, DRC . ea,



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

AC WITH AGENT OR. DEFECTOR

cSupmer: WIROGUR Mek
83 August 1963. ’ yo

.. , Subject ‘for a long’ time has been attempting’ to get-a
patent ‘but could not ‘come’ by. ‘the necessary funds, approximately
200 DM. -Case..0fficer asked ‘him how hé was able’ to swing this
and-was told-the following story, some of which Case Officer
already knew: oe .

.. During the months that Subject has been in
“HARVARD's: hands, he“ has kept himself busy by inventing
various gadg¢éts-and devices. Some months ago he made
contact with 4. mechaniker, Alfred Naegele, who has a
work shop on ‘25 Gla rgstr. Subject has had this
individual: make certain. small parts which Subject was
' not able to.make, due to a lack of tools. Over the
sepastmonths,;. Subject has ‘won the confidence of Nacgele
and has ‘been. exchanging his labor for permission to
usé the work shop facilities. “Subject has also solved
‘eN\ job. problems.-for the work shop owner who. has ‘now. .
(yf: begun to. take: on. specialized jobs only bécause he has
“7. Subject's talent. and ability. available to him, Subject
a . cores continués to. help Herr Nacgele gratuitously since he
oo . _ '.. feels that in time he will make’ the contacts.which will -
: be of help to him when ‘he is finally on his own, Subject:
told’ Case Officer that. one of Nacgele's contacts had
prepared the technical description and application for
Subject’s soup dish -invention without cost. to Subject.
“ Subject ‘will pay-off the cost by helping Herr Naegele,
Subject. feels. he can. use this same procedure to patent

other ideas: which he. has.

POS temese
~ SECRET



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

n the patent application, . oe
r living at: Kuhwaldstr Sl... :
tio im regarding the use 6f. this
ect said (that he felt it was ‘necessary

nS? . i rr wee ae

‘ding wi h Naégele to the Taunus.
Ssing. Camp King, Herr Naegéle —- .
ie Camp was é place where .

Ommandos. and others for

L «the uSe of this address
. ‘break security ‘since he would not use:
_.that -address-for any official reason, e.¢.,
. Police ‘matters, etc., ete. a st

Case Officer ‘still- reamed Subject out thoroughly and told. . t
- him that-even though our attempts to maintain maximum security
“were probably 50% successful we should at least try. Case : ;
Officer finally réalized he was fighting a losing battle and . ,
d ‘eed in’ tagonizing Subject and if nothine@ eke .
more difficulties ‘for himself and told Subject they might as
. well drop'.the subject. Subject kept insisting that he would

do nothing to jeopardize what Case ‘Officer's organization was

‘trying ‘to.do for him ‘and assured Case Officer he thinks out .

very carefully what the results of any. particular course of
_ action “might be, : os Coo, ae :

old Subject. that-he is trying to complete

everything. is in order with. the German

ould-be-in a position to establish himself,

rtold him that it is: obvious his hopes for.

South America.should be shel#ed for .& good long

, would appear obvious Subject should establish - an

_ himself here in Germany. building:'up a work background and then toot,
af he so.deSired, «immigrate, ‘This would be without our help,.

SECRET



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

countries on a visitors visa if he’ “makes”
7 ‘a firm that-would require him todo so in the \
- course * of. his duties. “Case Officer told’ him that he would \
investigate these: problems: in due’ course but felt that. Subject
could Fopabey get visitors or tourist permits” ‘to all the

. Interpolg: asa future” ‘control. 5"

SECRET



--- Page 40 ---
Be-00000
i .

. ., Case Officer told him to try to be patient’ that Case an
Officer hopes to have his legend finished ‘in the. near :
future ard'take steps for his complete legalization in '
West Germany. < Se : a _ .

‘



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

S-8°C-R-8-T

$1 Kuhwalast

: r im at any time and did. not -
find. him: at: home he could -be reached at 558925. by calling and
asking ‘for Mr. Sanders, :

mo, 3. Case’ ‘offiéer told ‘Subject. -that his Legend is coming . .
along.pretty well and as Officer feels that with a little . :

Iuck we will ‘be able to: definite steps toward his more or
.1éSs. permanent resettlement. Case Officer promised to spend ,
more time with Subject when they meet again two weeks from
today. . : .



--- Page 42 ---
T0000

T CN. CONTACT WitH_AGEWT oR

" DATE: 12 July i963

1130

ntent with. doing :a little at
a:-if ‘he’ had heard’ from’ Brauf
t

Surpriséd'‘sincé the Chief
ent told-him it could be ‘several
him. Case. Officer said that he
A Naging perth -of his
really become"
t to
told Subject that we ‘had worked
out.a pretty for. him but there were a few .
“ necessary details -to,be addéd. Subject asked for .an estimate
' to. how Jong his Status quo would remain as is, because
wees “he would hate to be ‘thrown-out on the street without a chance
4 ee ‘to prepare “for it.” Case Officer, tojd him ‘that he had nothing
: te : 'S. respect” meats _Story was ready and
@ necessary action Case. Officer. would then
ters that his recommendation is to resettle
O y with a reasonable amount of .
hase. of furniture. ‘Subject. asked
Would take six months. . Case Officer
‘ ; hat in any event Subject would be
‘given adequate" time ‘to establish himself; i.e; finding a job,
Case Officer. promised to see’ him definitely within
eks.. "> coe mo,



--- Page 43 ---
14-00000,

y would appear to be
ince he has. more ‘going - for him here than he
uld in South America. .

Cy 0. ‘said he. was‘ working on his story (legend) and
. Fecommend. ‘to Headquarters that: Subject resettle in
Sermany: with help toward BKZ and’ furniture. :



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

“in the eye “of the russian el er ‘thers.

2. 0. told him that it was his opinion. we should Prepare

a good story to replace the “one he has now but to make sure
that it would not require that he ‘know a great. deal of Russian
“so that. if he should. go to S. A. at a later date he would not.
have to study too long. : ¢. oO. said he would still notity Has.

and see. if they ar willing to subsidize 6 mos. intensive

“Ru ar language training. Ir not we would concent ate

ceetting. him establish d here and then. at ‘a later date discuss
SAL emigration. .C, O.Said he. would: ‘also ‘recommend that
° . : “Subject. be hélped* toward furniture and BKZ if he remains “

in Germany.

ol aiite?



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

WIROGUE)

7 dune 1963

-1200' hours

ppéd..in’ to’ see Subject:
tionally good’ moi

ct w ave to study Russian for six months;
‘Since it is impossible for anyone: to have been. :
raised and-worked in the’ Soviet Union without knowing

some Russ: _At the-end of that tine he would try:
‘to process-him for S.A. (Subject was not told this’ but
_it is obvious that if he does not ‘know Russian,
., once he gets to:S.A., the first. Russian he: comes in
“contact with will realize he is not a bona fide.

~ refugee’ which,:would lead to trouble for Subject.)

There is.a possibility he could be gotten to Chile.
‘(John Wilms. has. suggested that through his contacts
he: might be. able to get Subject to Chile, since the
Chilean Ambassador owes him a favor.)

av" €0 teld Subject’ to think about the” three possibilities.
nt and. ‘make ‘and. give CO. his ‘thoughts on the Problem the next.

‘time. they meet...

So : : Ee en meee Orme K. Daronnat



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000



--- Page 47 ---
Be A aged 206 Ae te oy haart :
ie Sat ap thy ene ome ba . |

. , have bab Zoomar! fe ntl Cee! che
| AO “negate Had (FE ae oe ac apy. .
Soh Hy up yt : ; .



--- Page 48 ---


--- Page 49 ---
1400000 "

the’ bates al’ and -eaw that i
“info that Jaci Re

_ CC wilt

ended to verify the
had given us re ixwigrati in and Work

2 see ‘Subjeét again on Priday, the 17th.

Thaw 1

© oboopped By I OP Ait nt
Z na be wtf a “ey
Theos 23 | a |
ge BE Ex x lates fei a

eS Pe fork 5G. ame
. ne Liratef he ae

oprortuni ties).



--- Page 50 ---
p4op000



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000",

we “ae
autkorities.

. sergon appearing cn the ‘list stays on indefinitely.

The list ‘is follwed by fingerprints. and a data card.

1630. Se . ot a

Chris called to infore us that CARAVE
. that, Subject wag not listed under. th
-Since he was not i

SL. had called to inform him
@ two names we nad given hia and
nm the Gerzan Interpol files was not
files of any other ecuntry with
Paris. - CAREVEL will be going t

in, ‘the Interpol
the rossible excey tion of Haéqirs in

- ys
on
© Paris in the near future. ang can on

. check ‘the files Since he has free access}

f Modis - : a sr, nn
foe - . TP ORLA EL ode asf neog eS itn wit | Zorwarsb eee

Ae + wae Re joes erie
agi: .

Pasccth title fens Cel erernan aeieh

ee peegacs Fareed

aw Pte,

tere we yi Sh reed wahoo,


--- Page 52 ---
oe leave Geraan llprobably taxe along: 150k at he

‘ . : 2” “here and ‘take steps. to ericourage certain types) to depart.” Subject
gaia that: ke could end up in all kinds of trouble.” “co told his that
“in the ‘first place ‘the US Forces would be in cerzany. fora long tire

. at least during his lifetime. In the second place Subject would be long

amber cf. eefugees © |

gone before the Government changed it!s attitude toward refugees.
Subject then said he. was worried that wh nen ne got to S.A. the. : . : 1
Colurbian Governnent would ‘probably check with the Soviet Gov't to
find out if he was indeed an-ex Soviet citizen. This would result in
_his being put in prison for entering the country under false pretenses.
CO said there was no reason for the Columbian Government to check with
the Sovs. Subject would arrive. a bone fido immigrant fully checked”
' out by. the or dnization responatbee™ 6h to the Columbian’ Bovt. co"
“pointed out that “the: Columbian.Govt sould be erazy to alert. the Sova

that one of their’ ex citizens was tnere with the possibility of having.

hia recruited to, work: for the Sovs. Subject was- still dubicus. but
stated that he would eo anyway: since that ia what we wanted.’ co
‘pointed out that he had requestd. neip in ‘going to SA and that we had
‘found it necessary to get hima ‘Reisenusweed to accomplish this. Se
“was told that it is too late now for him to-have misgivings that ehat

is done is done and he would have to accert it.



--- Page 53 ---
nov ° .
co- promts ed _t0- drop by sozetice during thé .6ollowing week, :



--- Page 54 ---
Ne PAT OE SE BH

rerugee applicants -
Special Progrant

Sioer!
Ail refugees’ holding. a "elseausweis autodatteauly

nder the Mandate.)

ac>licsnt's quali :

made by. other sources. jhe Linn bed. at:
a FEA

‘eonducts ts ‘own security clearance on each applicant

‘whether USEP: or. non-USEP case.

6. If applicant. is found aeceotable. iy ICEM, a work contract
must: be signed oy the apolicant orior to departure’ from Germanys
ICEM has a placement service. whicr arranges the job olacenént
cbtains the work contract. This is a standard ICEM crocedure.
SH will not ‘sponsor ine applicant who does not sign a werk

contract.

Tne total procedure requires at Less set three months from the. date
the an wLicant's curriculum vitae is received by ICEM, 3ad God ies-

berge--

‘B...ICFM does not accept x: ment of oassage by apvlicants sor is’

“there an ICEM loan’ gra t. ICEM charses DM 210.-- for men Detween ¢

{+ 7@-51 for transcortation inciuding iuggage. ‘Ine. charges for women's
trarsportation amount: to. DN i - {16-51 years oid), UM Sus--

: fer eniidren between 5 and 16 years oid, transoortation ef chi ldren

‘under five is free oF charge. Tr. totad transportation cest rer_ :

_faaily wiil not exceed DM

Lacenent Service in Souta American countries. will meet the
% arrival, dntroauce him to tne employer, and ascertain

$ inorser, In the event that an apslicant leaves tais
1CEM -place:

.
placesent service joes.not: give assistance after tne second

st service wiil assist him to find anotner job.”



--- Page 55 ---
ng the applicarit recé ives ‘a camphlet: explais
litical, etc.’ contitions ‘of the’: country!

stecsimacner), 7 ‘na tri r for- plasti

z Lied. founary*worker; mou! der (metail foundry);

‘mill worker 4 technician, wcastin E noula tatrix maker (Hetariguss-.
form-Schabionennacher) « . :

: ijsceilaneous professions? Repair mechanic, ‘choto-engraver, offset-

Sone retoucher, téc cian for plastic material, papermaker. t

{

16. Professions ani skills not’ required jn South America: i
vers, office worker, sueciatist for commerce and sale, construction

engineer, construction.tecanician and construction wore carpenter, : ot
-leotner manufzcturer, waiter, servant, unskilled laborer. , .

17 Hotsnis Leer date mei feos f drncoaes fog Ard
. meg gone a yl
SR, Lege BAd S27ESCLLG arorrlinels ar 2 Leen Gesave
on Me procseny ~~ plese.
04. S. A pel a ae ovoy Ae foone! ot B LEWTOR LS TUAE
File ese: Preensrreaus y Sx ewcksrd mépLmuas7R, b> -7

: Fafa, (FEE Caner nerds the gol Kha, choos,

i ryt). bo .



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000 ,

WIROGUE

13 ‘Warch 1963

_ would, therefo:

“nietory around" "pee which he
but.in which ‘he could pass a practical examination and
t said that

"not. only cou qd ‘Hiave been acing ‘tri tre

Soviet Union,
which the South American country. needs and’ desires. ‘gubjec
-mechanical. fields with the

if his legend included schooling in electre
xperience in development and improvement

» could in fuct pass any HAL practical test

‘pajor portion: ‘of hia wer

of devices and processes.t

and sudsequent interview. — . .
, 2. We cust assume that he.is li sted with INTERFOL since

we.
~S the French would almost automatically infora other Eurcpean ecuntries

of Subject's disappearance from France. Subject agreed that this was
a tajor problem but one that he could not help with.

Subject has resigned himself to being processed a& a

regular icmigrint and has said that he will do whatever we require.



--- Page 57 ---
‘12 March 163
") "Bluxe ‘called to in

ors us ‘that Re: Gray is now ‘the PIO in .
Geneva. © The apecial assistaht to tne- Direc tor is Peter Regis. His’
assistant is Yarousch ? (retiredarny i. ajor). Blake said USEZP cases

are not checked as thoroughly as strdight apolicants, to ICEM but he
still aannot find out what, decides if a case’ will be checked with :
interpol. : “a a ee ”



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000



--- Page 59 ---
srigrate”

: “Blake © suggested that ve make our case , USER’  aligibte thro agh AFRP-
and then refer hia to ICEM. This procedure would prob: :bly give Subject
nore status in ICEM's ‘eyes and eliminate sone of the background ©
investigution. Sudject would ‘also be referred as .a self-payer ceaning
he would. nave the funds. to pay” his own transportation.

Blake asked if. Subject would have a Job waiting for hin and was told
that he would habe no joo but would hive a letter. attesting to the
fact that there was $3, 000.00 beong’ held for hin insalary -and bonuses
which he -had eeeived while’ working for the “Arny. ‘Blake Oke RRs
arrangement would. be satisfactory.

Blake feels that coming: to ICE asa USEF case throush_ Arar
bly: be accepted without: question. since he wo.ld

Subject would pro
“have: been thorouguly chaeked ‘out by Camp King and APRP. thua-elisinating
. the need. for invest&gatery action by ICEM. :
: Blaxe was of his: way to Bad Godesberg. and said “ne would try
to find out:.wotnout arousing suspicion whether or rot’ a refugee. is.
fin ngerprinted and with what authorities ‘the fingerprints are checked.

Ze zould also ing out if a security, investigation is made ani sow
: (over) : :



--- Page 60 ---
28 February -
1160

c/o dropped in to see Subject and informed him that ‘he
would-very likely be Processed for South America through | a.
-refugee organization... This would mean. with a refugee organ-

_ization-behind him and’.USEP support -he would. not be subjected

x tO the investiga. » interviews, étc he would normally undergo

if-he went di ctly to ICEM. ©

C/O told Subject that arrangements would be made for him
to start studying Spanish’‘as-soon as’ practical, :

: Subject was told that .his name was a common one throughout
the Baltic region ‘arid therefore, he Would be able-to discuss —

“that part of his legend with confidence.



--- Page 61 ---
1400000

- neti fication to issue a visa. .
- “ “Co expicined that it vould be ‘impossible for Subject. to

“50 te ‘IGE! on his own. Subject sas told. that tnese develodzents fa
woxld indicate that “Subject should be proceesed as a regular’ refugee.

; wie, a Volunteer Ager.cy féAde and USSP support.
co toba ~ubj ject that. he would advise Hdqtrs of the new

developaents ang get permission to use the new approach to ‘hie:

resettlement.
Subject was advised to work on his legend until CO vowed

2
“Sem OF On Friday. |



--- Page 62 ---
‘the refuges to
ee

sof the process

i .
- ’
nek :
’ 5



--- Page 63 ---
“aa Pebiriary 1963

oe Subject re : :
you ath Ow dated of thle ca

Cc. We Sehmitz -
“GCA Liaison Officer :



--- Page 64 ---
g the interview nee. fade’
“untransparent. statements: concerning his defection.

. ‘Among’. other ‘SANDERS said ‘that he. chad been a leading

member’ ofa resistance group in the Soviet Union. More- oo
over he’ claimed that he. evaded arrests by joining a - ;
Soviet t. -sroup’ with the assistance of friends.

_ . Thestourist group: went ona guided. tour. of the
‘Soviet ‘upied East zone of Germany: The group. left
Tiflis on. the l0th. of July 1962. arriving in East. Berlin
“on the’ 14th of July 1962. : Subject claimed; that upon
rival to East Berlin he escaped immediately. However,
NDERS refused to make more detailed statements about
:-his escape tc est: Berlin. Allegedly it. was ‘unknown to
-him how his tr lends ‘had managed to place hin into: the
tourist group. 7 ,

We would be grateful if any communications or
information concerning SANDERS inclusive a Possivle
intervies: report. would. be forwarded: to us.



--- Page 65 ---
4
e

Bonuas _ okine ee = _ oe per , te . oe

SANDERS  petindet aich pait deg a4. 1 1962 in Obhut einer:

., US+Dienatetelle in Oberursel, nachdem er angeblich am.

eleichen Tage als pow]. fouriet von Ost- nach Westbderlin

gefllichtet war. AG 28. 8.1962 satellite er Antrag: auf ‘Ane
erkennung ‘alg ‘queliindischer Pluchtling. Am 29. 8.1962
wurde ér An Anwesénheit eines Angehdrigen einer US=

- Dienstatelle duroh die krimtnalpoltzes. wernommen, Bet

der Vernehmung. machte “SANDERS undurehaichtige Angaben
liber seine Plucht, :

SANDERS fuhrte u.a, an, rT der Ud3SR einor Wideratands-
gruppe-als. ‘fuhrended: kitglied ungehirt, gu haben. Einer™.
beabsichtigs en Pestnahne will er: aich: dadurch. c: tzogen.

“haben, in den er aich von Preunden in eine sow). Sourister
‘gruppa ‘einechleusen lied, ‘mit der ‘er zu einer Beaichti-.
guna: fahrt in-ate SBZ oa to.7.1962 aua Tiflia abgereiat:

und .as 4s Te ,1962 in Ootberlin- ‘oingetroffen: sei, tr
fluchtete angetlion unsittelber nach seiner Anku-t in.

Oetborlin.



--- Page 66 ---
inawéat zu ‘machen. Angeblich ist ihn.
kannt aur. weléhe’ ‘Weise ihn séine Freunde es
eisegruppe eAncuschieusen vernochten,



--- Page 67 ---


--- Page 68 ---
co told his that this had, been ‘ler Pp to CO's diséretion
<0) sbsureddsubject/f that’ as long Hf as che ai gently applied
‘hinzself ‘to finding work and was not:

too choosy he would continue to
to- ‘Feceive, financial - “Supnort.

CO an@ Subject agre
choice. . CO. told Subject to 5O to the Solumbian Consulate,
_ 10 and eet as mach information as possible regarding izmier
ud Wit. attezst to fin

PE/M

ed that ‘Coiuzbia ‘seens to be the best

An Hauptbahnhot :
‘ation,

d cut if hig Processing can be done h
or if it. will be necessury to. go to Hazburg,
Subject was told t

erein

hat after he gets to SA,
contact through the sail or someone Ht in SA will
with hin by letter drop.

CO will maintain

maintain contact



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

“86

CO discussed. -
ane): and e

Anidt-ans

ac..ntion of

vr Schntas thon went into a long explana
and its rela

¢ unity and the 23¢

“body for the éntire £¥ ars con. aunity

liaising wita the 3fV-and

component’ of the AIS -com

be written or oral. It ia thsrefcre’s

to°thé File

On #5 Feb. 63. co vent’
and the SV" reques

ecause subjs atut t
fuetod from ‘the Soviet.

Sealine derriefed b
Stion -secmeaso wen,

the security of we

Ronn to

e SfV . the. Ferman
st Germany.

on

« . Te states

tazt Since the BfV requested info

request. to OCA with’ the realization t..

thé matter with

Passed to 32V would not be ae
liaison people know OCA is primar

4I3 one. It is
by the activity
Years nas. re ta
Dusiness he had

‘that he had
Chief of th

te

all. the ats

for. the shove reas
‘of. Mr Johr. f

aly refy to el
th the BfV @irec

“sith the Chief ‘of the BYVY. CO hed
‘brought up the BEY ing

soto 3onn and butter “up the Chier

ny event Sc:
the RTT he

hnidt stated thet ss

is obligated to an

oy .
talk with ofa
tion on him,

vy Cabezone.

r¥ 3.2.9
i

utry on Senders with Vil
‘lready made an ans .
3PV and thus would t

us. Sehmidt enszered. thet “illms. us

fore’ th
to the 3eys

re the RIRCG

VE case.

Eade an inquiry is. that
ition indicated that he’

J Tike 4 report of sctleone
‘oreover the ‘story submitted

k that it tonediutely drew the

ores

st €s the s

ona Seorg &

ents and

Ly
on

eer’with CO* und ¥
tly with the Bf"
explained

k wi

te

of

ce he received the
wer it and in

28ticn respon

as

ble fur

tion of the function of
tip to the rest of the Intel nee (ut)
ordi

‘CCA is the sole offi
that sny mets
tunity.nust be

nating
e for

r.of interest of any
angled by OCA, whether it
own in the present cust that
nders it sent the
at Ch wold coeriinete
reover the onewer
though the 3ryv

aay but a courd:nsted
t Gla is very disturbed
ng who throurchout! the

we
t even before re
a8, .‘Vilirs mentioned
th the .



--- Page 70 ---


--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

i
i i
: i been
al

ite g inet SORE! unica A SM oR MNMEIN Te Ree resteni n E



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000"

_ MEMoRASDUW “FOR. THE RECORD
“SUBJECT: WIROGUE Q

‘On’ ints date. George List and the jtindersigned- atscussed
. ‘Co: s plans’ and ‘thinking r arding WrROGUE'

South Ateri¢a.

Case. Office e plained that since ‘Subject is

s reragee, we will’

matgration, any subse went’. -attempts he:

, ‘inakes 1 ‘to inmigrate wili -bring ‘to ligiit” the fa

t that he had |
= previously applied: for immigration, to. another ‘country, ‘It ts
“essential therefor ‘that, we. plan: for, every contingency. Case

: “Ofticer’: feels, ‘based on ‘HARVARD’ s experience, that when WIROGUE

° applies. for. “Ammigration he will be required to. give
a). the nane and address of his present employer and
“probably, the name: of. his supervisor and telephone number,
(2) what. ‘type of ‘work he has been doing;
, (3) “proot ‘that he will be able to support himself for
a. minimum of two. years at the. rate of $125 a month, —. .
“ (4) . Proof of his: professional “qualifications,
(5) birth: certificate.

(6) ‘detatied information regarding his employment, and

Fesidence addresses in the Georgian SSR

@) details of the war-time military service,

eo”

S immigration to >. .

5
q
i
i

RE AUS tM an 6G, HR Tetnas ANP accion bent

of

x

oh,


--- Page 73 ---
4-00000

‘

“being. held for him, - Regarding 4) whether. or. not is 48 adviseable
‘to. j provide Subject with. Proof: of his professional qualifications , : oe

will be discussed with the 513th. (5) above, a birth certificate

will probably not. be. ‘ne essary ‘since so many defectors do not

Information on employment and .

“have these documents with thea.

residences will “be worked up by. the Case Officer, from past.
_ defector's BARs and with material: available’ to SR 6. (6) above -

this” thformation may also be acquired through facilities of SR 6.

‘After discussions with the 513th, Case Officer will tell
WIROGUE that we have been informed by Headquarters ‘that air
Subject still desires to ihmigrate to South America and is
successful in immigrating, we have authority to ‘Provide financial
assistance daring the transistion period up to $125, a month.

Since | Case Officer knows WIROGUE, “the ‘next question. will be,
How Jong will 1 receive this $125, a month? Case ‘Officer will

reply," Meta you. becone satisfactorily established or we have



--- Page 74 ---
14-00000



--- Page 75 ---


--- Page 76 ---


--- Page 77 ---
STUER ATES ST

a SECRET

2
e



--- Page 78 ---
: ne os Po ar a) January” 963.

SUBJECT: “WIROGUE

ay
: d-out if. the Lt.
dress ‘and :to advise him that ‘if he.

‘Subject, he should not mention ‘Raving | written

RME“K. DARONNAT = = 7

ha letter.

SECRET



--- Page 79 ---


--- Page 80 ---
‘Prankfurt a. Main

, - Lo Le - - Dear Yr. Sanders:

: a pleasure to see you. avain. durin Ry. tour of duty

dn Frankfurt. Mayle if you have. a free. hour or so in. “the: future’ you -

woula want to tave another F supper in the Bahnhof!

Streemly, :

“William Ds Zirki
ant 1

pra. USE FOR APPEOY ALS, DISAPPROvALS,
cova” CONCURRENTES, Ga Satan ACTIONS



--- Page 81 ---
" Herea, oS
Georg Sanderg .. : : LO oO

Frankfurt a. Main ~ Obérureel ~” ,

we Co - - * HeenmarkStr 4445



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

d that we: would
Integrated.

he habit of throwing Peopie out. ii
everything we could to help ‘him _Becoine -

;
E

. Subject was paid subsistence for two. weeks. Case Officer
an Promised” to try to drop by. the end of next week,

t if i case Officer ~
for. us and the .
6

Erg

DRT AA VITTOS aye a scata tend tys, atl

fe

pate

SECRET.

hy

ie

i wysiatedy:



--- Page 83 ---
He \dquarters,

equested « a German typewriter which will be.
delivered to hi some time this week, :

SECRET



--- Page 84 ---
Subject seems ‘to be in good spirits but is eager.to be
on his way to South America or Somewhere,

SECRET.



--- Page 85 ---
14-0000 +

. 7 e éase. fas it “now. ‘stands. and | we hope" ‘to receive
Sone, soonest Headquarter's advice as to thé future course of action
we will take regarding Subject. Case Officer said. that he hopes
to be in a position within a week or two” to advise Subject as to . . 4

what we can and hope: to do for him.

a Case Officer said. that in the final analysis if we do not -
-Lhelp Subject -to immigrate and-he is turned loose. on the economy,

we would-not..throw him into the street, that he would be given

e in.which to find:a job and an. apartment ‘and that

y. our procedure:.to:help “financially, at least: the’ first
- month's rént and an additional subsistence payment until he receives
‘his first Paycheck. Subject was greatly relieved to hear this.

S-E-C-R-E2T



--- Page 86 ---


--- Page 87 ---
Op-floor. 3
informed him. that this-apartumént would a
known when. He ‘advised Subject not to-s

Subject asked if he could Unpack and spread out.

ed him to-51 Kuhw ‘6
Case Officer.
lso be given up, but he did not

pread out too far.



--- Page 88 ---
vk ‘He said he has*made -the acquaintance of a salesman representative |
for several factories..specializing in small electrical devices: The mans.
nane: ilhelm Salzmann,- whose address. is. Frankfurt/Main, am Tiergarten 52, -
' telephone "492251." ‘Subject said “that this person had recommended a patent © -_
attorney by the name of Wilhelm Reichel, a Dr. Ing. Patentanwal:, Frankfurt/Main,
Parkstr. 13, telephona 559165. : , : :

icer that if’ he is lucky and his invention is’
inite arrangements we make for his immigration
eave ‘our Custody and probably stay right. here
dni Prankfur z “that he is’aware he has commited himsélf to-go to
“South America ahd will do so but.all that. ne wishes to do if immediate
Success of his inverition is not forthcoming, is to get_a patent on his

: . invention’ so he‘ can negotiate ata later date from South. America.

, : Case Officer feels that this is. about the best we can expect from
Subject. Case Officer has discussed this Situation regarding the patent
“with John’Morrison of ‘the legal staff, who says that he will at least try
\ to find out’ if this patent attorney is qualified and successful.

NOTE: Case Officer has learned that the patent laws in Germany are somewhat

: peculiar in that a patent attorney is.a technical qualified:man who can
obtain:patents on subjects in which he.nas specialized and for which-he

1as ‘réceived ‘specialized: éducation but.he ts not an attorney in the sénhse

t he ‘al with any legal questions whici-arise in the course of *

‘ patént’ procedures or litigation in’ patent. matters. : Normally; an ‘individual

Q who intends. to get a patent will. hire an ‘attorney who will contact a patent

‘ attorney. tween the two of them’ they “can ‘handle all problems snd procédures

involving a patent. This also can be worked in reverse. --



--- Page 89 ---
t vention
Case Officer feels that

ely.



--- Page 90 ---
‘a’ cable to Headquarters
documentation and propose
: ¢ en to. begin ct! ssing for South America
Case. Officer gait that he bad several! Pas as to how this’ shouldbe : .
“-done but.in the final analysis. would have to defer to Headquarters decision. a .

Subject ‘asked 1¢ tiiat meant he would-be leaving soon.
told hin it was his opinion

Case Officer
that he would sti11 be here in D

jecember, ”

content and satisfied avr prekgnt at



--- Page 91 ---
12-00000

q'
. that he 1s a recent refugee. *
the: haye objections, we will” 's

d to this approach ‘aithough Case Officer believes that
411. Succeed in making hiaself financially independent
of his iriventicns. If this should happen,’ Case Officer

Ject ” ‘will ask for. his documentation and leave HARVARD
housing Atta go” on “his own. : an . . :



--- Page 92 ---
14-00000 |

21 Séptecber 1962

. £0 ‘dropred in to see Subject ‘to tell -him th
reasonably certain: thet he

at we ‘were now.) ne *
would receive political recognition and his

Reisenuoweia. He was told. that we are - paking good progress” acquiring

the infornation nécescury for sstigcation and that soon he could

Start, his Processing.

toe
"Subject is ag wrapped up in his inventions a . noe

ole : 7 boy ae - that “Be: aeenda hardly’ to hear’ t £0 was sayings co oat. chia down

ents leading upto. the ‘Present; that he. had come to. : oo ~

us. for a jeb and when that ‘haa not been: forthsoning had stated that .

his ambiticn was to be legalized and get citizenship by tanirrating :

to a SA. country. He was reminded that that is what ee are atriving

to do but that we a t

his point, are not sure how. the tion

. : wilh take Place. He was told tat idqtre nay ‘require that he i

igrate oo ee a
on hie omn vith, us au

he tay’ poasitly be. ne batione yeaid he did

nst know if or whas yal uosistance would be 1

then hime

. ' » Subieet. said at he je y eratetul and wants to do wh -tever we desire
- ves : wm

ahd ea HER, Bes



--- Page 93 ---
ll the details. told hic that he should hold off as long as
possible but in any event he should remember that his name ‘is

Georg Sanders and that any business he conducts should bg done . -
using his Hohenarkstr. adBeess. 145,
CO may be.wrong but he feels tnat ‘Subject is agreeing
to ‘Lami grate to S.As only in the hope thut we will provide him with

a stake.of sortie kind. -

ft



--- Page 94 ---
14-0000. -

. Subject hag an extrezel
i explained severs] of h:

\ "Rave co=zercial val
Ios money to develop th
| with patenta or manuf,

y inventive mind an? has - -
his ideas to CC. They would appear. to: -
2» Unfortunataz Sugject hus néétther the Ll:
‘nor ia he fs “a position: to-get involved |
acturers at the vresent time.
Re seers reaz

onably hacpy with his. present etatus
: a . but CO anticipates. a hairy situation if-upon applying for
shee itmigratiog to a SA Country,

the processing Period takes’s long
- tine. . .

Se pas TT



--- Page 95 ---
on i deredyetcs It is ver Fortant trat Rogue have
r the right answers when. ne avolies and is i terviewed for lewigration.

Geo. .L. agreed to CO's siggestions and Proposed that CO have APuF.

get started.on this sroject soonest. ~ :

140000
Wirogue was taken to Camp King where he was lst briéfed on his
story and then successfully interviewed. it is: pessible that
Rogue will be ecmpletely documented within 2 or 3 weeks.

30° August a
: COhrg with Gus =
‘detailed izzigration r
acreed to get
ys and-atte
Prat docunents
What professions ay denand
i -Tequired for i igration processing
terant seed a certain amount of funds
ronecessary or heizfull
residence requirezent for citizenship
quota restrictions a .
ver e tes or private agencies ino will
Arted’ : . :

Jack 2 anj told thez we were in need of

onentsiPPy me
-official uiry toatl the consulates:
‘out the 25 lowings

“hat are th
L. : 4ré. thera’ s

Bons? hel he:
“eeee the J

Notes. Rogue has alr
because -he h

CO that “he ca

there wh «o in to
the author: a ake trouble for } eculd.
Rogue: pre

la if-he has a ch



--- Page 96 ---
‘be “abye" ething along that ltrie for him to
build. Subject was very enthusiastic Sugeested that we get started
soonest. nn : .
: Subject was dropped off at his apartment and CO promised _
“to. come by as. soon as hecould find something to Occupy Subject's
tice, — : : . , . oo
Subject was told that Edgtrs had suggested Argentine for
resettlement because they ad no quotu.restrictions and were in
“need of technicians. Subject said _ hat, Argentine waa out of the
: question since he ‘had acquaintenccs there who would be happy to

“ stirup any kind of trouble they possible could.

Subject suggests that he. go to SA on a tourist visa. According
it would be much easier after his arrival. to apply for
tion since hé already would: be. there.’ This reason is quite
valid’and sensible but CO-xnows that.Subject has 2 quite different
reascns for making this suggestion. 1. With a tourist visa he has”
visions of having us finance ‘hin from country to country until
. he finds exactly what pleases him and,2. He figures that. with
“a tourist visa he can return tc Euroce without having comzitted
hirself irrevocably to inzigraticr.statuswith all it's attendant
responsibilities for settling a \ . .
Lt is also ebvious to CO that we cannot trust Subject to

. Bake inquiries hicself the -varicus”SA Consulates because he will.
tell ius only. those-de 8s which he wantsUs to know and unfortunately
we kav eno way of checking since the Consulates. will not give out
infortetton re. igration Gver the phone, ~:~ aan an

|’ When the. time comes.CO feels that we. nay beable to get the.
information we need ‘by working through AFRP. ° i -

0 ibe gah



--- Page 97 ---
SEN SER St RE SP Ra SS

on . .
for a wise he must be prepared to give all the right answers
since the | 3a consulates and mmbass:es ao not give out. immigration
material #ithout discussing the mat er with the interested

individuals
S ject iga bit sceptical that

AYY. everything can be

sed but. is willing -to play ball. Al took some preliminary

a infornationfton Subs Sect- and will discuss our prediem with Camp King. “CK

aa indicated that they might be atie to nelp us get Subject

particularly in Chile.

ect is beconing extremely edgy and farvard co is”

hoping that that this case will star: noving soon.



--- Page 98 ---
: e-delay in his South
“3008 not want t6 cont inne ts
to get Someplece *here

receive “supnort from us_ but wents
ne can start working and be on ‘his own.

Subj stated that: he called the. German firn: which “expressed an”
interest in his‘: ing to.the Coneo and wes told to -have Geduld,.
“He -stated in very clear terms thet he is tired of having Geduid
and. hores that sone? ing wild scon happen. . .

od neshxhet. CO told hin t
SAmerican countr. we will
and related tatters,

| He mentioned again that he doe



--- Page 99 ---
SO EEMRUT RSME GS | NY ATURE FSI

G 4
as = :
- ‘ .
~ a
g QO
a o
3:
‘
i SEO, gh
Gre rr Od be



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

titute or.
m toe ; .
society and, above all, prevent his
- {

ao cs
phen R. LACKLEN’ and Roscoe MOSIEN
al He was reliéved of his documents
etext. that they were to ‘be photographed and he
would not no hem for the time being since he would be given
-an identity : nt: fo: se during, the period of time he would . "
be’ in KUBAR! 'KLEN lained that as an administrative :
officer: ny taking care of nis immediate
d-beintroducéd to one who's
th him in an attempt to resolve his

contributing member of
return to the Congo. .

\ however. h
ould be to-work |

‘problems...

nee. it-had beeli. decided that Subject was primarily a:

- tlemént’ problem,. Orme K. DARONNAT of HARVARD was .
. Antroduced to Subject. DARONNAT told: Subject ‘that he would be
working .with him during his stay. in Frankfurt while we were.
awaiting word on whether or not his servicés were needed by
the Government. Subject stated that his greatestwish was to
work for the "Company". If this was not to be, he hoped he
would..be helped to. legalize and immigrate to South America...

He emphasized. his obli

‘ gation to complete his mission for.the

i: (C.D.F. and:-¢laimed alSo:he had to return to the Congo to. |:

».. conclude his .contract even if we decided to emplq@him. C..0. - toe

“ “told hin.our first ordér of business was to eStablish the need.“ .
for. his Services and. in:the meantime -he could attempt to — : “
“market his i tion. “ : oo . .

Bo. ee

gy



--- Page 101 ---
14-0000 ,

¢ ity -wo' be
“Temained' registered at the place

I was issued. Therefore, the

é11-be:.a short range solution unless Subject

J n.. visa “to..désired country of resettle-.
2. the d the’ issuance of a:

mpletely legalize Subject, but ‘would.

the basis of a false defection story and

ess absolutely necessary. Subject a .

ermans and no matter what happened would’ . a ;

He suggested that. he be helped to- eo

», Canada, “England, Australia, etc. -C. 0. 1
S criminal record of. arrest and . :
immigration: to other than S.A. was out

in this wag in doubt. He stated if

toh ible. he-would hope to get legal

ie de Panaskhet. (his brother's

egal residence: somewhere. —

ie) and take up 1

By this time (June) HARVARD C.0. had an inkling that
Subject was not eager to return to the Congo but surmised

that his nuisance value might be such that he could parlay his
osition into something better. HARVARD C.0, felt that a
ubject.'s dislike: for the Germans was real but was emphasized .

“KUBARK. He, also:

5c @.any responsibility .
by confirming C.0.'S suspicion.
) réturn to the ‘Congo and was |
S stay in FF/M and benefiting



--- Page 102 ---
‘ta-p0000

ily 1962 Headquarters. advised HARVARD
lem as stance includin
th i.

to. provide
g help iz

he.“namé. of.”
ope for the future.

“had recomm nded that Subject be. resettled on

‘Ss i mdenpass; however, Clarance.

AT after much discussion: of |
e types of documentation available, :
eausweis would stand up under the-~ ~~ . ye
tion authorities and in addition, -it | .,
ere was..no. guarantee Subject would be. going to - ,
“Therefore, if he: were ‘required to stay in. :

longed riod .of.time, it would be best to .

5. FEDREP recognition processing —
: : A Subsequent- discussion with
med this reasoning and,- with the.
AD/FI,. Subject was briefed by

S was now being made but a_
‘Om a query initiated in December
fficer Bonn requesting full
d all. information available
f° HARVARD informed OCA by toon
1 .,to Bonn that Subject's name, : to Se
y-submittted ‘for recognition, etc. were
‘ e.that WIROGUE ‘received political
It was explained that WIROGUE



--- Page 103 ---
14-0060

! t ; ah uld :
aving committed. himself irrevocably to i \
with all its attendant responsibilities. !

Available South American immigration data. indicated that |
‘ospective immigrant would have. :to. have .personal qualifications
{cient to make him an attractive prospect plus proof of
C y. Sufficient to provide self-support at the’: a
ith: for two years. -Headquarters approved
$3,000-for this purpose and. discussions . :
np King resolved the necessary documentation

SEE A RLS SE BUR ITI rae TE MARIS UE

applied.at the local Colombian
to immigrate’, HARVARD had hoped that
, rs 5 n tters of recommendation would be —
sufficient to. enable. Subject..to process with a minimum of red
tape. This:was-not ‘to be. and Subject was informed he could
only immigrate by processing through the Intergovernmental
Committee for European Migration (ICEM).

iSsed. ‘with .a clearéd official from

AMCONGEN, Munich, and the Chief of
nformed that European refugees ~ : p
‘America are “processed through ICEM thereby

ed for individual countries to maintain:

: lfare staffs. Unfortunately, since



--- Page 104 ---
.! alk” R were not-sure that
_ the aforementioned risks. were worth taking “and the problems

a th trying to resolve when it: was obvious to. HARVARD c.0.
j Lc et to: South-America and became disenchanted

be. thé local U.S. Consulate or ‘Embassy

€ d ask to See. the KUBARK representative and once
‘again force KUBARK to‘become directly involved in his’ personal

-_ “problems. . : wee : . :

’

: hundreds of hours :of Case Officer time; the
y pull together adequate information

HARVARD was faced. with the realiza-

‘for. South American -tmmigration

ret . We-were faced with the fact that
_provided with a-detailed ‘life history.

fo. ion required by “prospective employers

: orities he was not in.a position to be

_resettled anywhere, let alone South America. We knew anew
‘approach would. have. to be tried if HARVARD was ever to be in

+. a position to satisfactorily Sever Subject’
KUBARK and reduce to a minimum the need for

HARVARD C.O. felt that Subj

immigration to South Am r

7 By
iwith @ detailed life:histor:
nforma: needed for the filling out’ ©
\applications,'to stand up under detailed “i
immigration ever took place,

with enough: factual
‘any’ future: job”
nterviews, and, tf

to satisfy immigration requirements.



--- Page 105 ---
a . _ : as =6- 3

be

DARONNAT -to1d™
thoughts should be shelved,
f ‘in 'Gertany--abd. i

ed. to Chief, Stage 1, CAaBEZoNE
ESDINS” to Prepare a life story to
e from the Georgian 8.S.R. ‘to Turkey,

He
a detailed eScap

in German,

Subsistence, ie

“Sa louse, was given dishe
‘hot ping. He was

ad -taken over a dropped CABEZONE :
and various -items to set up |. -

aimed and .warned that h

sequences of any. action 6

having his fingerprints taken.

ed. the wish to immigrate to the

alia and With his new identity

He has been told that these countries

vestigations and a check with Interpol
identity. HARVARD has established

erest in Subject but we feel-his |

Provides us with some control over _

fe Fate from Germany :)° Subject :

ere is nothing. to Prevent him .

Sor even entering as a technical



--- Page 106 ---


--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

5. SOCIAL ORIGIN: “Intelligentia (sluzhashchiy); m

‘A. DATE OF BIRTH: 25 July 1919

B. PLACE OF ‘BIRTa: _ Tiflis, Georgia, USSR. Tiflis is the

, old Russian name. ‘The Georgian as well as the present.

official name ts Thilisi, .
C. NATIONAL ORIGIN: Georgian . oo
’ CITIZENSHIP: ,

- AY «From 1917 (October Revolution in
. » Georgia was governed, from. the -
rist regime, by Menshevists and: partially
rman ‘and British troops. Only in
government -in Georgia officially

wever, all persons born during this
i were classified later as Soviet citizens.

B. PRESENT CITIZENSHIP: Stateless

RELIGION: “Orthodox (pravoslavnyy),
ety, .I--practiced my religion’ to a

wy. youth, and, due to.

‘going to the Church-

y father was.
an engineer, and ny mother — a white collar worker, :



--- Page 108 ---
: ‘ Bléctro-tech
ithout d

r Hion i mo.
“happy “to marry their dai er ‘off
@. well-to-do man, By the time I
e@ Nina and I were lovers, When |
moved in with her for her husband
Ting World War‘ I} and She lived,
ing this time,“in a small hone
‘ ca isband.. Her parents were dead, and she
yorked as.a mail carrier for. she.\had very little education,
» During the. later ‘yéars of .our life together, I discovered
that-Nina was hay ‘affairs with other men. This caused
frequent quar Is: at. home. ‘and made my life unbearable, ,
Finally, the.,woman ‘became Pregnant, and since. I was ‘positive
that it ‘was nots hild, I-decided ‘to énd our relationship,

lati
was drafted:
I returned

his was. one of the reasons for ny deféction, 1 have “no
children of my own, | Pe oo. : . :

9. PARENTS: : oe :
. = Siaie . a
A. FATHER: Franky SANDERS, -born circa 1885 in the Baltic
a area; came to Russia: proper circa 1910 and worked as a
» eivil engineer in the Baku, Batumi, and Tbilisi areas,
In 1918, he married my mother in Tbilisi, He died in
1924 of .an :accident at his Place of work, I do not .
“remember my father at all, but ‘knew from my mother that
he.was. a very. good and kind man, ‘and was well’ 1 ked.

B. MOTHER: Maria SANDERS, .nee KANTCHELT, born” circa 1885
1 wiliage near the Azerbaydzhaniaa border in’ Tbilisi
} Only..child, and when her parents died

in'a’ few years! of each other, She. dioved to
rked as a\clerk in various private enter-
father. After her husband~



--- Page 109 ---
14-6000

15.:. FINANCIAL STATUS: None

her. place. of
remember

ASSOCIATES: I never had’ a

friends, but T'was somewhat closer to the following persons
in town: .

_(1) Director of RTS, who was’ transfered in 1959 to Rustavi,
Georgian” SSR.

(2) Rayon veterinarian who had his office in the rayon
. veterinary clinic: and. travelled d extensively in the rayon

area visiting collective farms
3) Club librarian. (a girl friend)

13. “SPECIAL SKILLS: i like to invent Gadgets and built up a
| -Felatively good home work ‘shop -

ua, LANGUAGES: Georgian - native

Russian - from: school and contacts with
population in Russian speaking
area and in the service.

German - fron school and residence in Germany.
fron Technicun, home. stuay and

association with Americans in
“Germany.

AINE oe EI



--- Page 110 ---


--- Page 111 ---
14-0000 oF

_-form of répayment for

“17.

ise

of second semester, and were graded by the following .

to t : @xaminations; “oral
i$ fssued a diplona. Jt was a one-page
dicated that I had attended the technicum
isted:the grades I had received on the
nd showed that I was graduated as an | -

for 4 years,
various subj
electro-mekhani

-Al1 graduates were assigned to various places of employment

not less than two-ycars. This is a
ié money which the ‘government spent
on-their education, -I- was sent to the MIKHA-TSKHAKAYA M.T.S.
which in 1958 was converted into an R.T.S. o ,

where they .had ‘to. stay:

EMPLOYMENT HISTORY:
1938 - 194) and 1946 - until ‘deféction - - Mikha-Tskhakaya

METAS. (Machine-Tractor Station), later converted into R.T.S.

-Terakhi -Rivérs

(Repair Technical Station) =" Machino-Traktornaya and Remontno-
Tekhnicheskaya Stantsiya, respectively, . Mikha-Tskhakaya,

“- péferred ‘to by the population simply as Tskhakaya,:was the

rayon center of TskhakaySkiy Rayon being renamed so after the
famous Georgian Revolutionary Mikha Tskhakaya (the old name :
of the town was: Akhal-Senaki and Akhal-Senakskiy Rayon,
respectively). . M. Tskhakaya was one: of the organizerSof the
‘Ge an Communist -Party... The. town Has now about 10,000.

pop nd i cated on the RR line Samtredia-Sukhumi
(the .main connect

between Tbrlisi and Moscow) with the
Black Sea resort. The town is located
ibutaries of the Rion River: Tsivi and

m the latter, located a few kilometers

m Mikha Tskhakaya,: is situated a'sma1l-hydro-power. station
re Iwas \a -_part-timé ‘Gmployeé: upon my return from World

junction to‘ Poti, t
-between two 17

War IT,



--- Page 112 ---


--- Page 113 ---
C...

INDUCTION DATE: . On about 26 August 1941, 1 received a
notice instructing me to report. to the rayvoyenkonat
on 27 August... I reported there and was: notified to

f. either 80 or 100 conscripts from my - 4
on the train and via Tbilisi travelled mo 5

‘report -for induction on the following day, . Then 1,

of Baku, on the highway ‘to’ Salyany and the Iranian ae on ee

~ BRANCH OF SERVICE AND SERIAL NUMBER: I-served in the:

anti-aircraft artillery, I fadino Serial number

(which is never issued’ in. the Soviet Arniy) ,

‘TRAINING: 2.3 took basic training at Salyany barracks
in Baku for a period of two months. One month. I took. the
regular basic training, ‘and the remaining month improved



--- Page 114 ---
“CHRONOLOGY OF MILITARY SERVICE:

and after
discharge

Discharged fr
submitting my

‘om t!
tr

my
‘avel and

eo -2°"" papers to my Rayvoyenkomat was issued

a new military booklet which contained

an’ indication: of my ‘resérve"status. I

was ‘never .recalled. for military train=
. : . ing’ or duty of any kind after my final
a discharge fron the Service, :

isted men, I was sent by train to
_ the 253rd. separate anti-aircraft .
artillery division (OZAD-ogné-zashchitnyy artilleriyskiy.
divizion):.:.Commanding officer of. the. battery was Lt, VAKS,
Of ler ‘zvod uprayieniya (administration platoon).
- the division was Lt. ENDELADZE. Deputy divizion
commander for political affairs was Capt .- CHOKHA and
politruk of ny battery~was ‘Senior Lt. SAMARIN, Major Vlado
(Vladimir) GURGENIDZE was the commanding officer of OZAD
and in February 1943 he was also appointed the commander
of the PVO (protivo-vozdushnaya ‘oborona or anti-aircraft

In a grou of other
the 2nd battery of

7 _ defense) in the town of Michurinsk...The headquarters of

a n eneral, :

‘When If

the division ‘was. loca:
itself was, Stationed near

‘Michurinsk, while the battery

; >, Station: TARASOVO near the oe
‘settlement of: Konskoye, 7° from.Michurinsk and 6 ‘km, - aa
from the six. ma ‘Shalling” yards located at Kochetovka :
station..:A higher HQ was in’ Tambov. and-was at first’

‘commanded ‘ by Col. CHERNYAVSKLY -and later by Col. TSVETKov,

irst arrived in Michurinsk; “1 was assigned as'a

truck iver with the division's supply platoon (khoz-vzvod



--- Page 115 ---
another med
‘d

- 1919

1926

>, 1934

turned themin at my rayvoyenkomat,

ical check-up: |

from he: reserve for médical. reasons (sane “as

Be ssued aso called-belyy bilet (white ticket
or permanént deferrient. from service), - “

‘49, RESIDENCES FRou BIRTH: |

1926"

1938

“Y941

_ enterprise.

-Mikha Tskhakaya, ‘ULitéa Tsulukidze, #14,

(Catherine),
took’ care! of my:
‘The’ couple had ni chi
" and treated. me as their own son, .

€ 3 y ‘travel: --
nit in Michurinsk aad
In 1955, I was given
by orders of the voyenkomat and

Several. addresses in Tbilisi

- Teilisi, Kirochnaya Ulitsa #35, an | eo

‘apartment in a two-story house, formerly

":@ privaté- house, later taken, over by

the: State..ZHAKT (housing organization).
After ny mother's death,
I entered the local: electro-technicum

and-moved to the students’ dormitories,

Tbilisi, Ulitsa Sovetskaya, # not recalled,
Student hostel of Tbilisi Electro-Technicum,

Here ‘I’ rented a ‘room i 4. private one=

ment. hi Keto

ry;and cooked for me, :
ldren of their own. :



--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

an to. fe 1
onship at any time.
. i} 7
For the last! several years Nina, as I
. found ‘out, was meeting other men-during
“my absence “from: héme. A.rift between.
ee “us developed. ‘and grew more and more ‘with
. a the-passing of time. Being deprived of
Nina's intimacy, I-reacted by dating other
girls, We:were on the verge of separation
-many times but Somehow made up. I. tried
‘desperately ‘to resolve our problems since,
! ’when'T. still was very close to Nina, I
_ : pee re _ _ made -anti-regime.remarks on several ©
oe se ~ . : Sions and .evén planned a joint. escape.
ft ~the USSR. I was afraid to aggravate
her too much in order not to push her into
possibly reporting me to the militia,
. However, -for some reason Nina did not
want to break off with me completely,
and. one day announced that she was expect-
ing a child and wanted to legalize our
marriage. Since, I did not consider
myself the father of the child and ;
fearing black-mail, by Nina, I decided to .
speed-up my defection which I was planning
anyway. : a : . . ‘

20. TRAVEL:

’ None except as'described previously.” °° *

CT er ee 1



--- Page 117 ---
MEMBERSHIP ..IN POLITICAL PARTIES OR ORGANIZATIONS:
I. never belonged to the Communist Party. I was urged to

join’ the Komsomol in 1937. while at the Tbilisi Elektro-
‘Téchnicum, and wassponsored there by ‘two of my class-mates,
-each of:whom had more than two years of Komsomol standing,
IT sub pplication to the local -Komsomol yacheyka
é al’ meeting of the cell members ny

ed ao told my life story and answered.
he. ers,:-After I was accepted, _
ed.my membership card ‘in‘about two months fron. the
committee of the Konsomol in Tbilisi after which

end meetin nd’ pay very small-dues., I never
; (on with ‘the Konsomol ‘organization.
: rbilisi,; I had to-deregister from the Tbilisi-
organization and register.with the I6cal organization at my:
new place ‘of residence in Mikha Tskhakaya (usually referred
to by the’ local population. sirply as 'Tskhakaya'), The same
proceedure had to be repeated upon my departure to and
discharge from the army (deregistration from the old
“organization and registration at the new place). Upon ny
return from.the army ‘to Tskhakaya, I never registered with
‘the local“organization again: °. . So,
‘When I started to Work in Tskhakaya, I was. automatically
énrolled.in the. prof-soyuz (trade unions) where .I was a.
passive. member. pay.ing-my dues (something ‘like 1% of my Salary)
: on organizer of MTS (prof-org) and attending
: “eb eétings from time to time; "I: never ‘took .
any. advantage .trade union penmbers privileges. such as the —
“cut-rate accommodations’ in rest. homes (putevka v dom otdykha).



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

ce services, w
acity for Soviet .s curi

eal so, different

Ogand. During and after’ the. war; -
_visited Western countries and was able
to..benefit fron‘the particles of truth about a different
1 re-from the even sonetimes very carefully worded
@ “people. After .I (purchased a good: radio
n 1956; started to listen intensively to
5. . long' time I cultivated the ~
éscape from the USSR where I -had -no.- ---
ly, no possibilities for advancement: te
., and ac it life.’ My anti-government. sentiments which | :
. developed ‘as time passed bécame stronger and ‘stronger,
- “and it bécame more and more difficult for me to hold |
:,myself-back and not to. éxpress them openly, which 1 did
~ anyway’ on ‘several “occasions., My. involvment with the

militia and ‘the unfavorable developments in my: personal .

life. acceleratéd ‘my plans for defection. |

‘TECHNIQUES OF ESCAPE:

On 25 June 1962, three days after my experience with the
militia, I left my residence at 0700 as I normally would
to go to work. I walked out of town toward Samtredia,
I wore my regular clothing, had 80 rubles and a_ small
. : », hand bag. I-did not want: to take. the train being afraid
Sees ee) Of militia’ surv in After I walked ‘two or thrée kiio-
: : on the highway, I- got a ride. ona ‘truck from a
y collective farm which was headed in the same:
ion, I.got off’ the truck downtown in Samtfredia and
the driver. one 'rible, then walked toward the railroad
on.. Here. I purchaséd: the ticket for Batumi-and
édithe train at 1YSO arriving in Batumi at 1415, 1



--- Page 119 ---
t: to swim 3 km}
When I came into the
the sea, I submerged.
h light swept over me
d not been discovered,
letely exhausted, and '
"e and hid in a cave
ar’the shore, J :
The next morning I climbed

; 4n observation tower,
“village of Sarpi, still on Sovi
thirsty and climbed down the hill to a near-by Stream to
drink water. I met aa ll or 12 y¥ :

drew away from me, Being
» I walked in.the stream.
Then T hid in the

. f d c I climted
OM the: roof of a Sort of stable in-the courtyard and Spent
the night there, Barly next morning I_was awakened by



--- Page 120 ---
—

a saw several. women. and’ two

. ‘no inform
receive any help

ys
from anybody. -

. From Kemal-Pasha where I was given ‘some’ clothing, I was
taken by car to Erzerun and’ from the '@ -by train to.
Istanbul refugee center... -I was thére about a week and
was taken to Germany. with the assistance of us authorities :
on Friday 6 aely “1962, , SO

25 DOCUMENTS: © - . De co
ea PASSPORT:

1 received | my: first: ‘three-year pasSport at #17 militia
(passport desk) office of Molotovskiy rayon of Tbilisi,
‘where’ I resided at that time. : ‘The passport was a single
sheet ‘of paper with my photo and biographic data on it.
In 1939 I exchanged it for a new five-year passport. at
the Mikha Tskhakaya rayon militia, This passport was of
a regular bodklet form and along with my photo and bio
data, had a stamp of propiska (registration with militia)
which stated the date of my arrival in this town and my
residence address. Shen I was drafted-to the army, &
turnéd in my. passport: and military. booklet to the ~ |
Fay voyenkomat nd picked it ‘up upon discharge from the
sérvice.” At that time:I received a new,five-year passport
from the sane militia. office with the. _propiska showing .
my new address, . In 1951; I I exchanged my passport for the -
new ‘one- hic was valid for 10 years and which was
exchanged for. ‘another 10-year passport. in. “1961.



--- Page 121 ---


--- Page 122 ---
plein .
ts “nething hé Gan do
P and said he is sorry to

te a
z Subject thanked us for cur hel
‘Cause’ us so



--- Page 123 ---


--- Page 124 ---
Ru teach

avid r reinbold

in



--- Page 125 ---


--- Page 126 ---


--- Page 127 ---
14-00009

jot interested in.”
ave to sell “it s0 che

NA te Tween c as FD ee dee.

gn

that he . :
ot over . : =

tg


--- Page 128 ---
on vacation and “that: Kr. i nor would be’ working with hin
until CO returned. He was assured that Minor was aware of

-all- the yrobleas and knows ‘the case thoroughly.

’ a : - ce . . Subject night return on Saturday but if not he sill contact:

‘Minor. t weeks i


--- Page 129 ---
this assignzent he fiad’ todo - :
could be done on his way back to Leopoldville. It 1s osvious that Subject's

primary worry or concern is te get a job with us. . Subjecs asked if his —

identity card could be renewed. Case Officer took the card and had it . :
re-validated until a June and retu:ned. it to Subject. _ . - :

Subject. was. also told that the’ cool would be. taker ‘fron’ “him for’ .
: several” Meeks and that C 8e Officer’ would g:

Cage Officer promigéd- to o return as-Soon as che" ad
48.S00n as he heard something from Headquarters. °

‘sone free time or’



--- Page 130 ---
‘lines:”

at. hné:did not “have'a 3 pose a problem and offered
him:5,000, DM’ for inis“idea. SubJjéct ‘told them lie would give it’ to’ them outright’
for. $19,000. Although they did not refuse his request, they told him they
would think it over and discuss it with the boss and would have to make a
patent'search which would take up to 4 weeks. Subject told them to go ahead
but not to try to pull any funny business sinc? there were ways of proving
that the idea was his and he. could offer it to other fimis. _ Subject will
now wait to be contacted by this. firs.

= Case Officer told Subject that we ‘had not heard any.thing from Headquarters
regarding his re-employment by us.. i asked if there was someway of’ finding
out approximately tow long: it- would’ ta CO. told‘hin this was very. difficult,

“but we would see.if we could make an’ educatéd miess. :

: Subject asxed for a key to the mailbox since he. will be receiving mail

‘from his friends in-Dortmund and possibly from the firm-which he has contacted.

bates .
then began discussing documentation with Subject along the following

The type of documentation he would receive if any would depend upon the
final decision from Headquarters as yet not received. we solicited sug,
from Subject as to solutions to the documentation proglem. Apparently his
immediate desire is to receive back his Austrian pass, finish: his business

‘in Zuropé and. return to the’Congo to clean up matters there.



--- Page 131 ---
£0) nd“submi tall ‘necessary information for “th completion of these ‘forns,
i which he did. He was reassured again that-no steps will be made to acquire. ©
: a Fremdenpass without prior consultation with him. :



--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

tion and-
‘ngths on the of the Congoleg@ and
would ‘appear to dislike intensely,

Upon return to the apartment Subject was told that we A
would like to get him West-German documentation witn political oo .
recognition, He was told that ‘if we are ‘successful he would be 7 :
documented. as legally as,possible under the ‘Circumstances and Poo
: on to begin a new life. Subject was’ very ae .
skepticalthat we could accomplish this. He Fon
carefully about his desire to ‘use’-the. Dame © Tos
: » if-he was wanted ‘for’ breaking parolg.
e@. a. watch: list’ for. that name and it. ~
c be ass that since. Panaskhet was his brother's name, _

' Subject: might. assume’ that name some day. . Subject stated that

-| Someone was confused -about -his status in France, that: he was
“not™on parol and had herefore, tiot done anything wrong in

- leaving the country, -He said that the worst that could happen
‘if he returned there would be for the authorities to ask him why
he had left the. town he had been confined to. His answer would
be that since ‘they had restricted his movements he had left the
country (C. 0. doubts that this is true but not raise any

questions), ~

.

“Bubject was given a DRC identity card, number 596, in the
pane. of David de Panaskhet. Since HARVARD is awaiting Headqiiarter6# -
- proposal regarding Subject's resettlement, C. 0. -Suggested that

he investigate the possibility -of marketing his telephone
“answering device, | Doe : : :



--- Page 133 ---


--- Page 134 ---
: _LACALEY tol im.the | te whi bad loaned “us ‘vere being ~-
wigagrpk photographed and would be Yeturned to him es soon as possible.
WIROGUB said he-was in no hurry for his documents and fcr us to keep then

a3 long as ve needed then. He said he hated kt being coupfed up in this
epartment and hoped that we could give him an interin pass which would |
Permit him to go out on the street in Frankfirt. LACKLEN said that he. vas
trying to obtain this pss as soon as possitle, the photo WIROGUS gave.

“22. May was not proper with. thy sport shirt snd that he would have MOSIEW

‘take more pictures the afternoon of 23 May with coat and tie. for the pass.
-LACKLE! explained that the deday in issuing the pess-Was simply getting another

very effort: to have a pass for hha.by 1700 23 May. “LACKLEN said ir
this was; not possible ‘he’ would plone hin ‘at-1700 and probably: have thie pass
the following .dorning, the morning. of 24°May. -NIROGUE agreed. .

4.. WIROGUB ‘said that he wanted to travel to Dortmmd and Dusseldorf
to talk to'people there about his “telephone ansvering dcvice: He would
like to have a pass to facilitate this trip which would take two or three
days. -LACKLEN suggested WIROGUR "nit tight” until we had some information
fron Washington before making this trip. In this exchange of conversation
WIRCGUE. mentioned that he preferred not to use his Austrian passport in

x i amore than any :

f in:dny. country, even the Congo. ‘He & said that he

‘Ampossidle “because ‘of his criminal: cord. LACKLEN .
. a Gertsn,¢1tiiebat (NOTE: In: a

Pp, political recognition,ete.)

ot willin spend the reqitired five years residency. in Germany
to attain citizeuship or’ for.that-matter in any cthér country. LACKLEY
mentioned ‘thst some German: documentation: ight be obtainable, hovever, he knev-



--- Page 135 ---
300008

. ® he: Ge’ pr oblém ver, :
tain his’ cefeoient not to return to the Congo. “The: ‘matter that-
8 Austrian passport will prevent him froa returning to the Congo,
be very desirable to find a plausible reason by which ve can
rake him sea he must not return the Congo.

‘7. LASKLEN requested and WIROGUE ‘agreed to renain in the p apartnent:
“ume ‘the pass “gould be obtained. . LACKLEN arranged tor a maid to com in
and cook his meala. French ‘magas inee vere Provided. It 4s: ‘Belleved he wih

. be content in the partment: through 2 May

; “8. Throughout the meeting WEROGUE continually remmiaxtinks “expressed
his views on the Congo, documentation ‘procedures and techniques, | ete.

“LACKLEN 3 Suggested that.
st ‘an expert-in: these: Flélds and asked’ if he would-be agreeable

ot taking tin ‘soméoné Oa fold be vould ery plesodd vo: 42 00s

for an immediate solution. We might also describe delays: as being caused
by Washington hea inom misonusy<' ‘SSidthing of vhich he claims to be véry
familiar with. During these Gebriefings it would be possible also to learn
the extent fo his knowlegeability of KUBARK operations, personalities, etx.
LACKLEN believes WIROGUE has. quite an extensive movledge of KUBARK. He

_ has been handled by muy people, in many places and in many vaya.



--- Page 136 ---
be

&. MOSTEN vould return at about 1400 today to take needed

pass photos and bring him som French reading material.
WIREGE WIROGUE agreed to remain in the apartment until
such a pass was available. LACKLEN would do his best to
Get 1t by 1700 today, but 17 not, early on 2h May.
When a pass vas available WIROGUE could work out arrangements
_ 20 go to Rartmmé Dortmund, etc. ; however, it may be that hia
debriefing on the ‘Congo, on documentation, ate. was of sufficient
importance’ that he should be debelered tamedintely.: 0

C. "To make hie stay in tha apartmiit as comfortable aa possible ©

. he aboula suggest to the maid: the ‘types of Toots he partiewlarly
a. We would continue to press Washington for authority needed to
resolve his cass.

WIROGUE understood the program and vas quite satisfied. He is

cooperative and LACKLEN belteves will continue to be ao.as long as a
logical and plausible Prograz is presented. LACKLEN's next contact with
WIROGUE. wi) be by telephone at 1700 hours.on 23 May when he will tell

him the

on. 2 May,

pass ig not ready and arrange for another contact at 1030 hours



--- Page 137 ---
ported::to his office to revi:
of WIROQUE and get further instructions. Acting AD/FI
instructed -LACKLEN to take him to the apartment and if
feasible, obtain the passport. and with extreme caution
eligit any infurnation regarding WIRGGUS's purpose for coming
to Prankfurt. DOOS oame through the office at this time and
was advised that LACKLEN and CABEZONE were carrying out this ~

.WIROQUE was ‘met as planned. He advised that he had |
“frit @ Hotel Savoy across tne street.
; t feasible to obtain the passport if
‘Apartment. “If:he-were in the hotel,:
to Slve up the ‘passport, etc, “WIROGUS
‘ irat about burdening us by Living in our
- apartment but: agreed todo iso. “Stephen R..-LACKIEN uaing.
“aldas MrJ Baward Miller and Roscoe MOSIEN using alias Mr. Dale
drove subjeot in CAKEZONE oar to #1 Ostend Strasse, apartment 9.
Tnia nice one-bedroom apartment with kitchen end bath and a
- living room is regarded a8 blown and is seheduted to be dropped
in Pigeal 1963. The telephone number thers 13 492813. Contact
instructions given WIROGUE in a FRAN cable were Mr. Schneider's
munber FC 553001 (opa phone located in HORDWIN's office) and.
the Annex A Guard Post number Northern 766 for after ‘hours.
Both of thease: numbers-should be ohanged-.as soon. as feasible.

3s. As agen) 08 WIROGUS was settled in tho apartsent;
TACKIEN doaortbed “nis

elf: as. an ‘adnitniatrative 6fflcer who
. Wes, Boeting hia- that che got eottled in the ‘new apartment _
and “attending to hie timedlate needs. |

:wery clear tnat het ority vo

or resolve His’ case.



--- Page 138 ---
nto the Mintstry ‘of Defense
This money had been deposited in Swies banks and Aisappeared.

He showed LACKLEN an Crder de Misaton dated 17 Hay 1962 uigned
by the Secretary General of ths Congolese Foreign Ministry
identifying rin for travel for the Congolese Government to as

gountries 1n Surope as necessary. WIROQUE sounded resolved

to completa this mission. He claimed, however, that thio alssion
was aimply s cover for nis Frankfurt contact with the "Service".

§.. WIROGUS talked about hinself ‘for about an hourand ak

“ne half. “Bone of tho Aighlignts of this’are: |.

of Défense Ainlatry

say About the inveatigation - 4 Belgian citizen, who
had béen-in the Congo before independen: @ and who was now

‘golorel in tha Congolese Ariy, and close to Genera) Mobutu
had gone to the American. ombassy to ““name+check” WIROCUE.
WIRQQUE said he was not worried ebout thie investigation
(HOTZ: LACKIGN was not asking these questions, but simply
Lfetening to WIROGUS and attempting to lead up to the
request far his passport). WIRGUE felt the only way tis
Belgian cclenel could pin hia down was by contacting the
Viennese diplomat rerresentative in Leopoléville and
through hin checking WIRUGUE's Austrian paseport sumber.
He mentioned that his friends in tie Surete and Departaant
Kea him fora. police certificate
from ‘Auatria. » KIROQUE : ino problem in furniahing tite.
He ould fasrfoate. this with no trouble and was confidant
At. would. te accepted because .tha Congolese officials would
have no otiwr such document to comare it with and ned o

practios of, throwing resorts anay..

; * sing .
at -_



--- Page 139 ---
ignsent-
\WIROGUE oontinued discussing hie interest in working
for the “Service” and indirectly made it clear he was
not interested in a normal job and life. LACKLEN ssked
him what country he was a citizen of. WIROOUE stated
that he was stateless. LACKIEN aaked him what country
like to live in it he had his chaise, if he

that he was ated bien with hia’
no tine was: it” discussed. or did

cue eae trouble whieh hs Shon eoacrfbed os the bank
robbery. a

a. LACKIEN asked him if he was actually recetving
@ salary from the Congolese Government. He said he was
ing about 15,000 Congolese Francs per month and this
was not enough to live decently on. Ke. said his Job in
addttion to this investigation he was conducting on
. . the omberszlement of money that he wap in- effest the
; a : ohtof, of the ‘Congolese Air Force.



--- Page 140 ---
abilities 1n dedolteto

ents: peop ‘love to get aixtceir -
WIROGUE loaned LACKIEN the following documenta

Passport (Austrian) 090058

Return Sabena Air Ticket 8096473 to Leopoldville |
-Congo D.ivers Pormit | .
) Carte d' Indenitite D'Etranger

.& Paso from MINDEF/Congo re Teahnioian

a
ve
paw

eg

"Status (Civiltan)  * “

Major,Congo Arey” |. “
: 238° to Hoyal Hotel, Leopolaville)’.
) Congo Certificate of Vaccination  <
‘Q1) Onder do Missica (17 May. 62), by-Secratary |
General Foreign Ministry == :
(i2) Ordor' de Mission to Brazzaville to epprenend
aman signed by Joseph MATUBA, -26 March 62

SRE
aE SEE
Bee

S 2
é

&

(13) Attestation he is Attache (Technician) Congo
. Army by M. Kalongo, Seo. Gen. Ministry of Defenze
; . 28 December 61 :

_.. 16. + LACKLEN asked if ‘he could bortow thése doounents so they
.- eguld be. photographed’ as he ‘was sure: they were of extreme value.”

- EACKLEN ‘eaid ‘thet inéamuah as these documents were WIROGUE's
"property 1f he- insisted he would nave someone: photographi the |

“doounen a 3 sem back as fast as possible, but



--- Page 141 ---
: Soviet Russia. on hid owt,’ |
- would "belp him”. “He also indicated exceptt
- -paking phony docunerita, ote. : Se

- thie te-done and he misses then,

6 ;
WIRQGUE’ also said that he nada ali ensa your people”
gave me with oy pasepcrt and while peitioning his comission
as a major in the Congolese’ army that ‘he was able to obtain
thig rank by showing ais German Army papera (aio). WIROQUB
did not indicate whether thesa papers werd given nie or he
obtained or made thes hicself. oo : .
8. -Incidentally; WIROGUE indicated he would go into
ascomplian any: misaion we wiahed
All at his own risk, (provided. wa
onal interest in”

to assign him and’ return. -

these ‘docusents eince they hed

_@® TLACKIEN did not ask hia for
"gapvioe? and would be inconsistent

apparently been provided by our
with ut the story of the "service's" interest in photographing
Congoloss docunents, stamps, eto. It is believed that at the
right momnt WIROGUE eould be taken elsewere Jor lunch or some
other. excuse, that ha would probably leave thane documenta in ris
apartaent and we could take possession of tnen. However, “hen

g the dio is cast. :

“ERE
RYBAT °

i
3



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

. ee : “a ‘dangerous and .
re jal ‘wien "crossed". It te suggested that a
: \ clear course of action be established prior to advising —
! : WIROGUE his documents are not being returned an it is quite

: likely WIROQUE nas planned or will plan his om oourse of
action.

4, Laexuat believes that WIROGUE oan be delayed for
two, three, -four;. or even more days with the. story theso
documents the stamps are terrific,” "our psople” are really
uit, them. and we would like: to keep then longer, we
ow to “send them to Washington, eto. It may be that - i

WwIRoguE ‘ould. be “given. an Identification card: siniler. to. but :
not ia tical: with xa those providec defectors describing the: '
idual ag ‘in ‘Ary ouatody a8 an. Arteria measure and’ clearly !

; “marked with an expiration’ date. . ; :

i
i

5. It may be. important ‘to note that . prior to neoting
WIROGUE LACKLEN had only read FRAN O404 and made a 30 second :
perusal of LEOP 3939 and DIR 11783. LACKLEN did really not
retain any deta from the two incoming messages and certifies t
that he did not lead WIROGUE in the conversation but simply :
let him talk with sa the purpose of establishing. rapport and . \ .

obtaining the passport 1£ posaibla.

: 6. At approxddiately 1755" hours LACKLEN returtied to the.
pcos’ 8 offices and: briefed’ the DCOS and Agting AD/FI on the

ROB. A ‘nesting waa schiaduled: in the -... . : ;

AD/FI office at 0830 23 May. Acting “AD/FI'e request LACKLEN -
notified Deputy” Criter. MATOPAZ to attend the meeting. * RBRSK : ;

tet Deputy Chief sacropaz came to CABEZONE at 1945: hours 22 May

: _ ana snapacted doounents-t OE ROI Gilde, CABEZONE was “aii. p. ah,



--- Page 143 ---
140000”

2.

3.

A.

- kannt.

UN eine Mutter hat: ‘mich: nit ‘der
georeischen Abkurzung meines Namens "Zhori" gerufen
und meine russischen Freunde haben mich "Zhora" oder

"Chorch" genannt,

'. GEBURT:
‘As. GEBURTSDATUM: 25, Juli 1919
Be “GEBURESORT: Tiflis, Ceorgien, USSR. Tiflis ist der
: ‘alte russisché- Name. Der georgische. Name .als auch
der gegenwirtige offizielle Name - ist ™bilisi.
Cc. NATIONALTTAT: Georgier .
STAATSBURGERSCHAPT:

BEI GEBURT: sowjetische. Von 1917 ( Oktober Revo-
ution in Russland ) bis 1921 war Georgien nach dem
Fall des zaristischen Resimes von Menschewiken re-
giert und teilweise von tirkischen, deutschen und.
britischen Truppen besetzt. Erst. 1921 kan in Georgien
tische: Regierung offiziell an die Macht.

die Sowi j

, Jedoch wirden alle Personen die waihrend dieser Uver-

gangszeit gedoren warden spater als Sowjetotirger aner=.



--- Page 144 ---
. ‘land’ einem: Ingentew: ohne Diplom, as bh ‘ohne Universi tits

bildung, entsprechen,
A. LETZTE STELLUNG: Chef Elektriker ( starschi elekto~
_ctechnik ) bei MICHAL ZCHAKAJA RTS. Ty

-%.  LETZTER -WOHNORT: Sdpta, Rustaveli Strasse ( ulitsa ) Nr. 25 mo ve i:
( Wohnung meiner Lebensgefihrtin Nina GANDELI ) in MICHA- foes
ZCHAKAJA, Rutaist Oblast, Georgten SSR. :

: 8. BHESPAND: ‘Ledig. - “seit ; 1946 bis: zu meinger Plucht ledte
me ich mit’ Nina GANDELI zusaninen,. geboren 1920, ‘Hidchenname
:  PAKPASCHWILL. - Als ich sie kennenlernte war sie mit einem
' Postangestellten ungliicklich verneiratet. Ihr Mann war
viel Alter ale sie und die Ehe war von ihren Eltern ge-
plant worden. Die Eltern waren altmodische Bauern von
einem entlegenen Dorf die froh waren ihre Tochter mit

einem verhaltnismassig gebildeten und wohlnabenden Mam" :
, zu verheiraten. Zu dem Zei tpunkt da ich in die Armee ein- :
bverufen wurde waar’ ‘Nina meine: Geliebdte.: Als ich aus dem
; Krieg zuriick kam 206 3 ich. zu ibr, aa ihr Kann’ in Zwei ten



--- Page 145 ---
T4QA000

.

VATER: Fraiik Simon SANDERS, geboren: ungef

“WUTTERY | ' Maria SANDER

‘petnen Vater heiratete. Nachden:: -ihr- Mann: ‘dard

1885 im Baltikum; er kam-ungeféhr 1910 ins “fussi-
scha Gebiet. Er arbeitete als Ingenieur in Baku,
Batumi. und Tbilisi Gebiet. Er starb 1924 an den
Folgen eines. Aarbeitsunfalls. Ich kanu mich an :
meinen Vater. nicht mehr erinnern, aber ich lernte — . '
von meiner Mutter, dass er. ein ‘guter und glitiger re

“Hann war der siigeneia bold be. Wars.

geboren “"ungef. ihr 1885. in éinen ‘kleinen Dorf’ in
der N&he der aserbaidshanischen Grenze im Tbilisi.
Oblast, Sie war das einzige Kind;als ihre Eltern
im hohen Alter innerhalb weniger Jahre starben
ZOg sie nach Tbilisi und arbeitete in Bluros von
verschiedenen. privaten Unternehmungen, bis sie

fing. sie. wieder - an.zu arbeiten. “Sie wechselte

. thre Arbeitsstelle verschiedene: Male und die



--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

12,

13.

n ‘den: ‘Heimat (

‘Mutter unterhielten keinen Kontakt mit néiner Familie

da sie die Ehe meiner Mutter mit einem "Auslinder" eines
anderen Glaubens ablehnten. Ich habe das Heimatdorf mei-
ner Mutter niemals besucht. ;

NAHE FREUNDE UND BEKANNTE: Ich hatte niemals nahe
. Freun aber Lich. stand den folgenden Personen in.

. der Stadt etwas: nither :

a ‘Direktor + ‘Vor RTS, der 1959 nach. Rustavi in coor
“gien SSR verset WUT 6 :

(2). Rayon ‘Tierarzt, der sein Biro in der tlerirztlt-
‘chen Klinik des Rayons hatte und der viel im
Rayon herumreiste um dort die Bayern zu besuchen,

(3) Bibliothekarin des Klubs ( eine Freundin)

BESONDERE: BEFAHIGUNGSN: Ich liebe es kleine Dinge. zu
erfinden und mir im eigenen Hein éine gute Werkstatt

einzurichten. :



--- Page 147 ---
14-00008%

15. ° PINANZISLLE LAGE: keine~
16,  AUSBILDUNG:
1927-1934 - Trudowaja Schkola Nr. 107 ( 1l0- Jahre Schule,
desyatiletka) die sich an.der’ Ecke von “Prospekt Michailow.-
.. skiy und Rirochnaja ‘Ulitsa in. Toiliai befand. ( 2ur zeit
“"" hedssen ate Strassen PLECHANOVA wa MARDSHANISCHYILT) , |
Vor 1927 wares. deutsche. Realgymnas ‘um
: din eine ednjaja schkola umgey ndelt “wurde
: der Unt exricht bis” 1930 in ‘Deutséh abgehalten und erst,
‘von: ‘diesem Jahr an in der georgischen Sprache. . Die Mehr-.
: ahi der Schiller waren Georgier, Bis 1930 gad es zwet
Stunden in der Woche rusSischen. Sprachunterricht und eine
Stunde seorg sischen Sprachunterricht; - Ich war sieben Jahre
in dieser Schule aber Wegen des Todes meiner iutter. wech-

-Selte ich’ auf: die technische Scmile iver da ich dort woh- .
ten n_konsite und verpflegt: wurde : a ;

TEAM ESR VE SOMO ee

ie ne Le

wo ‘die Workstation ina Wohnheiine



--- Page 148 ---
“emerge ee

me

&
f
\
*
3

oder @rei Hauserblécks: vom ‘Téchnikum. :

Vier Jahre studierte ich Physik, Methematik, Geschichte,
Englisch, georgische Sprache und Literatur; von 1926 oder
‘1937 an die Verfassung der Sow jet. Union. dye Gegenstinde.
wurden auf dem Stand einer"Hoheren Schule" gelehrt. Dann

. gab es noch . die. . folgenden spezialen Unterrichtsgegenstiin=-

de: Technologie’ ‘der Metalle, Theorie. der Mechanik,. Katerial=
stirke, Elektie-Maschinen,elektrische Arbeitsyerfahren,

Le a,-elé trische Messinstruménte,. Zeichnen. Die
Studenten: wurden auch mili ttirisch ausgebildet™ und kérper=

- lich ertichtigt.. ‘Der ‘Unterricht dauerte von September bis

Juli. Die Sonmerferien verbrachte ich gewohnlich auf einem
Kolchos mit einer Gruppe,die vom Technikun organisiert wor-
den war, um den Bauern mit der Ernte zu helfen.

Die Priifungen fanden zwei mal im Jahre ‘statt, vor dem Jahres-
ende und” am Ende eines zweiten Semesters. Noten wurden nach
den folgenden Systen gegeben: .



--- Page 149 ---
1450000
fan

SLED TE MOPARTS ETA

on ausgedildet: word a :
Allen Priiflingen wurden. verschiedene. Arbeitsplitze zugewiesen :
an denen sie mindestens zwei Jahre zu verbleiben hatten. Das

- ist eine Art von. Rickzahlung des Geldes, das die Regierung ftir
‘ die Ausbildung ausgegeben hatte. Ich wurde MICHA+ZCHAKAJA

‘17...

M.T.S. zugewlesen; der Name. -warde 1958 in’ R. T.S. , adgewandelt.
BERUFLICHSR WERDEGANG:

. 1936-19411. und 19 6-bis. zur ‘Plucht MICHA ZCHAKASA MT. Ss.

(Maschinen-Traktoren-Station) , spadter- abgewandelt in RT. Se

* (Reparat tur-Technische-Station) « ae Matehino-Trakternaja, und bz.

‘Remontno~. Technits¢heskaja Stanzi ja ). 41 CHA-ZCHAKAJA wurde von

der Bevilkerung einfach Zchakaja genannt und war Rayon-Zentrum
des Zéhakajskii Rayon, so génannt nach dem beriihmten georgischen
Revolutionir MICHA ZCHAKAJA (( der alte Name der Stadt war
ACHAL -SENAKI bezw. ACHAL - SENAKSKII Rayon ).. Me Zchakaja war

: ‘einer. der ‘Organi satoren der" georgischen konzuni stisehen Partes,



--- Page 150 ---
14-00000
a

cath,

PRPS,

Reparaturen : der el sktrigchen, eile von “lahawirtschaftlichen
und ‘anderen Maschinen verantwortlich waren. hiein Anfangsgehalt -
war 400 oder 500 Rubel, aberfes stieg schnell und als ich in die-
Armee einberufen wurde war zein Gehalt schon fast doppelt- 80
hoch. :
Aus. persénlichen Gringen kehrte ich in diese Stadt zurtick, nache
dem ich aus den. Militurdienst- entlass en worden war und - ich. er-
hielt: meine alte Steliung wieder. Ich békam dazu noch. eine” ;
stelle ‘als. Elektro-Tecuniker nit. ‘dex vorher erwihnten Elektri= *"

- zitdtewerk,- welches Elektrizitat fiir die Stadt und dem tbrigen

Rayon erzeugte. Ich er! hielt diese Stelle zugewiesen, da nach

‘den Rrieg ein angel an qualifizierten Arbeitskrar ten bestand.
Ich arbeitete in der zweiten Schicht im Elek trizititswerk von”
19471953 ( dann wurde die Stelle von einem -jungen Absolventen
des Kutaisi Technikums gefitllt). Ich verdiente dort 700 Rubel
neben meinen Grundgehalt bed Ref.S, Vor meiner Flucht war mein

‘Einkoamen ungefé#hr 120° neue Rubel Brut to. Ich hate susitzliches
-Binkonmen von Wochenerd~a> beiten ftir die ‘Reparatur von Haushalt

gegenstiinden, Radios. ust. durch Einwohrer’ der. Stadt. Das Geld war

2

10 ‘zu il abgewertet. waden,  - : Se



--- Page 151 ---
14-0000

AC! \
. yo
“BINZIEHUNGSTAG: ‘Ungefahr ‘am "26 August 1941 wurde

ich aufgefordert ‘mich am 27. August beim raywo jenkomat

zu melden. Ich tat das und wurde aufgefordert mich zum
Dienst am folgenden. Tag zu melden, Mit einer Gruppe von
ungefithr 8&0 bis 100 Rekruten meines Rayons fuhren mir, mit +

. dem Zug von Tbilisi nach Baku, wo die Gruppe in der so-

genannten: ‘Sal jansk? Je ‘Kasarmi ( Se Kaserne ) untergebracht,
tadtrand von. Baku, auf der Strasse

“nach Sal jan: urd zur’ “dreanischen: Grerize »befand.

Cc. militdrische EINEEI? und ERKENNUNGSNUM QER: Ich dtente :
bei der Luftabwehr artillerie. Eine Erkenriungsnummer hat

es bei der sowjetischen Armee nicht gegeben,

BD. GRUNDAUSBILDUNG: Meine erste militdrische Ausbildung
erhielt ich in der Saljani Kaserne in Baku und sie dauerte
zwei Monate. Einen Monat regulire Grundausbj ldung und” in
zwei ten Konat verbesserte ich ‘meine Qualifikation als”

. Autofahrer ( Ich. hatte gelernt wie man einen Wagen’ fabrt
wihrend. ich: in der x De Se die elektrischen Reparaturen



--- Page 152 ---
a ‘a erkie! ¢ deh éin néves™ .
Soldbuch welches meine Reserve Zu-
gehbrigkeit enthialt. Ich wurde nie
Behr einberufen sder zu irgendeiner
Ubung eingezogen cachdem ich von
meinem Militairdienst entlassen
; -worden Ware °

der 253. Separate ‘Luftabwehr art illepie Division, 2. Batterie,
‘gebracht, C- OSAD= ‘ogne= asehtschi tnyd vartilleriski division .
-Der kormandierende. Orfizier der Batterie war Leutnant WAXS.
Komnandant der wswod uprawlenje ( Verwaltung, Zugsfiihrer )

der Division wer Leutnan ZNDELADSE. Stellvertretender Divi-
Sionskocnandant fiir politische Belange war Hauzcmann TSCHOCHA
und politruk meiner Batterie wer Senior Leutnan$ SAMARIN.

Ma jor. Wiado: (_ WMadicir) GURGENIDSS war kommandierender Of ffizier
' von OSAD und in Februar 1943 wurde er auch © ‘cum Formandeur von

“PCs d cases

gg

eT ee



--- Page 153 ---
1400000

- tun i Felawevier beférdert.. 3:

pate de - ich ‘nit: dem“od
bekanit, ein Landamann von mir und ‘we ude. durch ‘sei- |
nen Zinfluss dea Di visions~Kommandeur GUA2GINIDSS, auch ein

Georgier der spaéter zum Oberstleutnant beférders wurde, als ooo

‘personlicher Pahrer zugeteilt. Er behielt mich in dieser Po-

sition bis ich von: Militurdienst eht tlaseen wurde.»

HK. BEPORDERUNGER UD _DBGRADTZRUNGEN: Rach 6 Monaten. wans-

tirzeit vurd
Sversten Jahres zum interfeldwebél waa 1s

544 “inurde deh —_

lw " auszstcHiuncsn: keine!

J. ENTLASSUNGSTAG: Ich warde vom axtiven Mili thrdienst
Ende September 1246 en tlasten, Ich erhielt meinen 3 nbefeh)
und. Reisegeld von meiner Einheit in Michurinsk, Qie ich spdi= | : . ,
ter dem rajiojenkonat ubergab; 1955 wn “de ich® hochzals trzt- : os :
lich untersucht, aut Befehr von" ‘vojerkonat und oft)

- “Reiner Reservesteilurg entlassen, aus Gesundhei seirinien. (80
wie zuvor) und erniel + eine. sogenanrte. belji bilet ‘( -weiase



--- Page 154 ---
1938-1941

1941-1946
1946-1962.

(dis gur Plucht) 7

. ‘ein Zimmer: vernieten: musste, um etwas

hatte nit. ihr. ein Verhiltnis ‘bevor ica

nicht ‘in Erinnerung), ‘Studenteriheim aes ,
Tbilisi Elektro-Technikums.

MICHA ZCHAKAJA, Ulitea Tsulukidse Nr.l4,

Hier mietete ich ein Zimmer in einem fo,

privaten einstéckigem Haus, das einem |
pensionierten Eisenbakn-eichensteller,
I1ja LORDEIPANIDSE »gekbrte, welcher —

zu seiner Fénsior dazuzuverdienen.: Tlja's
Frau Keto{ Katherina ) kiimmerte sich um

_ meine Wische und kochte fur mich woftir

ich extra etwas bezahlte. Das Ehepaar.
hatte keine Kinder und behandelten mich
wie ihren eigenen Sohn,

Militarzeit ,
Micha Zchakaja,Uiitaa Schota Rustaveli
Nr. 25,. die Privatwohnung meiner Celiebdy.
ten. Nina GANDELI. © Ich liebte sie und



--- Page 155 ---
Wihrend der letzten Jahre fand ich heraus, . :
dass Nina sich wihrend meiner Abwesenheit -
von zu Hause mit anderen Minnern traf. Un-
stimuigkeiten entstanden, die mehr und mehr
-Wwuchsen als ‘die. Zeit verging. Nachdem das
“Né Hl tnis ‘mit: Nina sehr kh. geworden. war,
fing teh" ar mich mt" anderen- Frauen. zu tref-
fens. Wir waren oft ‘daran uns. endgilltig zu
trennen,” aber wir fanden immer wieder zu-'
‘-gamnen. Ich versuchte verzweifelt unser
Problem zu lésen,denn ich hatte zu einem
Zeitpunkt als wir uns noch sehr nahe waren
Bemerkungen gegen die Regierung gemacht und
ich plante sogar eine gemeineame Flucht aus
den USSR. Ich wollte sie nicht zusehr ver-
tirgern um sie nicht womglich dazu zu brin-
, en, dasa sie mich bei der. Militia ‘anzeigte.

“aber: aus irgendwelchen Grunden wollte Nina :

“nicht. ginelich. mit mir brechen und eines



--- Page 156 ---
14-0000.

22. -

Obwohl ich solche Bemerkungen bed verschiedenen Gelegenheiten
gemacht hatte und deshalb schuldig im Sinne des letzteren Teils
der Anschuldi gung war, konnte-ich ftthlen, dass die Militia nicht
gentigend Informationen besass und ich verneinteplle Anschuldi-
gungen. ‘Ich konnte ‘mir nicht: denken wer dahinter _steckte. Nach

Longer Ve cunteen ‘bei deren ich uber alle Einzelheiten weines

befragt wurde, -
. e vnicht- au :
verlassen und: ‘mir, gesagt: ich wilde . wieder von. der
Militia -hiren. Kit, dieser einsigen Ausnahme bin ich nie ver-

‘haftet oder verhirt. worden, wedér bei der mast oder anderen

Sicherheitsbehérden.
MITGIBDSCHAPE IN POLIS ISCHEN PARTSIEN ODER ORGANISATIONEN:

Ich. gehirte niemals der kommunistischen Partet.. an, Mir wurde

nahe gelegt 1937 Komsomol beizutreten wwiihrend - dich am Tbilisi -



--- Page 157 ---
23.

lve ge chah ala ich. in’ die Armee
eintrat ( Ausstreichen aus der .lten Organisation und Ein-
schreiben am neuen Wohnort). Als ich nach der Entlassung von
der Armee wieder nach @chakaja zuruckkehrte liess ieh mich
nicht wieder in die ‘Lokale Organisation eintragen.

Als ‘en in Zchaka ja zu arbeiten. -begann wurde ‘Goh automatisch
in die (prof. “org ) Gewerkschaft . ‘eingeschrieben, ‘in der. ich.

ein- “passives Mitglied

von HTS begahite und: von. zeit “ Beit einer Pflichtversann~
lung beiwohnte.Ich machte nie Gebrauch von den Vortetlen
der Mitgliedschaft wie ermissigte Preise in Erholungsstdtten

( putewka v dom otdicha ) .

“VERBINDUNGEN MIT EINEM SICHZRHEITSDIENST:

Ich hatte nie einen Kontakt-mit einer Sicherheitsbehirde.

“Iéh rande ‘auch: nie aufgefordert in irgendéiner Art fur den

powjetischen Sicherhei tsdienst zu arbeiten.



--- Page 158 ---
besucht hatten:und ich war in der Lage’ Bruchstticke ~
der Wahrheit Uber den Unterschied in den Lebensarten
aus diesen Erziihlungen abzuleiten, obwohl diese Be—
richte sehr vorsichtig vorgebracht wur @n. Nachden. ich
1956. ein gutes ‘Radio der"iir" Marke kaufte horte ich
“sehr, oft ausliindischen ° Stationen zu. Lange Zeit trig’
“deh ‘mich- mit der Idée. aus: den USSR’ gu fliehen wo- ich:

x ine Familie, keine Verwandten und: keine Aufotiegsate=

. ‘und diesen: Gefthlen. nicht offen: Ausdruck Zu verleihen,
waa ich dann doch einige Male tat. Meine Erfahrung mit
der Militia und die Entwicklung meines persénlichen Te-
bens beschleunigte meine Fluchtplane, .

s



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

aur Eisenbahnstation; hier kaufte ich eine ‘Fohrkerte
nach Batumi und nahm den Zug um 11. 50der um 14.15 in
Batumi ankam. Ich fand einen sicheren Platz und schlief
bis zur Dunkelheit. Ich verliess Batumi zu Fuss entlang
des Seeufers. bis-ich 1 1/2 oder 2 kn stidlich ale alte

‘Schiess-Stitte’ erreichte. Hier cing ich um ungef ihr

oh 22 Unr ins Wasser ,. nachdem ich meinen Pass ‘gerstert -
hatte (‘die -anderen ‘Dokiuine nte liess ich eu Hause. ):
: und “vergrub meine Kleider und Tasche. Ich wusste ‘durch’

das Studium einer Llandkarte, dass’ ich ungeféhr. 18 km 2
zu schwininén. hatte un tiirkisches ‘Gebiet zu erreichen. :
Ich schwamm die ganze. Nacht und ich war nicht sicher : ;
ob ich schon tiirkisches Gebiet erreicht hatte » aber
ich war erschépft und schwanm ungefthr um 3 Uhr oder

'4 Uhr. frtih zum Ufer. An dem Punkt wo ich ankam began :

das Ufer steil anzusteigen. Ich sah die Silhtette - -einer

Hiitte und” ging hinein, Da fand ich einen alten elektri-

schen Motor, | Bussisch: veschriftet, woreus ich’ ersah, dass , : ‘ 7
ich noéh in Russland war. Ich versteckte mich in der Nihe Doe



--- Page 160 ---
14-0000,

Urer ‘und versteckte ‘mich. in einer Htéhle zwischen zwei
Felsen im Meer in Ufernidhe, Da verblieb ich zum Morgen,
‘Am nichsten Morgen kletterte ich den Abhang hinauf, wo oy
ich ein Steinernes Gebilde sah, das. wie ein Grab aus-
gah. Teh sing: hinein und Schaute mir die Umgebung durch 7
. eine kleine Offnung. ane Ich Sah ein. Kleines Dorf, apiter
__lernté ich, dass és’ Kemal-Pascha war. Erst dachte-ich:
ein ‘Minare tt wire.: ein Beobachtungsturm.. Ich ‘nahn | an,.
es wire. das” Dorf Sarpd ‘noch immer auf russischen Boden..
_ Teh: war sehr durstig und Kletterte ‘den Hiigel hinunter
2u einen Bach um zu trinken. Ich traf einen 11 oder
12 déhrigen Buben dex ich russisch ansprach, aber der
Bub lief weg. Ich war noch immer nicht sicher wo ich
war, ich ging-ein Sttick im Bach um meine Fussabdrticke |
zu verbergen, Dann. .Wersteckte ich mich im Geblisch bis. i.
zur Dunkelhéit. Ich ging dahn um das Dorf herun zum - i
“ -anderen Ende. Ich ‘betrat: das. Dorf und klopfte an die :
“ Tir eines Hausesy | das am Abhang eines Hugels lage. Ich i



--- Page 161 ---
ein Flasp ‘im Giirtel, einen Sack.Nadeln um mich zu
stechen im Falle eines Krampfes, mein Geld war in einem
Nylonsack, 3 Tafel Schockolade, ein Kompass und zwei
Phenamin Tabletten um meine Energie su heben ,inpinen . /
anderen Nylonsack. Mit: ‘Ausnahme des Suchlichtes: auf dem et
Wasser, das ich durch Tauchen zu umgehen euchte, gab 28. ee
keine anderen ‘Hinder 150. : _ . ce

einen | Fluchtplinen erzéhlt ‘und |

Ich hatte niemanden ° ¥v
niemand hat mir dabei. geholren..

Von Kenal-Paseha,, wo igh ‘Kieider bekan jwurde ich nit den
Wagen nach Erserum gebracht und von dort mit dem Zug: nach
Istanbul ins Flichtlingslager. Dort war ich eine Woche
und wurde dann mit Hilfe ven US Behirden am Freitag den
6. Juli 1962 nach Deutschland gebracht, :

’

25 . DOKUMENTE:
“A. PASS: : : le . :
Ich erhielt meinen ersten drei Jahre giiltigen Pass von der



--- Page 162 ---
B.

C,

“nach meiner Entlassung aus der Armee iibergab.

fen x neuen 5—~Jahres Pass. von der gleichen Dienststelle mit

propiska, welcher meine neue Adresse anzeigte. 1951 tauschte
ich diesen Pass gegen einen neuen 10-Jahres Pass ein und : ,
1961 gegen wiederum einen neuen 10 Jahre. giiltigen Pass.

MILITARBUCH: ( Wojenrii Bilet )

Siehe Para. 18. Tiper Aree hatte ich ein  Solabieh
Litshebna ja - knishka ), welches’ ich me em’ ayonwojénkomat’

ARBEITSBUCH: ( Trudowa ja. Knishka )

Ich ‘besass keings, da es von dem Arbeitsgeber :ausge stellt
wird und wenn jemand seinen Arbeitsplatz dndert » dem neuen
: Arbeitsgeber tibergeben wird. Ich aber habe niemals meinen
Arbeitsplatz veriindert. | . :


--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

The undersigned further ‘agrees he possesses no right, title or interest
in any information or Kmovledge arising out of said relationship and he fur-
ther solemnly swears that he will never divulge, publish or reveal ty word, .
Sondust or any other moans the fact of -eaid relationship mor any auch knowledge
‘or. rmotion arising therefrod except se authorised in writing by the sane -

* offfeial: of the Government aa that who witnesses this oath.)

WITNESS:

LAW Bean 5 BS oe ne

An



--- Page 164 ---
14-00000, — . -

4 2 ‘Fluechtlinge -
‘Raben wir. end; is derung nach
Chile interessiert sind, Ich were Ihnen daher sehr su
Dank verpflichtet, wenn Sie mich ueber folgende Punkte so
eingehend als noeglich informieren wuerdent . : ‘

1.) Vorgang zur Erwerbung eines Finreisevisuns unter dele
fuegung von Mustern Saemtlicher erforderiicher Fragee
dogen, .

2.) Anzahi-von Jahren, waehrend derer der Jetreffende tn
Chile ansaessig scin-muss, un die chilenische Staats~

buergerschaft 2: erwerben,

34) Hat Dir Land irgendwelche Finschraenkungen in Hinaicht
" auf die Einwanderung squote? :

‘4.) Welehe Benife sind gefragt?

S.) Muss der Firvanderer ueber eine bestimte M! ndestsune
an Geldnitteln verfuegen, ehe das Finwanderunzsvisum
ausgestellt werden kann?

6.) Anforderangen in Hinsicht auf den Gesundheit tarustand . ’
des Einvanderers, . . :

Fuer Uhr frevad ches Entgegerkommen in der Frtetlung der
‘ erbetenen Augkuenfte danke ich Ihnen ‘ta voraus, ,

Xt ‘vorsueglicher Hochochtung

_ A, O. Flnendort
txecutive Director —



--- Page 165 ---


--- Page 166 ---
istocage

d) in order tz sie an application for ar. Lamigration visa the ‘Special
conditions, cvtlined in Circular S:, 3 have to be fulfilled, !specially

the "Cartilla de inuigracion™ has to be furnished (forms are to be
obtained at the Consulate). The "Cartilla de Ivsigracion® is to be
‘filed in duplicate and executed in Spanish. .

e)' Viea fees amount to DM 9.10 per passport.

ration visa

7 . Lice ef. du

edge: for. anim:

“f application for’ an inatgration visa is filed in-Germany,
ifst sust be furnd ched ‘with seven co: des. For ‘Proper,

» form sée Clreslar "re &,

2.) The luggage list can contain only personal belongings and nate “tal
i meceasary fcr the apclicarnt's profession, which were owned by the
‘ applicant tefore the immigration visa was issued and were Produced
vin the aprlicant's aomeccuntry. The items tust be used. In some
'exel.sive cases they may ce new, however purchased bLerore ‘the issue.

,of the visa,

Iters necessar; for the execution of profession:are such which serve
eat ct’ in co ntinuing 0 the profession he has- been executing while

etd) in .Gérnany.

be Household velongings can be imported, hovever’ cnly ‘to an extent ia
focordance with te innit ront's situation,

‘tn “gzclusive cases the inatgrant: ney “also: ‘inport a ‘motor. vetiele,
ruck, jeep, or snaller trick. Trucks and Jeeps can be imrorted-
ty-free, for a delivery van 100% of the F2B-value are charged,
Passenger cars of other vehicles carsot be inported. The im-igrant
Jean, hovever, import. a’ tractor, should: ‘this be an itea: necessary ©
No carry cut his profession, - . .

6) The. lngeage: aust not contain itens of art or luxury, euch, as
. ‘valuable. ‘carpeta, gobelins, music boxes ete.



--- Page 167 ---
tion visi 48 té-be aporoved by the Chilean Foreigh |
bh lean General Consulate hag the we :
insigrant's date,



--- Page 168 ---
Sekr geehrte Eerren!{

In Beantwortung Ihrer Fragen von 31. A
&
nde Auskunft geben:

zen wir Iknen: folz

l.- Elnzelneiten cer

bzw... sinwander mgsvisums bi
ntnehmen.

Circular 2.2u.

2.- Die-chilenische Staatsbilrgersch
_Wenn man. mindestens 5 Jahre ans

+~ Eine Einwanderunssquote besteht nicht.
-- Gefragt sind vorwiegend téchnische BSerufe.

Se- Es wire besser, wenn der Einwande
einer Seite her zit finanzieller

recknen. kinnte,.
6.~ Siehe Circular 3.

rir hoffen, Innen zit unse
taten und stenen weiterhin gern zu Ihrer Verrtigung.

A

kit vorzuslicher Eockachtung

Enrique Nelkonién
: Konsul-

ist kin-

aft erwirbt man,
ussig war.

rer auskunft gediente cu

n
Ve -

die crteilung eines Einreise-
tten wir, unserem

rer von irgend-
Unterstutzung



--- Page 169 ---
14-0000 +.

I. TOURISVEN
4) Auf Crind eines tescnderen Abkorrens zwischen Deitsehlind und Chile und a
eines besonderen chilenischen Gesetzes -kann .ocn in Chile zu einem Aufent- , _
halt von héchstens So Tegen sls Tourist sum e¢inreisen. (In tesonde- .
ren Hillen besteht die Jdgliviixeit, die Sufent=altsdauer ein einziges lal
_ um weitere ‘90 ge in thile werlit ingern’ zu lassen),

: ») Als* Tourist Karin: man in Chile nk, folgenden Unterlagen @ einreisens
“Giltiger Pass ohne Visun, oder giiltiger. Persanr. r

3 ige lime, Geburtsort und -dr. tun, Staatsinge: rigke > Be -
sort, Augste) lungsda tin: und Gilt, ekeitsdauer chervor ; hen, und -der Stempel- .
“und Unterschrift. der ausstell den sehirde Sowie ein Lichtbild des Inha- - : .
* bers enthalt: : -

c) Auferden ist: ein von einem Antser2t ausgestéllter Internationeler Pocken«
inpfschein mitzufuhren, der 2 Jahre Ciiltigkeit hat. .

d) Bei der Einreise ist die Riickpassare in das Jerkarftsland oder die Passage
fiir ein anderes land vorzulegen, fur das der Tourist eine Genehnicung 2 zur
Einreise besitzt,

e} Bei der Einreise in Chile erhdlt der To.rist ein
(Toaristenkarte } vy die in zwei er Ausferticunz

als’ Tourist inn Bt. -kenn dort kei
ii ‘In Ausnaline fullen kann ans Innenzinistérian in
gang ur: die Ausiiing einer solehen Patinkeit flir-eine
neertéilen.  . i

ie als Toiristen 3 in Chita « einreisen, kénnen.dort keine VUtShe
IDELTS TEMPORAR ION dentragen (siehe .rt.1¥)

h) Als “Tourister werden Personen angeachen, die.als Erholungsreisende, we- |
‘gen sportlicher™ Interessen, in Aistitung einer. gesc Aftlichen “atigkeit
ohne Entge: us farilidren © teressén, etc. nrc: Chile kozmen, ohne die
adsicht it zu haven, fiir icrer in Tend zu bleiben oder dort zu arbeiten..

"Dar jeta de Surisno"
auszufiillen ist.

ite TBtipkest rus=

le eire Cenei:ni-
Schstuauer von



--- Page 170 ---
tgeber : sich*in je
ickreise des arbeitneniers zu
iibernehmen. Jas nonsulat bent sic das Recht vor, eventuell eine Uaran-
+tie Nir die Bezahling dieser Kosten cu verlangen. auferden wenlei: die’ in ©
unseren Circular I'r.3 bezeichneten Unterlagen benitict.
od) Bei Vertragsende Kann von den chilenischen Sehdérden ein neuns Visum oder
die "Pernanencia Definitiva" (Daw eraufentt hal tegmehnigung) erteilt rerden.

e) Die Visumgebiihren betragen DK 36,20 pro Pass.

it VISACION DE RES

t ihn. nicht gestattet, ‘ohne tesoniere vorherige Cenehnisung des chi-
chen’ Imnenninisteriuns eine bezahlte Tatigkeit im Lond auszuiiben,

. ¢) Unter besonderen Usstiinden kann der Inhaber dieses Visuns evtl. nit einem
Dauervisum in Chile bleiben, Ich einex zweijdhrigen Aufenthalt in Chile
hat er das Hecht die "Pernanencia Definitiva’ zu teantragen (Jaucraafent-

" haltsgenehnigung
d) die Visungebihren betragen Du 3, 20 pro Pass.

. Iv... VISACIONES DE REST DUI me 7 Poasato (visua fir befristeten éafenthalt;

a) Dieses Visum wird Aus landern ‘erteilt, die. sich linger als So Yage in Chi-
le aufhal er: wollen und Zu einea Ve dtenbesuch oder’ wegen’ anderer ine
n-nach-Chile xormen, oder neni die chilenischen :
fassung sind, daf der ufenthalt in Chile von ‘besonieren
land ist.’ Das Visun berechtigt zu’ eines: :Aufenthalt ‘von einen
irnerhald seiner vii tigkeitsduier, jedock” nich nachher. verlereert werden.
iach Avlouf.eines Yahres
" bleiben will die. "Perzanencia Definitive” (daieraafenthaltasen
beantragen ‘Auch wer: dieses Visum in Chile er: halten hat, ou@-die
nencia Jefinitiva"”’ ein Jahr nach der Visunerteilung becw. nach zwei Jah-
ren. seines dortigen ‘Aafenthal tes: beantragen. .



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

i ingungen:2u

x t  hervorgehen. Insbesondere. ist dié "Cartilla
Innigracidn" vorzulegen ( die Formulare werden vom Korsulat ausgegeben),
dié in zweifacher Ausfertigung mit Maschine in Spanisch auszufiillen ist.

e) Die Visumgebithren betragen Di 9,1o pro Pass. :
Bei der Anfertigung der Gepackliste fiir ein Einwanderungs visun ist folgendes. '
zu deachtens So 7 . . :

'Visum bei den Konsulat beantragt wird, dann ist die Gepuckliste : :
ufertigen. Wird das Visun ‘in Chile’ beantragt, 30 genii-
@. bei Visumerteilung vorzulegen sind. Die vorgeschrie=
unseren Circu: S : an

egen le zum persinlichen Bedarf” und: ir Berufs<
My die vor’ Ertei lung des Visuns. Eigentum des. Einwanderers
seinem Herkunftsland stanmen. ‘£3 m8 sich um gebrauchte Ge-

ndeln. In Ausnahmefiillen kénnen sie neu sein, doch mussen sie

- vor der ‘Visumer teilung erworben worden sein.

3) Unter Gegenstanden zur Berufsausiibung sind nur solche zu verstehen, die der
Fortsetzung der Tatigkeit dienen, die der Auswanderer bisher in veutschland
ausgeiibt hat. . .

4) Es kénnen Haushal tagegenstande mitgenommen werden, jedoch nur in einem der
jeweiligen Situation des Einwanderers angemessenen Rahmen. | :

usnahmefallen kann. der Einwanderer ein Notorfahrzeug mitnehnen. Es kann -
we . istkraftwagen, Jeep, Tempowagen oder Lieferwagen Sein. las tkraftwagen,
aa Jeep-und Zempowagen kénnen z0l]frei eingefiihrt. werden, jedoch fiir einen
' Lieferwagen sind loo% des. FOB-Wertes’ zu zahlen. Personerwagen oder andere : re :
 Pahrzeuge’Kann' der’ Eirwanderer nicht. mitnehmen. Er kann jedoch auch einen oS
Traktor ‘ri tnehner enn ‘dieser. fiir Seine Tatickeit erforderlich ist.. , :
-7) Das Unzugsgut darf keine Kunst- oder luxusgegenstiinde, wie z.3. echte Teppi-
che, Gobelins, Musikschranke, etc. enthalten. .° . * : .



--- Page 172 ---
6) Obwohl die’ Binreisegenehnigun; vori ‘chilenischen AuSerriristeriur erteilt
wird, behalt sich das Chilenigsche Generalkonsilat des Recht vor, die Rich-
tigkeit der gemachten Anzaben zu priifen. :

7) Fir alle Visumarten wird ein internationaler Pockeninyfschein beritigt, der
von einem Amtsarzt ausgestellt seir suG. Seine Giiltigkeiisdauer Letriigt
2 Jahre, = -

nderjihrige (unter 21 Jahren) benbtizen, wenn’sie nicht in 3e,

rziehungsberechticten reéisen, eine notariell béglaibigte
' . klérung des Vaters oder sonsticen iehungsberechtisten,

land und dén ‘Aufenthalt dort gestattet. Mat

9) Das ‘Konsulat nimt ‘keine. Arbeitsverni

. teressenten unverbinilich,

~ COKDOR ;

: Casilla 9469

L Santiago de Chile

telung fiir Chie vor. £8 empfishit Ine oe
sich an folzende jJeatscnsprachige Zéiting zu : ae

- wendens.

a eer



--- Page 173 ---
saan rape YD ALAS RES

co eemy

- 12) Irkaitsaufstellung des unbecleitete

tragens

- 7) 4 Fassbilder (uein Fetenaton) 5 x S em, auch fir jedes Kind.

- 9) Gebithren DN 9,19, oro: Pass. a

- 10) ‘Fragébos gen in 2-f
gefalit und mit Tinte ‘Unt

ng, Bit Schreibmaschine aus-
Senyvincer.. . _ .

ischer Sprache,
ercehrift versehen,

= 11) Leberslauf in 2eXéfacher ‘Ausfertigung in spe
mit Maschine Bes schrieben urd mit Tatum urd

A-1-Tack, in spanischer Sprache, rit
culer

- 13) Dekumente, die Inren Seruf best#

- 14) Schriftiicne Refercngzen.

fenthalt

n sind ni

U.S. Durchzestrichene



--- Page 174 ---
men ‘unseres Auswanderungsprograces fuer Fluecht linge haben
Wir einige Personen, die an einer Auswanderung. nach Pera intere
essiert sind, ich waere Ihnen daher sehr zu bark veroflichtet,

wenn. Sie wich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als noeglich
informieren werden: , :

“1.) Vorgane zur Frwerbung cines F inreisevisums unter Seif uegung:
von Muster saeintlicher erforderlicher Fragebogens
" 24) Anzahl. von Jahren, waehrend“derer der Betreffende in Pera
-ansaessig sein musa, um die pertanische Staatsbuergerschaft
su erverben, ue “ Te oe

34) Hat, Thr Land irgecdwelche Fingchraeatungen in-Binedeht auf
--Gie Einwaniemncsquote?. .~ - :

4.) Welche-Herufe sind gefragt?

5.) Musa der Finwanderer ueber eine bestinnte Mindestsumme an

Geldmittein verfuegen, ehe das Finmwerdervazsvisims eusgestellt
wird? :

6.) Anforderurgen in Hinsicht auf cen Vesundheitsgust: ad des Fine
wancerers, © : - 2

Fuer Ihr freundliches Entgegenkommen in der Frtetlung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke. ich Ihnen in Yoraus, uo : :

"Mit vorsueglicher Hochechtung

A. G. Blnendorf
Executive Director _



--- Page 175 ---
Goris ulado del Peru

ars - Sb) Birth“certificate (0 °°.” x ; ;

foo0 : ¢)' Proof that tne applicant has sefficient meana te pay for his

: transportation, ad well as his living expenses for at least
two years, As minimum iiving costs we figure S00 DM per month
per person. A work contract can also be supplied as proéf of
tne above, _ : -

d) Medical certificate issued by a health officer not more than

.. 6 months befcre subsiission to -the Consulate, ae

e) Certificate of ‘small-pox vaccination, issued not longer than .

: 2°years before submission to Consulate: -.
"> 2) Poiice waiver covéring thé past 10 years -
" g) Certificat good conduct ‘(Leumund szeugiiis)

Visa fees amount to DM 180.--' plus’ possible telegram, fees.

2.) .The-.citizenship of Peru can be acquired only if the applicant

egided without interruption for at least four years in Peru
and can prove.that he nas served the. country(?). Further 10 sponsors»
are required, oo,

3.) We do not know about any restrictions under the imnigration quota.
4.) We do not know any special orcfessions in demand,
5.) See Paragraph le .

6.) See Paragraph & : ; io



--- Page 176 ---
Ao elias Perdone
wenn Sie mich uebe:
fornieren wuerdent

5.) uss der Finwanderer, ueber-eine’ bestimmte Mindestsumme an.
‘Geldzitteln Verfuegea, ehe das Finwanderungavisum ausgestellt
wird? . :

6) Anforderiagen in Hinsicht auf. den Gesucchetteaustand des Fin-
wanderers, 9 . . :



--- Page 177 ---


--- Page 178 ---
die an einer Auswanderung nach Venezuela
interessiert sind. Ich waere ihnen dzher sehr su Dank verpflichtet,
wenn Sie wich ueber folgende Punkte so eingel end als moeglich
infamieren wucrdens

1.) Vorgang sur Fruerbung eines Einwamterervisums unter 3ei-
_ fuegung von Muster saent Licher erforderlicher Fragebogen,

2.) Arizahl von Jahren, uachrend derer der Betreffende ‘in’ Tener nucle
arsaessig. sein muss, um die ‘Stantabuergerschaft lhres Lendea
-8U -erwerten. . . . . .

3.) Hat ihr la “4rger ndvelehe E: nechraenteang gen in stnatont ‘mf die
Finrelsequote?. : ce an .

4.) Kelche Berafe sind gefract.

5.) Nuss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestinmte Mindestaume an
Geidnitteln verfuegen, ehe das Finwancerungsvisun ausgcestellt
wird?

6.) Anforderungen 4p Hinsicht auf den Gesundheitszustan.! des Eine

wancerers, © , : to
Fuer ihr freundlicties: Entigegenkonzen in. der ertedlung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ich Ihnen im voraus, °- a _

a an , Mit vorzueglicher Hoctachtung

"Ae G,- Elmendorf
Executive Director.



--- Page 179 ---
“Im Rahnen unseres Auswanderongsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir eini¢e Personen, die an einer Auswanderurg nach Ecuador inter=
esaiert sind, Ic. waere Ihnen daher sehr 2u Dank verpflichtet,’
wenn Sie wich ueter folgende Punkte so eingeherd als moeglich in=
formieren werienz pe ee

1.) Vorgang zur frverbung eines Finreisevisuns unter Beifuegung he
ven Mustern saeatlicher erforderiicher Frapebogen. ”

2.) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer der #etre. fende. in Feuador.
ass, un die Staatsangéhcerigkeit Thres Landes

gu erweroen.

3.) Hat ihr Land irzendvelche Finschraencungen in Hingicht auf
die Einwanderzngsquote? -. Ss :

.) Welehe 3erufe sind gefragt? , ; ;

Se) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestinr, ‘Hindestaunme an
Geldmitteln verfuegen, ehe das EF: mandcersrysvisum ausgestellt
wird? . : Loe

6.) Anforderungea ia Sinsicht auf den Gestndheitszustand des Eine
wanderers, . . : . Lo

Fuer ihr freundliches Fntgegenkomer. in der Erteilung der erbetenen
Auscuenfte danke ich Thacn in veraus, . :

“M48 voraveglicher Hochachtung

A. G, Finecdorf
Executive Jirector



--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

Im Rahmen unseres Auswan erungsprogramma’ fuer Fluechtlinge
" haven wir einige Personen, aie an einer Auswanderung nach
Srasilien interessiert sind, Ich waere ihnen daher sehr
. -..°. $a sank verpflichtet,.wenn-Sie mich ueber folgende: Punkte |
7 : To -» ° 80 eingehend als. moeglich informderen werden :

k,) weiche Berufe sind gefragt?

S.) Muss der Einwanderer ‘ueber eine bestimmte Minéestsume
n Geldaitteln verfuegen, ehe das Einwanderungsvisua



--- Page 181 ---
1450000

4.

n unseres Auswa aierunzssrocrams fuer F luechtlinge haben

wir einige ‘Personen, die an einer Auswanderung nach Paraguay

interessiert sird, ich waere ahnen daher sehr ge fank verpflichtet,

wenn Sie mich nede: folgende Purkte so eingehend als moeglich -

infornieren weerdea: : o . soe

1.) Vorgang eur Erveroung eines Eimvancerervisuss unter Beifsegung ca, E
Von Muster saeatiicher erforderlicher Pragebocen, : . Poa

2.) Anzahl von Jahren, weehvend derer der Setreftende dn Paraguay:
ansaessig sein uuse, ua die Stastsbuergesschaft Thres Landég
gu erwerben,. oe ue

3.) Hat. Thr Loni irps-duelche Fingschraenkungen in Hinaicht aur
die Fimvaniercngsquote?

le) Welche Berufe sind cefragt?

Se) Muss der Finxardeser ueber eine ! steut.e an
Gelimitteln ve-fuegen, che dis P-nw SvV.sua ausgestellt
wird? ~ .

6.) Anforde rungen ia Einsicht auf ten Cesurdheita:.stand des
Finwanderers,. -

Fuer ihr’ frevndiiches Frtcerenkomzen tn de> Frteflung der erbetenen
Auskuenfte danke ‘ich ihren im.voracs, = .

¥S% vorsveglicher Rochachtang

Ae G. Fliendort * _
Executive Director . - a



--- Page 182 ---
igration'a special immigration nem,
de eforna Agraria, Asuncion, must ve ob

it, issued by Instituto
ined, “nly upon receipt

of such permit we wili issue an immigration visa. Citi of
varicus countries not

need any immigration visa. since July 1962.:

2.) Citizenship can be obtained’ upon’ an’ unintert
country for five. years. ' fo 2 eS

inorder’ to taxe gare

: Frant must ce acsciuteiy healthy and must not be hindicapned
in any way, Lo. .

6.) The int

: a due ta a trenenious w

e2riier.. ‘

ork-leai we were unsdie to answer your letter | re _



--- Page 183 ---
infornieren wuerdens,

derungeprograms fuer Fluecht1inge haben
wir einige Personen, die an einer A: eswardertng nach Bolivien |

interessiert sind, Ich waere ahnen dahec-seh> cu Jank verpflichtet,
wenn Ste mich ueber folgende Punkte so eingeh rend als moeglich -



--- Page 184 ---
Auskuenfte wird Ihnen aber das
, Ministerio de Inmigracién
La Paz / Bolivien
WO ‘oe ne Wit bitten Sie deutialb;
fintetértun u- wenden.

E
£
;
%
'
:

— oensticvdtiest cegot tiara ox,

Ci ary



--- Page 185 ---
“Im ishmen tinseres Auswanlerungsprograms fuer Fluechtlinge haben
wir einige Persoren, die’ an einer Auswanderung nach Uruguay intere
essiert aind, Ich waere Ihnen daher sehr zu Rank verpflichtet, wenn
Sie nich ueber folgende Punkte so eingehend als moeglich infomieren

wuerden:

_1.) Vorgang zur Frverbung eines Einreisevisums unter Beifuegung :
~ von Mustern saentlicher erforderlicher Fragebogen. i °

20) Anzahl von Jahren, waehrend derer. der Retreffende in Uruguay
_ ansaessig*sein auss, um die Staatsbuergerschaft ihres Landes.
-gu-ebwerbeng ©. : Tet . so
3.) Hat Ine Lard irgendwelche Finschraenkangen| in Hinsicht auf die--
Finreisequote? | . : .
hk.) “elche Berufe sind gefragt?

5.) Muss der Finwanderer ueber eine bestinate Mindestsumme an
Geluaitteln verfuegen, ene das Firwarderunzsvisum eusgestellt
wird? i

- 6) Anforderingen in:Hinsicht auf sen Gesundheitsgustand dea Fine

wanderers. :

Fuer ihr freundliches Entgegenkoemmen in der Frteilung der erbdeterea
Auskuenfte danke iich Ihren im voraus.

Mit vorauegiicher Hochachtung

A. S. Elme:.dorf
i Fxecutive Director



--- Page 186 ---
:  5.)-No. However the imnigrant must be able to support himself by his
protessicn or private capital, :


