
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000 =
104-10119-10247), | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

ignite Ie Dee (12 a Seas mal Nuke. Lead) |
pe rreeel @ FUU exe sw RETUAN TO GIA
] Jar ~ a a velo. 7 Background Use Only

Subjeét advised that Aline’ MOSBY was a newepaperman in SCHAPIRO' #0 Not Reproduce |
office. MULBY, durin: the vast year, fad been in the hospital on several
occasions, and one dicn't see too muck of her, Subjeot also acvised that {
MOSBY stuck mostly to the foreign circuit rather than the Enbassy circuit.
Subject stated that one of the reasons MOSBY was in the hospital, on ong
occasion, was the fact. that she had an abortion, according to gossip.

J Subject stated that another nowspaperwomen in Moscow was_Priscilia
JOUN3ON. Subject advised that JOHNSON had the reputation of being a rairly
Foot reporter and one whom the Sovieta kept on a month to month visa basia, .
Subject indicated that it was highly-possible the Soviets had attenpted to
reeruit JOHNSON, as she spent a lot of time with Soviet nationals. a

disclosure of classified information in the Soviet Union, to which he re- .
plied that he had not disclosed classified information as sugh. He stated
that his cover, which he had used for the period in between|‘State Depart~/7
meant} asignmente, was that he was afconsultent of the AKO, particularly 2H
to the Joint Atomic rnergy Intelligence Committee; composed of AEC, CLA,
State, NSA, Joint Chiefs, and the Armed Services|.“] Subject stated that he :
had indiaatad to individuals, when questioned, that he had done economic )
research ami onalysis in tha Soviet field and that he had done this ever : i
gince he nad first become a otat ¢,Departmen ap Loyeee Subject atated that,

_ amonp others, he had discussed this wi th fay HUTCHINS, his counterpart in

tthe (British tnbaany) . canna OcioY ;

|
|
onbjoct. was queried as to whether he had ever made an unauthorized ‘ |
/

Subject was asked for his itinerary on his roturn trip to the United ;
States and who authorized the trip. Subject stated that he had long planned *
ts come home via the Far East, and it was a well publicized plan, lie stated '
thet when ho left. Moscow, he stayed over in Delhi for a week to soa if there i
ware any objections from Headquarters as to his itinerary, He stated that !
when he rege! ved no instructions to the contrary, he returned to the United. ;
Stules via bis previously announced plane and the differences in fares being !
borne be hin. .

x

Subject departed Hoscow 1 September 1960 (1200 A,li.)3 want to Tashkent
ad then to oelhi. vhere he spant one weeky Bankok, 4 days; Saigon, 6 dayoy.
Hone You, © dayss Tokyo, 5 days; Hawaii, 5 daysy San Francisco, 5 days;
Loc ancelue, ? days; Los Ventas, 2 days; Denver, 10. daysy arrived Washington
Oh > ctoher 1660. ;


