
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000
(104-1029 1-10003 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
a SELECT COsdLTTEL O18 ASSASSIRG SONS STAR SEDSBERS

WIV.

en cae ems

“D omy

i INCLUSIVE DATES: _,9 ¥ Paty 59-22 Je uly 19h

CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:

DELETIONS, IF A

NO LYTOUMENTS MAY BE COPTED O2 REMOVED FR; 7



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

ache meemnatad See mer

Fins >

Be Anooentedttt ty in tho exouit of 0. ‘Be
us @ eredié of

setatecred te, Seasgtnrbess

fees Bis Aaa:

38 Paly 1951
Abtachesstod 1,

Diotribeatess "
aga - 4k, v/a

Resokps

a/o

told ho eld have. $0 965 Gui!
woling exgadéey Statien 414 nat webtrast thah macint

thd abevo. $300.00

+

Angola B, Dasrleste

for $165, ‘h/y

Tayoy ois Se etiplossion by Guthaen, nyw
Cequllbetvilld eatinate, k/e

Breohgown of edvances snd excountinzs, h/v

Ct jiyt ig. «\

tee


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

res.

Me Benes? lo mae ela

Tear te epee n

LowitS the ted G-e.eg pr erme
ser, effertouve 4h Btoe- se

rng 9 oe

‘
a Rullare ¥
1 Oe tenrenss
.

fou ase f

ty the. Core pee?
Zope eleven «ip of aet2 gaotras GM

cea lly notlftm? atoe gald wcrc rect will, be terainstes
1 Sepierier L451. You-acw revirdead cf tha enotents
reeds as fallsver

rte

. "Wt. tet cesy.
guveyed Troe &
aserot ax ob $
govermes.s °h Shy form or manner. swiss Ao: euinort ted by th
arcesai gwd Tantrasting wT Sg axeniing thie agreement, ft fe
_farees t10t ay revelat wiatecorer of the agure tof ores tion

~ 7 axreesant
beanefins wo

“agg then have, searued Lo you by. rosses 4 the

as
:

we hese tn ‘sothort esd a. ze tine
5 i

a) ipeie. inera, mr syess we Payseaentatives feast
Gemerde and fyeLil flee tn and focm whatgeerar thrtug: >
Z for re Grltal states

a ae
OCR geet tea porte
wre Qent. ds. affeg isa §. 2

aigoatigs ta thy stare wecedied haloe La ashrowiedgscent of the

ctsete hare 7,

Wile, STATES oY Rua.

1 Pres tiene cwaasemy msec “han septum img 4a ie peteganne oy

r Leet
\ o
r

free

SETS CNEL eae INET SOE RO ER a *


--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

Y . oo . . a a .
H - -: 2 Lon - ~

MEMORANDUN FOR: Calef, Africa. gap ion

SYVERT 3 Tertmtion of

po ees ° LM Agyrem2 is herevieh requested: to relcete, terafaate and!
bos : wake a Sisal ssFrenes Fe yesct of $2000.00 tc SREB. i retura |
: for tnté SeaEN WiLL be required to. signs anit Clais ana Goereey
to agreement, wpe eee .
2. re ie nrevently plaansd to “polocsse “abject _ a Birore, with
the orice Gt Secirtty transporting subject via MATS os far os Pranks
. furt, Crea vienes he will proceal te an7 Wectere Surcpoas ‘eamtry ef
7 : his cholce ang ab his exgense. The t will sen at Stute
b . his only aseete vatil be can find ome. a A

3. Shera art cdequite fines evatioSile te the: project! to-cover tte
serminativa, Bemus tr) troosportation to Preatfust vis WAN. Les

fe
:
i
ee

4, * Ayprewh io aleo rapested to vrire “of? and oh: tovexpense '
the JAOAL. lone gireeeeEmege of wes ch oeseentastaly 300. od 4a, : .

7! san orgbotasgiag.
. oe ae. ae

,
‘

‘ “e ‘nam,
~ . oy sities % Deves
~ : vy 7 ey / 48s 4/2 . :
Yo carers !
bbe, a“ é ;
a Appeared: Amouat requested in paraguaph une
L “ A . ‘yg appioved {oz payment. Based
: , . A ‘ woon Cover ani operational circume
: . Ae Yh : act stangos, payment is not subject to i
. & OF 4 ate Federal income taxed, ,

_

OE ego Seg Te ee ete eB uae pede attr a teat ate Ao nS lt telecine naa eraee | eared


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

{PR Satis,

awk

Myr. Ernest GC. Maycrink
| Dear dr. Maycrink: L

Effective 31 Gctober 1960, alt contracts, oral or written, by and betweon
yous and the United States Government, as represented by the Contracting :
Cfticsr, are hereby terminated by «mutual consent of the parties thereto, and
is lieu thereof the following agfooment is, substituted.

1 Sompen ation. In fall consideration (oF the subs
‘vice, you will receive from the Government, payable in’ such

eras you may direct.in writing, the fotlowing: ©

provided ay @ cover an ity without prior amendraeat of this
agreement. .

2- Taxa. Moaies pald you diréetty or guarantced fy the Goverrimont .

Bo 3, Traval. You will bo advanced or reimburoed funds fox travel and
syanaportation expenses to and from your permarent post of duty overseas
asd for authorized operational! travel. You ivay be entitled to per diem in
lea of subsistence during such travel and, when authorized, whilé on
tga porary duty away from your per manent post of asaignment. All travel,
transportation and per diem provided for. under this paragraph muat be
yroperly authorized, and exponsés incurrad -horaunder are subject to pay~
sent ars accounting | in substantial compliance with. Governinent Fogulationa.
.

4. Cperational Expenses, You will be advanced or reimburaod funds for
recessary operational expenses as opecifically approved and financially limit,
ed by the Government. Such funds will be aubject to payment and accounting
ia avbstantial conformance with applicable Government reguiationa.

eee nt

: . Repayment. it ia racognised that your failure to account for or refund
a sy monies advanced you heroundor shal! entitle ‘the Government te withhold

the total amount of auch indebtedness or any portion theraof from any monies
you under the terms of thio contract in such manner as it deoms appro-

priate.

ne a ee eretenen ee



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000,

this asre yinent, you “incur & an injury or illness which ts not the result of, tye
: i groee pegligence, willful misconduct, or intemperate act, the Governme -
, ° | will prevido medical, surgical, hospital, transportation and disability be -
fite im euch amounts and under such conditions ae the Covernment in Sts 6
! discretion deems proper provided, however, that such bonefite shal! not
exceed a total of $5090 for the same injury or illness.

(2) Uf yau die tn the performance of actis ‘
hereunder and your death is not the result of your groso negligence, will-
misconduct or intemperate act, the Governmoant will pay the sum of $500
to your bene fictaryttee) leas any amount paid te you under sub-paragraph. -d.

t
i
f
|
4
y the U.S. Govern.ent can be made without conflicting with its
>‘prineiples and‘ideale. -- - 7 af
I

_ tb) Outstanding Performance by, you under t=
und. y

gither express. or conetr: d
may de required by thie organisation to

8. Status. You are ‘pot an omployee of the Unites Btates Government.
under-thie agreement and are not ontifléd to any benefits normally incide

to an omployeo status.

Punding. If necessary to protect the security of this arrange: meas
monies due you hereunder may be funded in other than a direct manner, .
ig understocd and agreed that any monies 90 funded constitute payment_B
the Government in satisfaction of ite cbligationa andex this agreement,

ta. Covar. (a) it is anticipated that you: will undertake & cover ventu
in the course of your performance ander thie agreement. Such venture 3
be appreved by the appropriate Government, reprogentative ovarseeing yr .
Activities prior to its initiation. Any aid all ducun-ente which you may i
execute in the courée of exid cover venturg are aubordinate to this aprer -
meni and any contradiction in terma which’ in any way anplify, exterid oF
restrict your righta and/or obligations hereunder shati be Fooolved by th > +,

agreoment which shall alwaye de dominanty: - 0

. (b) To provide capital for your approved cover venture t
Government will loan you $4000 be sacnred by a non-interest bearing p
isory SSte, payabie on demand. Said loan will be deposited to an accoun-
in a foreign bank and a $300¢ letter of credit will be issued you against t.
cepoait. The additional $1000 will be released from said account, after
approval by the Government reprosontative overcecing your activities.



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

eet

. tc) You: will submit
expense etatements on the cover

|

H distinct: from the bank a account into which’ your personal compensation pay
mente are made. :

{d) You heroin agree that monies loaned you by the Covernm «
i} shall be repaid from the profits of the cover venture, in amounts and at
| periodic intervals to be established by the Government representative ova:
i scoing your activities. After said loan has been curnplotely repaid and all
! other obligationa, auch as local taxea, ctc., have been made, you may rot
i any further profit derived from valid cover venture. Howevor, it ie clearl.
= epee a A agreed that your primary obligation under this agreement : te

ayreoment.
mation will constitute and

dation. j
° . a : 13. Unauthorized Commitments. No promlioes or commitments pér--
taining to rights, privileges or benefits othar than those expressly stipulat
in writing In:thia agreement or any amendment tharato shall be binding on.
thig organization.
14. Term. This contract is effective as of { November 1969, and alia..
¢ontinue thereafter for a period of two (2) yeara unlass sooner terminated

i

! by the Government vither}
| {a} By sixty (60) days! actual notice to you fram the Governmant, oF
| {b) Without prior notice, in the event of a breach of this contract by
your violation of tha security provisiona haroof or by your otherwiae
rendering youreelf unavallable for acceptable service,

i Subject to the availability of appropriations, thia agreement may be extend -

} upon notice from tha Geveram ont. In the event of voluntary te?snination on

your part or termination for cause by the Government prior ¢o the expirati

of this agreement or any renawal thereof, you will not be entitled to retura

travel expenses to the United States. Terniination or expiration of this agi...
ment will noi roleaso you from the obtigation of any security vath you may .
be required ta tako.

UNITED STATES GUVERNMEN™

. BY
ACCEPTED: Contracting Ctheer
i Ernest CG. Maycrink
i WITNESS: APPRUVED:
: . N f g watt oa
eared af 1 freer Go

.
‘



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

Asean . - .
, . . a ee
—_ ° i . |

Rese ed

fugu 1460

:. MEMORANDUM FOR: Contract Pesonnel Division “3
dn
Lae "1959 through’ "30 June oe iu
. r 5R/Do! . Oa 2) Octoher btacs the _
i 1 Re :)
7 ei
fi ect |
- ‘ “ax Woveabsr 1960 throug 20 serdor 1964. “
: i "$00. par month, Plus “$3000 per anniva. for houstaige -
Medical: ‘bo extent it ta neceacar} to iaintatn’ good health. . 7 - : OF,
: Inourarice: $5000 payable to beneficiary. _ narelt :
Ny ated Copon
EB. Bonus r for outstanding performnca, resettlement in snothe jor count:
F; ‘Termiiation: ending of all benefite and monies. OB
to, 960 3. This contract will have to be prepared for signing prior to 18 November 7 “omy
i 1960. . : : :
i . . * : .
; 4. For further Infortation, please contact Mr. Daniel A. Miesciur, x6264. . =
4 . . « ° “
i os Sher ‘ ite :
. . . Glenn D. Fields
; . Acting Chief, Africa Division
t 4, er iptsodsge nf Qari, : hen cat CLs beaver ~
. ..0 . Cpe
on fa HAP | thus dorfote oe. . ; i
. se * ‘

huctviel Ok - peu Cc. On
Arky dif At Oy FN. “he Heyl

nernen py
a e. :



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000
i

REFERENCE: |

™ SECHET

ave .
SR/DOB/60-207 4 -
‘ 20 October 1960
SUBJECT: — - Project Termination of Ernest G. May rink () . a

as tndependent ¢ contractor. for ‘SR Divis nm:

: SR/DOB/59 1660 dated 24 uly 1959

1. Because of the indefinite postponment of Project AESENTINEL,

“under which subject Individual was engaged, subject has been terminated by"

this office on 26 October 1960.

2. Subject individual will be picked up on contract on 21 October
i960 by Africa Division, Subject was paid on 20 October 1960 by this
office ali monivs remaining duc him as per Engagement of Independent
contractor ayreement for Project AESENTINEL,. Subject has no further

remunerative claim against the U, S. Government,

DI eke kd. , ;
MICHAEL RAE a
Chief, SR/DOB

ESRC ES RARE RA MCI REO poe!



--- Page 10 ---
14-00000

‘AraC | ' aa/h08/39/. rio, 4 aated 2h say 1959 to Finance Division re

- orene
SH/DOB/S9/_1735

oo - | a septenbis 1959
MEMORANDUM FORs Chief, Finance Division

munouas $ Special Contrasting Officer
FRow. -4 Céntrast. saititinta cfftoets

ses Bubjact.

1 projoat aesweti, undar which subject” Andividital. has been -

engaged, was originally approved through the period 31 Haroh 1960. Dias

for rengval_ and suendwent of the project has bson sutinittad to.
intended .gubjeat individual will bo utilised under tala project. ‘during 1960,

2. The following provisiona will apply to _subjest individual ducing |
the interim period, 1.2.1 20 Septanber 1959 through 30 dane 1960. ;
fern end Project Charge, Charge. .Subjeat snidtvidnad has bean engaged
under ered’ eontraet for use under “under Project ALSENTIREL, ha effective data of the
oral contract {a 20 April. 1959, and has been extended + h the period 32 Harsh.

3961, subject to termination hy the Governzent tpon thirty (30) days actual notica.

ky 8eeurity Approval, The initial esourlty clearance obtained for
Bubject's use, ah We 3532, dated LL March 1959, has baen suspended during
the interia period, Requests have been dade of the Office of Seeurity (8ED and-

Alien Affairs Staff) for sibject's uss,
Citisanahip, Subject 49 a foreign’ national.

6. Gopamation, Sibjeot will ba paid salary in the anount of $00.00
per month, payable in United States eurranay.

Te Quartars and Bubaistonce, Basia quarters md subsistence costs wit
ba berna by the Bubjeet.  Cagasional incidental’ expenses will bo borm: by
SR/D0B Station Funds. .

3. operatient Exponees. Ho Operational kxponsas are contemplated
during ths poricd covered.

9. Other Commitments, Tha following additional cowasitmenta havo been
mada to the Subject: ©
oranyy



--- Page 11 ---
medical benefits os
__-_ @yentaal use on his

Insurance, Insuranea coverage for death or disability a
“Rot to exésed 35,000. 00, Costs chargenhle agatnot Project

: es - Ba: Rosétttannits + Sata pon ma. for rome

‘of Sangeet ot “apply . .

‘fora of ecntesl, should this be doaned “noessoary fron | a ‘souurity viewpoint,
11. Ho coanitmente other than those stated above have been made’ to tho
Sadjeot, - - \

12. At euch tins as Bubjeot rowanters. training for his proposed mission,
about 1 July 1960, all provisions of his indtiel engagement will again apply. .

MICHAEL RAB
Chief, 6R/DOS

Speci? uz

Diets .
Orig. 241 - Addrassea
leo Gontraating Officer



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

a ~ Cree
. se Saw! . .
a a. snypan/s/_M.GO oo,
' . as July 1959
. . . . i
, To °Ghdef, Piname Division es -

Vids Special Contracting Offioer®
race Contract Approving Officer, Nicheel Rae
SUBIECES fncoseamt of Ernest 0. MATERINE (P) as Independent Contfanters o

t ter for a period of one year gubject to torndnation by the.
Goverment upon thirty (30) days actual notice.

2. Security Approval, The appropriate security approval for
Subject! a use jeon obtained. Type Operational Approval, No. 6-73532,

dated 11 March 1959.
3. Citizens hip. The Subject 19 a forelm national.

lL. Compensation, Subject will be paid salary in the anount of
$500.00 por nonth, payable in United States currency. ‘Of this amount, :
he Wil) setually receive $50,00 per month during training and tho duration : :
of the mission, All unpaid monies will eocrue to hig credit in an escrow :
accotmt,, the payzeanit of which will be dependent upon the proper performance
of hia duties and bea payable upon completion of adiaaion for which engaged.
Frovisiens also sas ‘for paynent of bonus not to axcned $10,000,00, ~

|

i

i

'

i

i

i
J : S. Caartara ard Subsisterice. The Subject will ‘be furnished quarters. - }
:
|

i

f

‘and aubaiatente: Shose costa to be borne by 28/008 Station funda. -
6 Gperaté onal Expensea. :

Operations? travel and expenses to bo paid ¢ as offtodally
authorised, - - .

as Domcatie travel costo will be borne ‘by SR/DOS Station funda,
fravol cesta.to and from the United States, ani foreign travel will be
charged against Project ASSENTINEL.

i b. Operational expenses to bo borne by Project AZSENTINEL.
. Training expenses to be carried by Station Allotsent.



--- Page 13 ---
14-00000

- . : ~ SECNE \ .

a i “2. | . ;
i T. Qthor Comet tmonte, oo, \-
~
. aq; Pm folloing atdttio comttonate hare bec, midh-te the
Subject:
; é
. 2 Benefits, “Subject W122. roeetve such dental and
medical benafi aa may S necessary to permit him to properly perfora
signed alssion, Conta to be borne by SR/DOB Station tiea Funda.
{
i
|
!
q

Tasurence, be for. death or Sey

Yr 7 Meenirreentenant meaner meme: yee ewes tere

_ ? : i
i a. _ MAL normal entertainnont expenses will bo © H
, n 7, Si 7 a6 i
8, Cantingent attons, ‘The folloving has not be prosiesd the i
i inttvidual eae a Sa 70 to bo tat by tho Governmant: |
tof a. Resettlement in the United States, either as an additional !
{ can bonus for the Subject or da a forn of control should this become necessary on
i . from a acourity: viewpoint. _ i
: i . 9. Ho commitments other than those stated. above have been modo te : -
} the Subject. pee
is B.
MICHAEL RAR :
! _ Chief, Sn/ucs . oy
|
Ok _ :
a i
oA an APPHOVEDE.
ws
! ed
i
! aes
i oe
cot
i vetted

