
--- Page 1 ---
14-0000

reac aee esa

2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY. ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992] .:

104-10174-10043;

Urty .

* the oxten Inigration authorities.
- a8 8 “tourdet".

‘end telephone number ‘attached hereto).

Deas ur. Tichborn:

. +: The: following is pet. forth as clarification of |: your present
nisaton, and the procedures which will be followed in the. conduct —
of ite Please indicate your agreement. by signing below. ~

Ae erational,
1. You will be briefed Generally on some aspects of the Cuban

attuation | while ja Washington oa this date. .

2. The: major briefing to ‘be given you concerning the local

political situation, security precautions, and more detailed

instructions on your present mission wi ve undertaken ‘upon your :
oxrrival in Havens. ~ : : .

Upon’ arrival! 4a Havana a tourist card vill be ian by: :
You will give your: true ‘name end
occupation in the United States and state that you are in ‘that area

“ye Your Anitial contact in Havens, wilh be with | DEN A. (oane
“When making this call, you

will ddentity yourself a8 Pred. Morse.
Se Tomi A will then give you the bristing mettioned in paregregh

2 above,

6. TUEN-A will also arraige to: put you in contact vith about.

‘two individuale for the purpose of starting you on. your assignment. —

It 1s anticipated that other leads ard contacts will result from

‘ these introductions, ‘both in Havana and the interior.

J. When talking to any local contacts you make while, in Cubs,
your cover story will be the following: that you are talking to the:
on the vehelf of some (unnamed) Americen businessmen and investors in

the revolutionary laws and to determine the possibility for future
financial development ani investments.

we Qe 3

: order to assess discreetly their position and legal résources as concerns

203)

OD



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

8 We are providing you with a letter from a cover campany
(attached hereto) which you vill use only in the case of extreme
‘ “emergency in the event that you cane to the attention of the Cuban . !
, authorities. This letter states that you are there on 6 vacation — nm ‘
and that this company has asked you to get ‘some first-hand information :
on the subjects mentioned in paragraph 7 ebove vhile there it' you :
are so inclined. ‘This will provide you with a plausible excuse for
being Both a tourist ani one interested in talking with local | a

personalities. .

9. Your mission generally is to talk with as many knowledgeable
persons as possible reganiing the political situation in Cuba, with
special emphasis on the opposition, its strengths, weaknessen, plens
sud progrars. Of particular interest ia the possibility or feasibility.

‘of a coalescence of these opposition groupe.

B. Administrative

1. While oa your present asoignment you ‘will keep s record: of
your expeuses which will) ensble you to submit the required accounting
for funde upon your return. Ty keeping the accounts you should note
times of arrive) and departure; detailed notation of expenses: incurred,
and the rate af exchange obtéined yhen exchanging U. S. dollera into -

local currency, . oo a

2. Upon your return you wilh wubadt two accountings. one wil
include your salary under “services rendered”, and also your expenses
aod will be 4a trun nase to the folloving company

’ Hanitora Associates 24
PG Spruce Street,
Philedelphia, ‘Pennsylvania

3. The second accounting will also include -salary and operational
expenses and will be subaitted in pseudonym to:

Henry W. Darkin’ t
P. 0. Box 8105 t
Southwest Station .
Washington, D. C. 4


