
--- Page 1 ---
REV ELST AP OCW. RARQUAPLERS ny

TATE AYTAL

SELEGE COPHUPLTEL OM ASSASSEBATTONS SPALE TEUBERS

Pby a: Seah SIEM SS Gee

mpnpsvonum: CC,

INTS MAY BE COPTED OP REMOVED FRO THIS PILi.



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

1 October 196%

CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENTS
IN THE CASE OF

YURIY IVANOVICH NOSENKO



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Orr. 2 y
Ba) pvyak Creer .
i
’ Ociader 1965 .
MEMORANDUM. FOR: Directos of Security

FROM 3 Degety Chief, Sccurity Research Staff
we | SUBJECT : NOSENKO, Yuriy Ivanovich :
1, Jn accordance with the request of the Deputy Circctor :
_ of Central Inteligence, attached ts a summary|with conclusioas . '

. conceralng the bona fides of Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO. Sube
@$ °  ~ conclusions are contained ia the sunraary concersiag severe

major areas which were given prbaazy consideration in iae matior
of the bona fides of, NGSERSO, - :

2. Included in this cumraary are conments concerning
conclusions in tho provicus summary and an annex containing ce.
marke on three scparate suujects reisicd te the NOSINKO care.

ica of this summary fe that NOS.

“ 3. In brief, the conclu
fo , ie the person ho claims to be, that ke heid bic clairaed positions in
a : the KGS during 1953 ~ January 1744, taas NCSENKO was aot dis-

patched by the O23, and that lis previcus ics and exage erations
wa + @xo not actually of material clynilicance at this time,

: : ; Bruce L.. Sclic : ; . 7 ,

Attachment; . : . : r
Suenmnary . coorcc2 .

BLSiko

late ia han element ee


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

I, Introduction

i ‘Summary of Developments in } NOSEN: KO Case Since
30-October 19867

ical Comments Concerning the Bona Fides of Yuriy
Ivanovich NOSENKO .

A. Is NOSENKO Icenticai to the Person Whom He Claims
to be? a

Be Is. the Claimed XOB Career cf NOSENKO Plausible?

G,: Has NOSENKO Given an Acceptable, Explanation ot
His Motivation ia Contacting CLA in 1962 and For
His Defection in 1964?

D. Is the Inforrration Fury ea by NOSENKO to CIA
Concerning KGB Oserations, Personalities, and
Organization Reasonably Commensurate With E

* °  Giaimed KGB Career?

- E. Can the Information Furnished by NOSENXO be
. Consicered in Tcto as Having Resulted in Material
- Damage to the KGB anc/or Has the information
~ - Furnisned ty NOSENKO Seen of Significant Benefit
to Western Intelligence?

¥. Is There Evidence of KGB Deception or "Give-Away"
in Information Furniszed by NOSENKO Which Woz?
(Warrant a Conclusion that NOSENKO- was Dispa: chee

GOLLECS



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

wcal or Any Gt ler Type

ctive Which Could Jusiify a Dispaich of NOSENKO
1@ GS With Peomission to Spee’ Freeiy to CLA

& Know.edge of the KGB and ¥ our

7 Being Given a Speci ic Mission or Missions?

H. Is Tere Any Evidence Thai the Contacts of NCSENKO in
2962 or in 196-4 With CLA Were Known to th.
to His Deiection or That NOSENKO Was =ve
by the AGS Relative to His Behavior or KGS Oxjective
During These Contacis of After His Dezection?

- ° " EV, Comments Concerning Previous Conclusions in Regaré to NCSENKO

A. NOSENKO Did Not Serve j ia the Naval. RU in Any 0

f the
Capacities or ai the Places and Times He Cla: a
@ .B. NOSENKO Did Not Enter the KGB in the Manner or at the

Time ie Claimed

C.: NOSENKO Did Not Serve in the American Embassy Section
Throughout the 1953 - 1955 Period as He Claimed

D. During the Period 1955 - 1960, He Was Neither a Senior : ‘
Case Oivicer in, nor Deputy Chief of, the Seventh
Department Armerican-British Commonweaish Section

E. NOSENKO Was Neither Deputy Chief of the American Embassy
Section nor a Sénior Ofiicer or Supervisor in the Section
During the Period:1961 = 1962°{sic) a

F. NOSENKO's Claims, That in 1962 He was Chiei of the
“a : Arnerican-British Cormmonwealta Section and Was

. Dow LF Thereafter a Deputy Chiei of the Seventh Department,
Are Not Credible

“G. NOSENKO Has no Valid Claim to Certainty That the KGB
: Recruited No American Embassy Personnel Between
1953 and His Defection in 1964

ecoLon4



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

out NOSENXO

Ab

cialis

oe

u

- Sture

Annex A

Annex C + The Cicrepa:

ACV Papers

6001005

eT ee

ome



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

SECKcI So

-)

. Feber .
aat ak :
ot
. of
: , gel
. 4
37
. ‘ ay



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

err a

7 INTRODUCTION

The following summary and analysis is not intended to be
all inclusive, that is to contain a specific comment on all organi-
zational, operational, personality and case type information furnished
_ by Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO: To attempt to do 80 ‘would be repetitious
and confusing to the reader and would not be of material benefit in the
formation of logical conclusions concerning the rather limited areas of

primary concern.

This summary will not contain a detailed psychological

“assessment of NOSENKO nor will it contain’a recitation of the numerous
theories which have been: promulgated in the past concerning varying 2 . -

‘aspects of the NOSENKO case. This summary will be primarily

directed toward the question of whether NOSENKO was or was not

“e dispatched by the KGB, whether his claimed KGB career is relatively

plausible and whether he has since late October 1967 been cooperative in — : ‘s.
a reassessment of the entire case for or against NOSENKO. NOSENKO

has admitted certain lies and exaggerations in the past but claims that ©

. these were of a personal nature, intended to enhance his own importance - _ : : vee

SRATR SR SS

SEES



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

-

but not to misiead this Agency in any material matters of an operational
or policy nature. :

In order to avoid any misunderstanding of the phrase "bona
fides" as considered in this summary, NOSENKO will be judged primarily
on whetocr he voluntarily defected to this Agency without KGB knowledge,
and whether his 1962 and early 1964 contacts with representatives of this
Agency were known to the KGB. . Motivation and certain other pertinent
aspects will be considered, but his admitted previous errors, lies and
exaggerations will not per se warrant a conclusion. that NOSENKO is nota
“wona fide" defector.

There is not an accurate standard or scale of measurement
against which information concerning NOSENKO can be balanced or .
correlated to determine if he is or is not a dispatched KGB officer, For
purposes of this analysis and summary, an arbitrary list of areas
considered pertinent has been compiled. Readers may differ in regard to
whether this arbitrary standard is a completely accurate standard, but it
is felt that the information from NOSENKO and information from other

sources derived through independent investigation will permit the reader

to assess the information-in toto against any standard he considers

appropriate,
The previous summary on NOSENKO entitled, "The. Exami-

nation of the Bona Fides of a KGB Defector, “has been considered ‘in

3 6004068 ~

oo oe

weed bare

aS


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

DECKS |

the preparation of thie summary. It will be commented on in part

end this summary will include conclusions correlated with the seven : 7 ,
primery conclusions eet forth on page 358 of the above summary, -
Remarks concerning certelu crrore, inconalstenctes, omisstons and
unsupported conclusions in the previous summary fa regord to specific
casea or cub-areas will be included in this summary. However, this
oummary will not include & point-by-potat comparison of all areas of

agreement or disagreement with information contained in the previous

summary.
: A positive decteion in regard to NOSENKO based on all

avellable information should be made in the immediate future. There

are 20 known sources currently available'to provide new positive 0
. information concerning NOSENKO and his bona fidee. it te recognized
; thes there fo always a possibility tn the future a new source or sources

will De able to furnish additional information in regard to NOSENKO. ; ‘

‘However, this possibility ie exceedingly tenuous and it {s felt there
fe cuffictent information avellable on which to base a conclusion in St

- . the NOSENKO matter.

_ Meatsctnaneru mats atid somes ee



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

SECRET

N NCSENXO CASE

EV:

D

SUMMARY ©&

I

Ba

Re



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENTS IN NOSENKO CASE
. SINCE 30 OGTOBER 1967

Since 30 October 1967, interviews with Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO.
have been conducted by one individual not previously known personally to
NOSENKO but who has been aware of the NOSENKO case since June 1962,

Interviews have been detailed and very extensive in scope, have
been recorded and transcribed, and have covered the entire life and caree:
of NOSENKO without regard to whether a particular aspect had been,
covered during previous interview or interviews,

NOSENKO, although naturally apprehensive during the firet few
interviews, has been cooperative, has developed a relaxed attitude, and
the interviewer has noted no gignificant reluctance to discuss any aspect

of his life, career, or activities. On occasion NOSENKO has indicated a

. reluctance to maxe positive statements in certain areas previously

considered at a minimum extremely controversial. This reluctance

was understandable and when it became apparent to NOSENKO that the

eats



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

szcunc

interviewer would not dispute or disparage his statements without adequate
reason, this reluctance on the part of NOSENKO, in the opinion of the
interviewer, totaiiy disappeared,

During the interviewing period, particularly in the iirst six months,
NOSENKO materially assisted the interviewer by preparing approximately
sixty memoranda on such diverse subjects as his life, motivation for de-
fection, individual cases, notes which he furnished to CIA in 1964, KGB
organization, and KGB officer and agent personalities. As an example
of the scope of this work by NOSENKO, four of the memoranda included

oO
remarks concerning approximately [875|KGB ofiicers, {loojxca agents,
3 35 GRU officers, ana[aco other Soviet nationals. These lists were alpha-
betically arranged and the above indicated cooperation of NOSENKO has
materially assisted in the organization and evaluation of information
furnished by him curing current interviews.

Copies of transcripts of interviews with NOSENKO and related
memoranda have been disseminated to the FBl and the Cl Stafi. Special
Agent Elbert Turner and Special Agent James Wooten of the Washington
Field Office/FB1 in particular have given great assistance in research
and compilation of new or additional information and the FBI has inter-
viewed or reinterviewed a number of United States citizens concerning

whom NOSENKO has furnished pertinent information,
oe ,
2 6001012

2S SECRET

nd
. [ened wee
es ae ee a eae oe

sige



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

6a , In addition, throe professionals from the SB Division have : :
reviewed ths current information and assiated in the retrieval of

previous information from NOSENKO and collation of current

information with previous informath-a. The latter ‘s a tremendous

task because of the volume of material; the number of individual

cases involved; and the extensive information in regard to KGB . :
persenalities, precedures, organizational structure end activities.
Tho SB Division elso provided tha services ofan expert
translator to translate the tapes of the 1965 interrogation of HOSENKO
_ by Petr DERYABIN and one of the previotisly mentioned three pro-
fessionala completed a new translation of the 1962 interviews with

NOSENKO. In addition, transcriptions of certain other particularly

pertinent previous interviewa of NOSENKO have been completed by
the Office of Security. :

Approximately 7000 pages of transcripts and related material
have been compiled and diazeminated aince late October 1967. Com-
iments concerning the value of the information contained in the sbove

. material aro contained in another section of tats surmmary. As of the
. x present thne, 8 complete anslysis is not possible since a considerable
. portion of the material bas not been fully proceaced. In the propsration

"lof this semmary all areas of major significance have been examined. ~

Because of the voluminous: information, all analytical and: eollation work

has nat been completed; but it ie not conzidered that,. based onall-

a ani ome neseenact mere leemmsaayrne mene +


--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

yarn |

6% avatiablo information, the remaining work will materially affect

the conclusions drawn in this summary. ’
The polygraph interview of NOSENK® was initiated on” . i

2 August end concluded on 6 August 1968, Approximately sixty
questions ofa pertinent nature were iridhuded in the polygraph tater-
view. No probleme were encountered daring the polygraph interview
and no aéditioval tenting ‘of NOSENKO te antictpated. Attached ts a
copy of the self-explanatory report on the results of the polygraph / :

_, interview. oo, oe CO ‘

‘Interviews with NOSENKO have. continued since the polygraph _ .

. ‘interview on a temporarily reduced scale’ ‘in order to ‘permit a review

of previous information and Preparation of this. summary. There ie,

no doubt that fature intexviews with NOSENKO will reveal information
of intelligence value, but information developed thus far will parrit
& decision in the case of Yurly Ivanovich NOSENK®.

7

- “Attachment: ,
ae Aug 68 Polygraph Rpt

3

sere tute

eR eRMINENRENE 5 CaS Ami He TERI


--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

Fie aS

@ intention to defect? Ko.

en PRY

J ebbee ®

rod a ‘ oe
26 : Chie?, Security Research Steff 12 Augus> 1968
PROS : Interrogation Research Division .
SUBTKT «=: Yurly ivanovich NOSIKO IRD # 67492

ADTLISYING DISA _
' Subject t6 a 40 year 014 foruer KGB Staffer wao defected so the
U.S. in ig6h tn Geneva.

BACKGROUND . ae vl
tir. Bruce L. Solfe of the Security Research staff has béen ae- .
‘criefing and interrogating Subject since October 1967, in order to
resolve the issue wietner Subject was a dispaicied agent of the KGB.
_ die has conducted a vast sxount of research and checking witn sources
‘ in an effort to estadlisa the veracity of Subject's statements.

PURPOSE
@ "Phe: primary purpose of the polygraph test was to deternine:
1. “Whether Suoject was a dispatched Agent of the KGB;

2. Whether Subject had intentionally given Mr. Solie
any faise inforcation. :

PROCEDURE

Subject was given a polygraph examination on 2 August 1968 at
a safesite in the vicinity of Wasninston, D.C. The examination was
conducted in the mnglish language. Suoject's comprehension and the
ability to express himself in Engiish was completely adequate for
‘ purposes of polygraph testing. Suoject was completely cooperative
in all respects. Subject displayed no evasiveness and appeared to
be completely 2ranx whenever he was questioned or gave information
oa a topic.
’

The following relevant questions were asked uring the first teat:
Is your true name Yurly Ivanovich NOSENKO? Yes. /
Were you born in the year 1927? Yes. ;
Besides the fczericans, did you tell anyone élse ebout your ‘

‘
t



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

os + wat + + to
dad you ever teii anyone in the KG35 about your contac® with ‘
Azerscan inteiiigence? io..

Seve you given instructions by the KGB to get in contact with
fzerican Intelligence? wo.

Were you told by tne KG3 to defect in onier to carry out an
Inteiiigence mission? io.

The foliowing relevant questions vere asvced curing the second test: : a 4

Did the KGB actusliy sera a communication Zor your recall to >: ;
tne USSR on the day of your defection? iw. '

Were you acquainted with CHEREPANOV? Yes.

Did you actually travel to Gorxiy in iiovenoer 1963 to hunt for
CiTEREPANOV? §=Yes.

e Are you deliocrately witnhoiding from us any information about . : a ed
", the XGB recruitzent of Acericans? ito. : . ;

Does the XGB Lave METKA ond ePTu.c 607 Yes.

Were you the responsioie Case Cfficer for Jona Abidian in 1960-617 ; .
Yes.

Do you know the true rene oF ANDREY or SASHA? Hoe
Did you ever nave tucerculasis? Yes.

- Qhe Lollowing relevant questions were asxed on test three: :
Did you serve in Navy intelligence from 1951 to 19537 Yes. , :
ve Sata in the USSR during the periog 1957 to 19597 Yea.

To the best of your xnowledse, were you in the Seventh :
Department at this tine? Yes. . : 7

Did you telephone the GaU evo Ese this tine? Yea. a4 .

: Go the best of your knowledge, was POPOV compromised because
. of the letter Mr. Winters walled? Yes.

n . . Lote .

Lo 7 . 9001016

. - yt nem soe sone



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

\

foe

To tne dest oF your i £ WOVHGY e:xmesea to the
353 Decause Of the £155 Gurveiliance oa the Briticn Exbassy7 = «+
Yes. .

wag themany misleading inforuation in tue notes you-brougnt
out from the Soviet Unicat ito.

iG you intentionally exaggerate your personal association wita
GRIBALOV? = No. :

Are you hiding any sdverse information avout your background? No.

Sudject's poiygrapn test reflected no significant responses indicative

of deception regarding the roievant questions asxed. No further polygrapa

tests were aduinistercd on %
run the risk of fatigue sett

tais date occause the examiner did not want to
ting in and thus possibiy ceusing adrenalin

‘ exhaustion.

Polygraph testing was resuned, on 6 August 1963. Tne foliowing

relevant questions were asxed ca test four:

bea

Dad you join the KGB in iarch 19537 Yes.

Were you a KGB officer trea 1953 to 19647 Yes. . :
Were you a Deputy Chie? cZ the Seventh Deparcent? Yes.
Were you only a Captain at tnis tine? “Yes.

Were you an officer in tne U.S. Exoassy Section frém March. -,
1953 to May 19552 Yes. .

In 1958 and 1959 were you the Deputy Chie? of the smerican-
Britisn-Cansdian Secticn in the Seventh Departuent? Yes.

Froa January 1960 to Decezber 1961 were you the Deputy to the,
Caief of the First Section of the First Doparwent? Yes.

From January to July 1962 were you the Cnie? of the First Section —
of the Seventh Departzent? Yes. .

Were you an officer in the First Section, First Department, SCD,
at the tine of the Stalingred operation against(Zenson, Muleland

ae 06,06 +
of oo . > 0001017


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

_

The foliowing resevant questions were asxed on tess Tive:

Since 1953 do you “now of any other 3G3 recruivccats in the
. Aerican Embassy besides AUIGY and fHOUARDR No.
Ob

Did the KGB xnow about the cotes you vrougit «7 ho.

Nave you told us the complete truth about your “U3 career? Yes.

" Did you intentionally exagcerate your personal involvement in
cases in 1962 ani 1964 ia onéer to misicad us? iio.

Did you intentionally give us any faise opcrationa:
infornation? Xo.

Did GRIBANOV offer you the position of Deputy Chie? of the
First Department? Yes.

Was ano order actually prepared promoting you to Deputy to the

‘9 Chief of the First Departuest? Yes.
in early 1960 Gié GREBANOV <eli you that your pricary responsibility an
was to work against Auerican Code Cier«s? Yes. we
Co
Other than you mentioned, are you hiding any other reasons for
your defection? ito.
Are you deliverately witnhoiding any inforuation es any foreigners °
reeruited by the XcB? No.
Sne foliowing re.evant questioss were asked on test 6ix:
Did you enter the XG3 through the influence of General BOGDAN
KOBULOV? «Yes.
Did you succeed BAXHVALOV as Deputy Chie? of the First Section?
Yes. .
Did GRYAZNOV succeed you as Deputy Chief of the First Section? !
: Yes. ..
i “Were the CHEREPANOV payers passed to the Americans with KGB :
Po, knowledge? Noe :
i“ ; :
° sot .¢ a : : : H - 8
- ~, 0001018 i
a -_ po
. i . , se 4 :

mite aot Pm ~ ee

pent ee '



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

Cor
C -

a)
Fry

’

sowledge wav there any uisienéing information in the
ov papers? No.

ot
Did you ever personally uect GOLITSGYN? No. *
. ~~ . . A
Was there a cable sexs to Ceneva Sor you to assist ARTAGV . . "
in the SoLITSKIY case? Yes.

Did you personaiiy maxe Gn approach to KS{SEA5 at the Moscow . \
Myrport? Yes. , .

Tne LToliowing relevant questions were asked on test seven:
Did you actualiy review the 4GB file on OSWALD? «Yes. . : ,

. ° Did LEZ HARVEY OSWALD receive any KCB training or assignments? .. . : a
' No. . . :

. - . . te
Were there any wicrophones instailed in the North Wing of the .
U.S. Ewoassy in Moscow? No.

a)

Was the review of microphone reports one of your duties in
. 1960-617 Yes. ;

_ Ave you withholding any inforsation know to you concerning . i |
KGB microphones or electronic activity against the U.S.
Enoassy? iio.

Before your official transfer to the Seventh Department did . 4
you read the surveiliance reports on the visit of ABIDIAN wo. . ni
to PUSHAL street? ‘Yes. _ ,

’
Did you personally conduct a certain investigation of SHAXOV . ;
in 1962 in Geneva? Yes. :

Was the rank of Lieutenant Colonel on your travel document - . .
to GORY only a mistake by KASHPEROV? § Yes. . ' ‘

_ The following relevant questions were asxed on test eight: ,

‘While in the U.S. Exbassy Section did you obtain a typewriter ; uy
, + for BORODIN for the preparation of a letter-to Zdward Zllis . i ,
SMITH? Yes. a '

a . : - 6001019.

“areaperT, ok: ook, '

weeecelee. ht
'

Te ek de cence ee



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

.
. a . Vues .
bes . nee . toe
. .
. :
, oo
i - ow. rat nen wana . ‘
Did you reaé tie officini rerors of KGGC. POY on nie contact “
, witalvz Re OL & tralia Tre. Neicinki to Moscow? Yea.
7 Are you intentionilty witheldine tay intonation conceming
ory KGB Knowseage of CIA personnel ia Moscow? Nos , ‘
; "fe there any poseit ity Vee wie KGB would dLeputen an officer
at tO Getect to the Acericans? No. :
. . a
Subject's polygrapa test of 6 Aunt aizewise reZieoted ro '
. i) P at 1
y indications of Gecegztion. : veg ont
:- vb, oa
CONCLUSIG:I : moe ‘
1 Based soleiy on the overall antiycis of Suoject's polygraph
: !

teste, it ta the Opinion of the u

imercivaed that tne Suoject nas

. ‘been Guostanvially travacul in anawerihg the rele guests
acxed, : coe eee eee tions
sy .
. vow °
‘ s
. . ; : a
' . eo
. . . . t ’
e . ‘ .
ty
8 st : : we
. : : .
yi :
: . .

woe oe

-

-  GOULC2P



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

ae —SECREL

EXTS CONCERNING THE BONA FIDES

OF YURIY IVANOVICH NOSENKO

Avett ae beat

. thu t
Exctsted tron estyantic)

tovngratag a4
trolaserteation

eaten ncn incre ee
nore ma ein pee a ee ee ta tat



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

)
oy
rt

SECi

mm

ANALYTICAL COMMENTS CONCERNING THE BONA FIDES OF

YURIY IVANOVICH NOSENKO

As indicated in the introduction to fais summary, information in
‘regard to Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO will be considered against an arbi-
trary but realistic list of areas considered pertinent to the question of
whether NOSENKO voluntarily defected to this Agency without KGB

knowledge, and whether his. 1962'and early 1964 contacts with represent-

" atives of this Agency were known to the KGB.

It was noted that motivation and certain other pertinent aspects

‘also be ‘onside d but’ hat his admitted'previous lies and exag- °
gerations. would not per se warrant a Gonelusion that NOSENKO is nota
"bona. fide defector,"

The following is a list of the areas considered pertinent and which

are being given specific consideration, Attached is a separate section

containing remarks in regard to the cesignated areas of A-H,

A. Is NOSENKO identical to the person whom he claims

to be?

: B,. Is the claimed KGB career of NOSENKO plausible?

_ SECRET / + gv0t022

re ere RE ee wane nme aera race PERE av CESS EI RIT PREYS HEC RSPR WEPSREIMREY Vee CET PENNER? We Hepes IRIE. Male eneNe hegwerimtnrtteareat as Re



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000 1

,

C. Has NOSENKO given an acceptable expianation of
his motivation in contacting CIA in 1962 and for his ; '
éefection in 1964? - , oe

D.. Is tne information furnished by NOSENKO to CIA
concerning KGB operations, personalities, and organi- : \- ‘
zation reasonably commensurate with his ¢laimed KGB
career? .

> 7 E. Can the information furnished by NOSEXKO be con-

sidered in toto as having resulted in material damage

: oe to the KGB and/or has the information furnished by } :

>) - _ NOSENKO been of significant benefit to Western Intelli- oO

gence? coe .
F. Is there evidence of KGB deception or "give away" in
information furnished by. NOSENKO which would warrant |

a conclusion that NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB?

G. Is there evidence of a political or any other type objective

ys which could justify a dispatch of NOSENKO by the KGB en en
with permission to speak freely to CIA concerning his
knowledge of the KGB and without NOSENKO being given © 1

a specific mission or missions?

UT
SSRN



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

H. Is there any evidence that the contacts of NOSENKO

A in 1962 or in 1964 with CIA were known to the KGB
Ten ; . : prior to his defection or that NOSENKO was ever briefed
by the KGB: relative to his behavior or KGB objectives

vo, during these contacts or after his defection?

sees

SAR RRR, HAG Maat Het



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

ac /ESER
co a . #58
tu wl :
” : rs)
L a .
8 . ;
Ey . .
2 .
alo


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

SARE TELA a aS

ai)

we
m
o?
a“
ine
a

A, | Is NOSENKO identical to the person whom he claims to be?
During interviews NOSENKO has furnished detailed information in regard
to his family, his activities as a youth, the schools he attended, assoc-
jates of his father and iether, and his own associates, The period
under consideration in this section is tne period preceding his. entry
into the First Department, Second Chief Directorate, MVD, vin mid
March 1953. :

Information furnished by NOSENKO concerning his father and

mother and his early, life, together with other information such asa

_comparison of photographs of NOSENKO and a photograph of his father

and confirmed travel of his mother to Western Europe in 1956 with

Madame KOSYGINA, conclusively establish that he.is Yuriy Ivanovich

-NOSENKO, the son of Ivan Isidorovich NOSENKO, the Minister of Ship-

building in the USSR prior to his death in 1956, This is also satisiactorily .
supported by personal-type information furnished by NOSENKO concern-

. * .
ing. other associates of his father and mother.

Since, as indicated above, there is considered to be no doubt
that Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO is the son of the former Minister of

Shipbuilding, a detailed study of his life prior to 1945 (age 18) is of:

> 001026.

Gh 1

Esctated trea aztonalle|
érenzracicg and

fechosate ey



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

woe oEGie i
rittie or no value in assessing ti.c bona fides or non-bona fides of
NOSENKO. An expose of his youthful indiscretions, of which he has
admitted a number, is of no import in a discussion of whether NOSENKO
was or was not dispatched by the KGB, Obtaining any coilaterai ‘irst-
hand information in regard to NOSENKO beiore 1945 would be of
negligible value, but there actually is supporting information from
Nikolay ARTAMONOV, a defector from the Soviet Navy, concerning
the claimed attendance by NOSENKO at a military-naval preparatory
school in Leningrad. ;

NOSENKO, during current interviews, has stated that he grad-

a) uated from the Institute of International Relations in 1950 and had

attended the Institute ‘since! 1945. He has explained that he should nave | nn

graduated in 1949'since it was a four-year course, but failed the final
examination in Marxiem and therefore was required to attend the Institute
for a longer period of time and again take his final examinations,

Based on information furnished by NOSENKO concerning co-
students and the Institute, there is no reason to doubt that he actually i
attended and graduated from the Institute of International Relations in
1950. The previous controversy in this matter was complicated by
NOSENKO who, in 1964 after his defection, stated in a biography that

~ he had graduated from the Institute in 1949. | Actually this statement

- G001027

RRR ETT
LASS


--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

Rae

Mine Ses.

by NOSENXO in 1964 resulted in conflicting information since NOSENKO

on 9 June 1962 during his first contact with CIA had stated that he

"completed the Institute of International Relations in 1950."" NOSENKO

has given the explanation that he changed the date of his graduation to

1949 because he did not wish to admit that he had failed to graduate in.

1949. NOSENKO explained that this change in his date of graduation

caused him to pre-date his actual entry into Navy Intelligence to 1950

instead of 1951 and his actual entry into the KGB from 1953 to 1952.

The above action by NOSENKO is included in what NOSENKO has

' characterized as hie "stupid blunders." The latter is a rather apt:

characterization of his now admitted lies and exaggerations but is not

” evidence’ that NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB. It'is evidence of ° *

a certain personality trait of NOSENKO who has in the past by his own

admission tended to enhance his importance and astuteness by graphically

portraying his personal participation in KGB activities concerning which

he had knowledge but did not personally participate,

.

The claimed service of NOSENKO in Navy Intelligence during

March 1951 to early 1953 in the Far East and the Baltic areas has been

seriously questioned in the past. Specific comments on this period of

_

wot. . . :
Peete merce ar eantinnsinerntiiern entrants ae womens cree
“bem ~

SECRET -.

0001028:



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

SEU.

: time are contained in a separate section of this summary, but it is

' considered that the recent interviews of NOSENKO satisfactorily sub-

stantiate his claimed service in Navy Intelligence during March 1951
to early 1953.

Attached is a typed copy ofa handwritten memorandum completed
by NOSENKO on 31 October 1967, This is a. biographical statement con-
cerning his jife and KGB career, No effort has been made to correct
grammatical errors or spelling since to do so would be in conflict with
the manner in which current interviews were conducted; namely, to give
NOSENKO an opportunity to recdunt his life.and activities to permit are-
examination of the entire case. The comprehension and fluency of
NOSENKO in the English language was adequate for interview purposes
in October 1967 and both have materially improved since that time.

_ Interviews of and memoranda prepared by. NOSENKO since

* 31 October 1967 have not indicated any material discrepancies with the

statements of NOSENKO in the attached memorandum, One change that
a

has-been miade by NOSENKO is that he now dates his transfer from the .

‘First Department, Second Chief Directorate (SCD), KGB, to the Seventh

Department, SCD, as occurring in the latter part of May 1955 rather

. than June + July 1955 as indicated in the attached statement. NOSENKO

' also now dates the period in which an unsatisfactory "characterization"

SECRET |

Hema Tttte Me en Sale et bse GRE ce



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

{personnel evaluation) was prepared on NOSENKO in March - April
1955 rather than May - June 1955, Since the unsatisfactory personnel
report was directly related to his transfer to the Seventh Department, ‘
neither of the above changes are considered to be of a significant nature,

An- effort has been made during current interviews to differentiate between ’
errors due to faulty memory and discrepancies indicative of deception by

NOSENKO.

Attachment:
31 Oct 67 Memo

ah

ED ORE CN errors,

i
we 4



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

ov

pUnte ue \

ih . Operational Memo # N-2

‘SUBJECT: NOSENKO, Yuri Ivanovich

The following is a typed copy of a handwritten memorandum
furnished by Subject on 31 October 1967, following a request on .
_ 30 October 1967; -

i . niga.

I, NOSENKO, George; was born 30 October 1927 in the city
we Glee. . . ne
Nicolaev, Ukraine.

ade -

My family: the father - NOSENKO, ivan, b. 1902, was working
-at the’ ‘shipbuilding plant and studied at the shipbuilding institute, which
. “he finiohed in 1928; the mother - NOSENKO, Tamara (nee MARKOVSKI),
b, 1908, a housewife; the brother - NOSENKO, Vladimir, b. 1944, a
student,
. - oo, : In September 1934 I began to study in tne school (0 claas) out
: : studied a short period of time because in October with the mother went
vin Leningrad where the father was working at the shipbuilding plant,

- "Sudsmech" from summer 1934, In Nicoiaev I was living at the Street

7 Nicoleki 7, All relatives of my family were living also in Nicolaev.

In Leningrad I was living with parents in three places till 1938:

t the Street Stachek {1934 ~ summer 1935}, St.. Ganal of Griboedov,

154 (1935-1938}, St. M.. Gorky (short period in 1938). From 1935 till
: oe "
SECRET

Gear 1
Enelséed traa antematic
Gra Sty 16

town asa al



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

eat be

. July-August we returned in Moscow,

SLU ee

‘
1938 I studied at the schools, which were close to my places of living.
In 1938 the father began to work in Moscow and soon I with the mother
went to live in Moscow in the end of this year. |

; In Moscow we were living at the St. Serafimovich, 2, Here

I wae ‘continuing to study at the school 585 (St. Be Polianka), In 1941

’- J finished 6th clasa and went with parents to rest to the south (Sochi)

“but soon began the war and we returned in Moscow,

In October 1941 I with my mother went in the evacuation in

Cheliabinsk (Ural), where I finished 7th class in spring 1942, In

- Cheliabinsk I lived in the poselok ChTZ, beizg there I tried to run to

the front with my playfeliow BUSKO, but,we.were caught and returned ,

home, . In 1942 (summer) I went with the mother.in city Gorxi and in

In August I entered in the Moscowite military-navy special

., 8chool, which was evacuated in Kuibyshev, where 1 iinished 8th class

in summer 1943 and after that I arrived on a leave in Moscow. This .
*

. school must be evacuated from Kuibyshev in Achinsk (Siberia) and 1

7 did not want to go there, With the help of father I was accepted in the

+ Baku’s military-navy preparatory school and in August went in Baku,

"I twice tried to be sent as a volunteer to.the front but failed, Soon

where I was atudying at the second course (9th:class). In this school

AR
ERAN

ashen ny

‘
:
?



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

x

“after that I run with a friend {RADCIIENKO) home in Moscow (January
: a

1944). In Moscow I studied at the courses (Russian word), finished : ou.

9th class and was accepted again in the military-navy preparatory

school, which was located in Leningrad. In Auguat of 1944 I went in
: Mae?
' Leningrad.
Boo Rte .
: , <All cadets of this school were sent to forest (about 200 km.
, ls Pe ee - '

from Leningrad) to prepare wood for winter, where we have been two -

‘months. In November I wounded by chance the left hand. and was put

in the navy hospital, When 1 waa in the hospital I decided-not to return , ae i
in the school. but to finish 10th class in Leningrad about what I have

‘written 4 letter to'my father asking his help and agreement with such

OL

my decision, . With the help of the father's friends I quited with the school

and entered in the Shipbuilding college on the second course in January

1945 and studied there till the end of May. The WWHl finished and I

decided to return to Moscow. The director of the shipbuilding college

had given me a document that I studied in this college at the second se
course and finished this course (though I was not passing exams). In ,

: - , _ Leningrad I was living in the hostel of this college (St, Tolmachev)}.

ma

- In May 1945 1 arrived in Moscow and was living with parents

(St. Granovexi, 3).

- 0001633

'

NIRS AMARA SMT BNR tee neo

SECRET



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000 »

: oO OL

In summer 1945 there was created the institute of the inter-

national relations in Moscow and in July I entered in this institute,

In Suly my father went in Germany with the group of engineers , ; ; nt . :

and he took me (I received a temporary rank of a senior lieutenant,

documents and a uniform).
- In 1945-1950 I studied at the institute. In 1946 I acquainted -
with a girl.- Shishkov FLAVIA, student of the medicine insuuture. I

H was.in close reletions with this girl, because of the pregnancy i married : ‘ vs

her and she made an abort. My parents were against the marriage and

ms we did not live together and we soon divorced, In the end of 1948 Iwas

. _ Bequai nted with Telegin AUGUSTINE and was going to marry her, ree |

ceived a flat in 1947 (St.. Mira - former Ist Uecyehckad, 162/174}, In

‘+ November her father, General TELEGIN, was arrested, but I married <

eG her. The marriage was not succesaiul, I foundout about her close

MO Ne op nla Soe teat ner git ne Set manta Sates eee ne

. relations with the brother, and the child-girl was born with patnological
changes. Iwas not the father of this child. After that I broke with her
ot. and we were living separately (end of 1948 ~ beginning 1949).
, In spring 1950 before state exams in the institute was working
a the commission, which was deal ing with future works. of the students of

my 5th course, Iexpressed a wish to work in any military organization

2 CERN EE AR NON ES nk ie Renta vate

¥ SU AAGACRR BE

SON MESSSCoSS


--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

1
oe Noa ate . QW

“and soon J was invited to visit personnel department of MGB (Ministry at 3
| \ of State Security). But MGB did not accept me. After that with the
: help of the father I began to deal with the personnel department of the — }
intelligence of the ministry of military navy concerning my. future work, : ‘. |

Passing state exams I failed Marxism-Leninism and with a

yroup of fails I waa passing state exams once more, In October 1950

, I finished the institute and received a diploma,

I was accepted in the navy intelligence in the 13 of March 1951 ;

.-and in March 17 went by a train to Soviet Harbour (inteiligence of 7th :

oe Fleet, as an interpreter .of the information department). Before going

e’Far East I began my divorce with the former wife. |

At the end of April 1952 I went on a leave in Moscow, Immediately

after returning in Moecow' had a blood cough out. Tb the middle of May

‘I went to a tuberculous sanatorium not far from Moscow, In July I

finished my treatment and returned in Moscow. Because of the health

‘could not return back to the Far East and tHe personnel department of . ,

* the navy intelligence sent me to Baltic Sea (as a senior interpreter of

ithe navy intelligence point of the intelligence of 4th Fleet + in Sovietsk,

Kaliningrad's district).
When.1 studied at.the institute.1 as all the students received a

‘ of junior lieutenant. of administrative service after finishing the

HOOL0S



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

a

eRe Sp BGAN Fs MR a tae

Reheat h

second course in 1947. In 1951 the ministry of navy nad given me also
the rank of junior lieutenant when I was accepted in the navy intelligence,
In September-October 1952 I received a rank of lieutenani,

‘In Soviets the work was not interested and for me it was nothing
to do. Besides this: the clim:te was not good for my health and I décided

to change the Job. With this purpose before new year at the end of 1952

Ral,

I took a leave and went to Moscow. January 1 Iwas with my parents

a

at the evening party at the cottage of | General MGB KOBULOV, whom L

o At
did not know before, but I knew his sonrin-law Vahrushev Vasili - a

former student and my friend. I told him about my job and that now I

wae thinking about change of the job. KOBULOV was Speaking with mé :

vont this theme and propose we work and his help i in MGB, but nothing

more definite was said about my work, This month I reported to the

_ head of the personnel department of the navy intelligence KALOSHIN

’ about my decision and that I will be working in MGB.

In the end of January I went again in the tuberculous sanatorium,

. where Iwas in,1952, In the days of funeral of STALIN I has come to

_Moscow and visited ‘the ministry where my father was working. There

1 have seen General KOBULOV who has come to the father and he said

that he would settle my “question concerning my job. After several days

in the middie ° of March Ihave received a telephone call from MVD to

‘ SES ms

%



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

. vet “ tee . .
Ti iil \

- come to KOBULOV. There I have spent about two hours in the re-'
_ ception room of KOBULOV, but he was too busy and his assistant

SAVITSKI sent me to the Deputy of the Chief of the Second Directory

SHUBNIAKOV, who told me that there was signed an order and I wae ;
‘accepted in the 1 department of 2 cniel, rectory as a case officer,

SHUBNIAKOV invited the deputy of the chief of 1 department GORBATENKO

. ‘who was acting aa the chief of 1 Department because the chief of the
|: department KOSLOV, Anatoli, was appointed to the special department

’ of extraordinarily affairs {investigation) ). SHUBNIAKOV and
‘GORBATENKO said to me that I would be working in the 1 section of ce

the'department, Then 1 with GORBATENKO.went to.the 1 department,: ,

; - Was acquainted with the chief of section KOSLOV, Veniamin, KOSLOV yoo

.told me that I will be working against the American correspondents,

me showed me room, my desk and acquainted with the officers, who were
: : 7 working in this room; KUTIREV, RACOVSi1, GROMOV and TORMOSOV,
_ The last officer must give files on. the correspondents and agents. I .
“ - was said to come next day and began to work,
- a . When Iwas resting in the tuberculous sanatorium I acquainted

: with KOI EVNIKOV, Ludmila, a student of the Moscowite University,

Vand in Tune 1953 we married, Before it Iwas living with my parents

‘ at St. Corky, o but after marriage was o Living. with the wife at

-ooocs7,


--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

. . Mee Oren Veron) We

St. Serafimovich, 2 (the flat of her parents), In 19551 received a flat

at St. Narodnya, 13, where was living with my family.

In 1954 I contracted a disease (gonorrhea) and on the advice

:
’
7
i
:
‘
J
i

of the friend IVANOV went to medic point at St. Negliunya. Doctors — !

asked to show a document, I had with me only MVD certificate and an
| .} Operative passport and showed them the passport. Doctors had: given

me a.treatment, after that twice they made tests and asked to come once

‘more, ‘but Idid not come. They wanted to see once more and sent a
letter to the place of work, which was written ‘ii the passport, The

“ Plant with MVD found out about it, The deputy. of the chief, SHUBNIAKOV,

was apeaking with x me, I had written my explanation, and punished by the ,

chief of the 2 directory, FEDOTOV - 15-daye of arrest. The komsomol's |

organization aleo punished me. I received a strict reprimand and was , |

freed of the head of komsomol's organization of the 2 chief director.

Iwas a member of komsomol's organizationfrom, October 1943.
"In the end of 1954 before leaving komsomol (oecause of Sge) the komsomol
organization of KGB took off thie strict reprimand.

In 1955 on all officers of the 2 chief directory were written

abe deht

. characterizations (May-June). In my characterization was written that

LL id not appropriate to the 1 department 2 chief directory. In June- -

‘July. Iwas ‘appointed to the 7, department 2 chief directory ag a case

“0001038

wer ttn WET, OED oS


--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

Re eereener a erie eee

an - SE ORE fT

goon received a rank of a senior lieutenant and got a promotion -a

. Iwould lose the flat in Moscow, At this time the. chief of the section: of.

: 2 department, PIATROVSKI, proposed tome to go. to work in. n Ethiopia

~ AMV seen, Nw’

officer of 2 section. This section was new created (the work against
tourists), The chief of 7 department - PERFILIEV, the chief of the
2 section - GUSKOYV.

4
In 1956 Iwas accepted as a candidate in the Communist Party,

senior case officer. . -
In 1457 I was accepted in the Party as a member. ,
v4 In August 1956 my father died,
In 1957 or 1958 I was promoted a deputy chief of 2 section, In

7th department I wae working till 1960 and in January 1960, was sent to

work: aga deputy ‘chief of the 1 section in ‘the 1 department 2 ‘chief
directory (chief. of the 1 department, KLIPIN, Vilad,, chief of the
i section ~ KOVSHUX).

‘My family was consist of the wife and two daughters: Oksana,
born in 1954, and Tamara, born in 1958, Oksana was ill (bronchial
asthma) from 1957 and almost every year till 1963 2-3 months was in
hospitale, In 1960 Iwas thinking about change (temporary) place of
‘ving and there was a possibility to go to work in 2 departments. KGB

‘in Lvov and Odessa. But there was another question if I go from Moscow

*

9


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

i

\

‘
EN

waLueate a,

(counter -intelligence worx among Soviet specialists in Ethiopia). The
chiei of 2 chief directory agreed and the question was almoat decided
“but in the last moment the personnel department of KGB did not agree,
' The yeasons were the case oi 1954 (iliness and use of the passport for
“cover) and a checking in the place of my living (some of agents: report

that drink and on this base have quarrels with the wife). -
1 wae working in the 1 department till 1962, In January 1962
_-I-was appointed again in-the 7 department as: the chief of the 1 section
(work.against tourists from the USA and Canada),
In December 1959 1 got a rank of a captain,
When I began to wors in the 7 department I knew that soon 1
must be promoted a deputy chief of the departrnent, when would free
a place ~ the deputy chief of department BALDIN was preparing to go
to work in eastern Germany,
In July 1962 I was appointed the deputy chief of 7 department
(the chief of'the department was CHELNOKOV) and here I was working
till January 18, 1964, .
During my work in MVD-KGB I did not study in any school, .
_only in 1953-1954 was visiting courses of foreign languages of MVD-

. KGBat St. Kieelni,

. iM 8
wl ieee iceman wee

i
i
!

4
i
¥



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

SURI tema memeretes rae ee

None “eee Thy :
Sivict oo

-; . Five times I was sent abroad; in 1957 I wae in England with a
2 de : ° ;

sport delegation; in 1958 was again in Engiand with a sport delegation;

in 1960 I was in Cuba with a delegation of specialists of nickel industry; .
‘in 1962 Lwas ‘sent in Bulgaria with the aim to help to department 2 |

: : directory MVD; in 1962 I wae in Switzeriand + the conference of dis-

armament, -

.

Working in MVD-KGB every year I had leaves for rest. In

- 1953. with the wife I was resting in the tuberculous sanatorium, In 1954 -

' Iwas with the family at the cottage. In 1955 I was resting at the cottage.

‘In March 1956 I was resting with the wife in Karlovi Vary, Czechoslovakia,

In 1957 Iw wae in Leningrad two weeks with the wife and then rested at.

the cottage. In 1958 I was resting at the cottage, In 1959 I with the wite’ .

rested in Sochi, In January-February 1960 1 rested with the wife in

Kislovodsk. In 1961 - August - I rested with the wife and daughters in

Nicolaev. In October 1962 I rested with the wife in Sochi, In July 1963

" L rested with the wife and daughters in Anapa.

ye es neers



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

Cie 1

Satie or3

dowagracis:

ania, Heetaas'

F aad

itycatiog , -



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

+
~ Skuse ! 4 a

'

B._Is the claimed KGB career of NOSENKO plausible? In the -
past the theory has been advanced that NOSENKO was never an officer’ :
in the KGB. information of a detailed nature from NOSENKO concern- 2
: ing the KGB, particularly the Second Chief Directorate, naa been a
extensive as to invalidate any contention that he was not a KGB officer, |

It is considered that NOSENKO was a KGB officer in the claimed:

Departments during the claimed periods of time and served in the claimed ,

\)

wee

positions in each Department. It is interesting to mote that NOSENKO has °°)

not materially varied in his statements in regard to the above since his_
original contact in June 1962 (with the exception of hie change to 1952 aa , : ; : : |
"date of his entry into the KGB and then later reverting to the date given:

in 1962), There have been some variations in dates of'a minor nature, : the

i as indicated elsewhere in this summary, but these are of month or day’ : !

transfer irom one Department to another and not considered critical’

S
or evidence of deception, NOSENKO has admitted previously giving false .

so gnee . ‘

information in regard to rank and medals, but his basic story concerning :

0001043



--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

hia KGB career today is not significantly different from the fragmentary

version he gave in June 1962,

Basically the following is now considered to have been the KGB

career of NOSENKO:

- "Late May 1955 - December 1959-(1958, - December °

: . July 1962 -- January 1964, Deputy Chief of Seventh

(NOTE: The term. Deputy Chief is being used throughout this

>
1
ioe
a
:
4
:

wa

eee eae ee no

Mid-March 1953 - late May. 1955, First Section,

First Department, SCD

1959 - Deputy Chief of Section) Seventh

Department, SCD

January 1960 - December 1961, Deputy Chief of

Section, First Section,: First; Department, .

ScD

January 1962 - July 1962, Chief of First Section,

Seventh Department, SCD

Department, SCD

SECRET

.

summary, but the better terminology probably is "Deputy to Chief. "
The position of "Deputy Chief" in United States Government parlance,

including CIA, is not synonymous with the term "Deputy Chief" as used -

4
i



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

We Vacwae

‘ oe 1

in Soviet organizations and more specifically in the KGB. As an example,

a Chief of Department in the KGB or the Chief of a Residentura aoroad
_ may. have 2, 3 or even 4 deputies, one of wnom is given the title oi H
Firet Deputy. This particular deputy acts in the absence of the Chief
of Department and in genera] has supervisory functions over all the
Department sections. The exception to the latter is when the Chief of - : a , ;
Department retains direct supervision over what hé may consides the : . . : be
. most important section, Other deputies. have supervisory functions only. . ae

over designated sections or organizational components, ) '
. 1

During current interviews and in prepared memoranda, NOSENKO ‘ !

nas furnished detailed information which it is considered substantiates re

-his. claimed positions in the KGB. . Detailed remarks on these topics are

contained in. separate sections of this summary.

It is realized that GOLITSYN, although confirming that NOSENKO
was a KGB’ officer in both the First Department and Seventh Department,
ScD, has stated that NOSENKO: remained in the First Department until
circa 1958 and that NOSENKO was not Deputy Chief of the First Section,
First Department, in 1960, It is impossible to correlate this information
" with the above indicated opinion that NOSENKO left the First Department.
“in late May 1955 and was Deputy Chief of the First Section, First Depart~-
7 ment, in 1960, nor is an adequate explanation of these variances available

gouic4d

SRE
SSS


--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

RELI AERIS PAE Ace Te EK Sot Cfo

An

reason why NOSENKO {rom his point of view should remember such

ukbee!
at this time. Onthe other hand, it is not reasonable that NOSENKO
would lay claim to the title of Deputy Chief of the First Section, First
Department, if this were not true when he clearly knew of the visits of
GOLITSYN to the First Section in 1960 - 1961 and of his conferences
with officers closely associated with NOSENKO at that time,
NOSENKO has also mentioned a number of officers of the SCD -

or former officers of the SCD who transferred to the FCD with whom

ct

he was personally acquainted and who were also mown to GOLITSYN, .

; A number of these officers were officers from whom GOLITSYN has-

stated he obtained certain information or through whom he became aware

of cértain activities including Vladislav M. KOVSHUK, Gennadiy 1.

GRYAZNOV, Viadimir Ivanovich PETROV, Yuriy I], GU, Viadimir

A. CHURANOV, Yevgeniy GROMAKOVSKIY and Vadim V, KOSOLAPOV,

The statement of NOSENKO that although he had heard of
GOLITSYN he had never personally met GOLITSYN, stands in conflict.
with the statements of GOLITSYN that he, GOLITSYN, had met and
talked with NOSZNKO in the SCD in the late 1950's. The description

of GOLITSYN of this meeting is that of a casual encounter in the halls

rather than a specific office visit, In light of this, the absence of any

‘an encounter and the absence of any reason for NOSENKO to lie on this:

ao 9001046.

_ SECRET

aie ag teen err Cee ea

f .



--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

issue, it is eminently reasonable to conciude that the encounter took
place but that NOSENKO simply has no recollection of it. There is
no reason to attach sign-cicance to this lapse of memory.

The previous opinion that NOSENKO did not hoid the claimed |

pasition of Deputy Chiei, First Section, First Department, during 1960 = .

1961 has had the most mer‘t in the controversy over his statements |
relative to-his KGB career, This particular aspect will be covered in.

detail in another section, but of note at this time is the controversy

over what duties the position of Deputy Chief of Section in the SCD, KGB,

entails or does not entail, It is a fruitless exercise to attempt to judge ,

t

whether NOSENKO was Deputy Chief of the First Section in 1960 - 1961 °”

on the basis of whether his knowledge of the total activities of the First —
Section was commensurate with the knowledge of a Deputy Branch Chief
in CIA in regard to the activities of the entire Branch,

Whether NOSENKO was a Deputy Chief of Section in the SCD,
KGB, must be judged on the basis of what were the duties oi a Deputy
Chief of Section in the SCD and in particular what were his duties in
the particular assignment. The organizational structure of the KGB

may or may not have some similarities to the organizational structure

[
1

of CIA, but any similarities are surely not such as to permit a judgment

| . ~ gn01047
SECRET ts

ie me alate cane



--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

ood

“salary structure, Pay of a KGB officer is-based on military rank and

.claimed positions, The judgment on whether he held or did not hold

as to whether NOSENKO held a certain claimed position on the basis
of a comparison oi his activities and responsibilities with that inherent
in a.somewhat similar position in CIA,

One of the most. important differences between United States
agencies or organizations, including CIA, and'the bureaucratic structure

of agencies or organizations in the USSR, including the KGB, is the

on actual position held with an additional percentage increase for longevity

and language qualification, ‘Actual position held is important from a

‘monetary: viewpoint in addition to the prestige. As an example, the

\ difference in monthly salary between a captain and a major is twenty

rubles and the difference in salary between a Senior Case Officer and

a Deputy Chief of Section is also twenty rubles, An increase in military

rank alone has limited pay advantages, as for example a Lieutenant

. ’
Colonel who is only a Senior Case Officer receives less pay than a major
who holds the position of Chief of Section.

During current interviews, an eifort has been made to obtain

from NOSENKO statements concerning his responsibilities in the various

'

‘the various claimed positions, in view of the absence of any factual

sa GOOLE48

5

eeamennnnan
SSR SURES

Re enet

stakes Seen



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

‘supporting or refuting information, has necessarily been based toa

ENKO.

-considerabie degree on the logic of the statements made by NOS.

Admittedly th:

ving the

i

is is no’

t the most satisfactory way of reso:

questions, out it is the only method possible at this time.

SEES


--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

creny

SECRET

L2 Ev>

ON OF

AN

=N

ny

nt
i

NO

SE

Cc,

EAS NO.

a .

ore}

”
oe ~ - .
s. .
ie)
2
os .
4 . ; ins
¥ eet
8 . UBER
8 . ie
r . :
tn : —
A
a

& 4 : .

4 mi

a hy .

|

an

a

i .



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

' in the matter of the bona fides of NOSENXO, this category is probably

"1962 and-d

9)

al

SEC:

-

C, Has NOSENKO given an acceptable explanation of his
motivation in contacting CLA in 1962 and for his defection in 1964? Of

the eight listed categories which are being given specific consideration

hn

the most difficult in which to present a logical position with factual -
support, There are too many intangible aspects involved and although
motivation is an important factor, full resolution of the motivation .
problem is not a paramount factor in deciding whether NOSENKO is or
is not a'dispatched agent. NOSENKO could have contacted this Agency in

n 1964 withdut KGB knowledge and yet even at this late

cte

ae
date have failed to disclose some important events of a personal nature

which actually were important ingredients in his ultimate decision.

Defecters are humans and have at least the normal reluctance to admit
?

: unfavorable information which.they consider of a personal nature.

On 31 October 1967 NOSENKO, following.a request, furnished a.

handwritten memorandum on the topic of his motivation, a typed copy of

. which is‘attached, The memorandum, although not grammatically correct,

is quite ‘understandable and is worthy of review. The tenor of the memo-



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

ra Stuaci i

NOSENKO and others of his generation have lived in a Soviet society

throughout their entire lives, The environment is an important factor
of influence in the life of an individual and true disillusionment is at

best usually a gradual process in which many factors, some recognized

ora eeanre

and some not recognized by the individual, have played a role in varying |

degrees.

- NOSENKO, until 1955 and possibiy until'the death of his father :

‘lin August 1956, could be compared to the profligate son of wealthy

‘parents in the United States who finally graduates from college and obtains

‘ >. ‘employment. perhaps in the firm of’his father without actually earning any of

_ the; luxariés he has enjoyed. “The fathér of NOSENKO was not only wealthy ,
by Soviet standards but also held a high government position. The
anfluence of his father and the name.oi ais iather undoubtedly was an

ae important if not the most-important factor in NOSENKO éven being
7 permitted to enter the Naval RU and.the xGB even though NOSENKO is

“ ; particularly reluctant to admit, perhaps even to himself, . that this was:

the primary reason.

.The above should not be construed as any reflection on the

actual intelligence of NOSENKO, but rather as an explanation of how

NOSENKO could have even entered the Naval RU and KGB. His

= Q004LC52 |

ere emnteangeeimiemabanres tint ree

sete lee So aentetterateereniteatnanieeeenrannine

sit

BN.


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

SECRET rs
performance in both prior to 1956 by his own admission was such that
he probably would have been summarily terminated. if he had not been
” the son of the capable,. respected Minister oi Shipbuilding. a . a
lt a-certain amount of speculation is permitted, the . .

disillusionment of NOSENKO, who lost. many personal advantages

following the death of his father including a personal automobile, may ©

i have actually started soon after the death of his father, That NOSENKO. : _ , a

is undisciplined is supported by his admissions relative to his life in co : , . : n
‘the ‘USSR ‘and his behavior both in 1962 in Geneva and fora period of time — ,
1 =. after’ his defection in 1964. _NOSENKO was addicted:to women, Hquor,:and

4 . othe rial things which can be purchased with money or obtained through

.~influence,

A question has been previously raised regarding his motivation
in contacting CIA in 1962, particularly his statement that he needed money .

and would sell "two pieces of information." NOSENKO has stated that he

\

wanted.to make a contact with the Americans, that’he was not emotionally °

ready to defect, but that he subconsciously believed that if he made a

. contact he would be making an ultimate commitment from which he could oy

. no longer retreat.

RAM SA ARETNRD A Dok adnan ane he RMN wnt


--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

ety SECRET

NOSENZO has stated that he gave considerable thought to the
best way to contact the Americans s0 that he would be believed and not

rejected and came to the conclusion that he would offer to sell some.

information. NOSENKO stated that he thought if he approached the 7 .
Americans stating he was a "KGB counterintelligence officer who wanted
to give information," he would not have been believed and would have

been peremptorily rejected, NOSENKO stated he had difficulty deciding : : _ : _

: how much money to ask for and how to make the approach, but finally

Dh

decided to do it through (Bast {AGRIC whom the KGB considered was with

American Intelligence,

» | The above statements by NOSENKO.are.not in conflict with thes J. vee

record, . NOSENKO did offer to sell "two pieces-of information," almost
immediately gave more information, made no significant demands for

money, and in fact his price for "two pieces of information" was . : : :
ridiculously low by American standards. NOSENKO has during current

t interviews stated, as he first.stated in 1962, that he had spent excessive

i - amounts of money in one or two riotous evenings. However, NOSENKO

has during current interviews stated that he could have covered his ‘

expenditures py other means without receiving any money from the : ran
a oye

Americans,
——.

ERD TRA a MmnnaRetN em, Hermtiitette seat Gee 8



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

Ne

impossible at this time and Probably at. any’ time {a the future, What

.” Attachment: Ts , . : on - vo
wv _ Typed cry} Memo from NOSENKO : : . oan no :

SECRET

NOSENKO has stated that the night: before blo departure from
Geneva to the USSR he gave serious thought to defection but wae not
emotionally adapted to defect st that time. Following his return to the |
Sovict Union, NOSENKO, during a period of time, made his final
decision to defect at the firet opportunity, realising that it meant
leaving his wife, children, and other membere of hie far.ily in the
USSR.

Some aspects of the motivation of NOSENKO aro obscures and

will probably so remain. It would be preferable Lf an exact detailed

- chronology of all the factore involved could be prepared or if even

certain obvious factors could be accuratoly delineated. These are both

ia. important at the | time ie a dectaion 26 to whether the motivation of

NOSENKO was beood on personal ressons with no implications of KGB ‘

' dispatch. It io considered that the explanation of NOSENK® concerning

bis motivation ia acceptable and thet hie statement that no one except

_ the Americans was aware of his contects with the Americans in 1962 ae

or bts intent to defect in 1964 te supported by other information of a

collateral nature. (See Section I, H.)

4 WOUL055

eons Nadtetactd oa


--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

Operational Memo # N-4

SUBJECT: NOSENKO, Yuri Ivanovich , ve

. The following is a typed copy of a nandwritten memorandum
furnished by Subject on 1 November 1967, following a request on
31 October 1967: . ‘

.

I. ‘What were the motif and the reasons which have led me to
the decision to breake with the Soviet Russia? The only definite is an © sob
understanding of the situation in the Soviet Russia, the knowledge of

the methods.of the communist regime, the knowledge.of the real foreign

and interior policies of the Soviet government and the faith in the rights 9: Tae

nese of the free world.

It waa not a decision which was accepted or could be accepted .

s—

ina month or a year. Thie decision was slowly growing inme, I | ee ; |
think that the beginning wae in the studentship, ‘ __ _- , |
Living with my parents.and being in the circles of the parent's.

and my acquaintances I knew more then there was written in newspapers

and periodics and that was propagandized by radio and TV, Working in

the Far East and later being in trips in different regions and cities of

Bf
s
a
ti

Russia I found out much better the life and conditions of the life of the ;

~ people of the Soviet Russia.

"SECRET

eR td. .
‘Treiated trea astemalle
es pazeiny aad
_dacteesitiention

So

ener


--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

" When I worked 11] years in MVD-KGB i understood and found
out very many things, details and the real deal of the existing regime,

aT about methods of the work of MGB-MVD-KGB and about their doings,

about hundreds of thousands of the people of Russia who were (and
still are) considered "politically" dangerous and around whom was

{and still is) going an active work of all organs KGB.

At the same time when I was several times abroad I have

reality how is living people,
a

Several times when J was abroad Iwas thinking about staying’

', at the West and not returning in Russia, but only one thing was keeping

i
i
|
\
i
i
| - . geen personally the so-called "decay" at the West. ‘I have seen in *
dt
|
i

me »+~ my family,

4 In 1962 in Switzerland I made the acquaintance with the
! : '. Americans. From my part "the sell of the information" was a real
show, Iwas thinking that they would not beiieve me otherwise, In

that period of the time there wae going a big struggle in me to stay

vO abroad or to return home till the last days of living in Geneva and even ,
when IJ was returning home in Vienna,
In 1962-1963 I decided definitely that I did not want and could

not live more in the Soviet Russia, In this period of time I have done.

all my best to go as soon as possible abroad...
“2

SECRET,

UNINC he ae ok ea cette



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

oJ
. - a
. or m \ a Veues Nw .
i . . . :
: eo, : 7 .
tae it ,
a | i : “ It waa ‘not easy to make this decision, it was very difficult
' an . : .
j 4 “to leave the family for ever, -- : " . ’ :
; bes at : : o . ;
4 Boe :.° And now in spite of everything I do not regret, : . oe ye _ .
i | 7 on . - :
! i .

4

§

SERINE: TR SUNTAN HET RANT ANTI i
[EA : gan CRANE RRS Si ee



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

re SECRET... be

,* 2 a
i
D, | IS THE INFORMATION FURN
C .
| EONCERNING KGE OPERATIONS, PERSONALITIES, a :
AND ORGANIZATION REASONABLY COMMENSURATE ;
te WITH HIS CLAIMED KGB CAREER? . ~
. . . |
| |
. . |
| |

RS i ‘ HRT AURA
CES SEREN: SSO


--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

‘

‘D., Is the information furnished by NOSENKXO to CIA concerning
_-KGB operations, personalities, and organization reasonably commen-

surate with his claimed KGB career? The conclusion is that the infor-

mation furnished by NOSENKO concerning KGB operations, personalities,

-and organization is more than reasonably commensurate with his claimed

_ , career in the KGB from mid-March 1953 to his: defection in early February

1964,
~. In. reaching the above conclusion, consideration has been given

to his.claimied, departmental assignments and claimed -positions in each ~ '

5 -department, Certain allowance has been made for faulty memory with
consideration being given to whether there is any indication of deception
or whether the failure to recalla particular item of interest can logically

: . ;

be attributed to the vagaries of the human mind, There is, of course, no

‘accurate standard of measurement which would permit a positive deter-

‘mination as to whether inability to recall certain details or events is
: vactually due to the fact that the human mind cannot recall all past events

,

YS oF could be attributed to willful deception,

gousCE0

SSS A Se

Sat Sy



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

-™

fue Vettes

An effort has been made to determine if there are any particular
patterns or areas where NOSENKO has indicated he did not recall

specific matters or certain details, and.no pattern or specific areas

have been noted. NOSENKO, in fact, ‘has an unusually good memory

as evidenced by the extensive information iurnished by NOSENKO purely

from recollection, In addition, there has been no material reluctance
on the part of NOSENKO to discuss his entire life, KGB officers he has
known, KGB organization and procedures, or other topics of interest.

. NOSENKO has furnished considerable detail concerning KGB
officers whom he has known at various periods in his entire KGB career,

He. has been very consistent in information furnished and has frequently
added certain details which he ‘recalled ata later date,

Certain remarks will be made in another section in regard to
the volume and scope of information furnished by NOSENKO. This in-
formation is not selective, but isan excellent indicator that NOSENKO
was assigned to the First Department and Seventh Department, SCD,
during the claimed periods of time and held the claimed positions. Con-

i,

‘sideration has been given to his various claimed KGB assignments in

evaluating the information furnished in an effort to assess whether-his

. indicated knowledge was commensurate with his claimed position during

-

20 OOUEC EL



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

we think.

a particular period of time or suggested the possibility that he did not

occupy the position which he claimed to have held.
It is considered that information furnished by NOSENKO supports
his claimed positions in the SCD. it has not been possible to substantially
confirm through collateral sources that NOSENKO served in his claimed
positions, ‘ Neither has it been possible to obtain from other sources an
applicable description of the duties or responsibilities of an individual
; holding any of the positions NOSENKO claimed to have held after 1958. It
is felt there can be no question that NOSENKO served in the capacities of = .,
junior cate officer, case officer, and senior case officer during 1953 - 1957,

As r ae the duties and responsibilities of a Deputy Chief of Section,

Chief of Section, ‘and Deputy Chief of Department, and whether NOSENKO.
held these various claimed positions, a considerable amount of personal
judgment has been necessary. This personal judgment has been made in
as judicial @ manner as possible, with full knowledge that any opinion in
, regard to. the above is largely dependent upon information from NOSENKO,
" .NOSENKO has compiled detailed diagramé of the actual officés . , a
he claims to have occupied and surrounding offices during the four pri-

. maty periods of time: 1953 - 1955, 1955 - 1959, 1960 - 1961, and 1962 -

He has prepared specific memoranda concerning his co-officers

. G001CE2



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

> deserved a low rating.

and other personnel, and changes of personnel, as well as diagrams

of the offices of the Chief and Deputy Chiefs of the SCD during'1956 -

1964. This material is internally consistent. Furthermore NOSENKO .

could not: possibly have known that this detailed information could not

immediately be checked for accuracy,-at least in. part, with a source

or another officer who has defected since mid-1964, If these diagrams —~

arid memoranda were not relatively correct, NOSENKO, who is quite
astute in matters of counterintelligence, would hardly have voluntarily
prepared the material in such detail. This type of information is

peculiarly adaptable for analysie by a knowledgeable source or by another

. defector ‘and could, if not relatively correct, permit a ‘rather positive con- ;

clusion that NOSENKO was lying or fabricating ‘information,
NOSENKO has furnished quite specific information on KGB
operations during the 1953 - 1955, 1955 - 1959, 1960 - 1961, and 1962 -

1963 periods of time. As might be expected, his specific knowledge is

legs.gor the 1953 ~ 1955 period; but his own personal situation and,attitude:
until 1955 - 1956, which are mentioned elsewhere, should be given
- consideration. In any event, he has furnished adequate information so

- that his claimed assignment during 1953 - 1955 is considered sufficiently :

substantiated even though his actual job pexiormance. undoubtedly
: :

~ SECRET

* go04e3°

A



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

The knowledge of NOSENKO- concerning cases, KGB operations,
and other officers can consistently be related to his claimed department
and position assignment during the 1953 to January 1964 period, The
scope of his knowledge of his own department when considered in toto
“is broader ‘after 1957 than before, which i is compatible with his claim of
‘increased responsibilities. His knowledge of the work of other departments
of.the SCD from the late 1950!5 on is also more. extensive, which is also a. -
' further indication that NOSENKO actually held the claimed positions .

during this pericd of time.

AN ae mh
Pay Te Ce



--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

~,
E,_ CAN THE INFORMATION
CONSIDERED IN TOTO «
IN MATERIAL DAMAGE TO THE XGB AND/OR, ca . . _ ; ” : ,
THE INFORMATION FURNISHED BY XOSENKO BEEN OF :

BENEFIT TO WESTIRN INTELLIGENCE?

SIGNIFICANT

AREER RRS Tw TN


--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

t ~
. - - 4G
, . Western Invellivence? The conclusion in regaré to bok of the above -
7 a“ te nret = - - . 4
CUssuones 1s BaseeThauve, 6VER 2045. ” ab
*, - = Pe . rt e x 4
. w the KGS and ultimate Genelt to We .
of an intangible navure anc sot susce :
; :
' :
' an interesting igure, the aciuz) sigaicicance of which would Ge marginal. :
Practically every interview wits NCSENZCS, even at presest, veverls -
Oe Nee ? oe

sao.e pevied of tim

This should |

not be construed as an indication caat N.

reer-y

OSENKO is intentionally wime-

wulevion of bis memozy througs

: : nolding information, Sut rather shat s tarougs

normal questions axe discussions has been and can continue to be . . te

productive. | : oye ; 7 -

'



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

cernmag

wyeririve contacts {

is a considerabie exchange of a
ollicers between the TCD and SOD, in uccition, numerous ollicurs

4 we a
CD and other internal KG3 ovgarizations travel abrozdé with

delegations, tourist grouzs, and zs visitors to various major ext

Such as Word's Fairs, i: is imposesisle at this time to estimate te

number of XG3

ied by NOSENKO who have deen outside

the Soviet Bloc since his cefection or who will be out sometime in the

Zuture,
There has been very iittie atiempivd exploitation of informetion
furnisneé sy NOSENKO concerning other XGB officers a:
ation to United States intelligence

cannot be estimated nor can the potential cCamage to the KGB

isclosure oO: isiormation cozcerning certain AGB officers would

be a necessary part of any dispatch of a AG

uw

agent or cificer to the

West either for purposes of contact with Western Intelligence for a

2 p04?

ecnacy -

|
|



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

o Oi the

Snes,

Disko vl AGE oO.

gaigibie impovieace. hey -

aetbi

abie arnount of manpower and money is spent on this activity, Even

acknowledging that it is muca more Gilicuit Jor CLA to obtain this type

ne cae ee een en i cera ae oR eaniyanen ome are

oi information about the AGB, which operates in a closed society, then

itis for the KG3 to oovtain the icex:

coubiiul any reader of this summary would consider that the iceniui

Ww

cution oi? GoO|CLA empioyees anu Geve

the KGB would be any less than a very serious compromise of valuable
information, +

_ Prior to the deiection of NOSENXO,

tie was known of the

organization of the SCD or other internal AGS organizations, The

information provided by NOSENKO concerning both has been dewwiled

and extensive, That this “infor mation is of vaiue to the United Siates ‘

Intelligence community is hardly su

5ect to Gispute, although analysts

. 3 . o001C68

Ne TE



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

can differ as to the weignt which should be given to Ue value of this

type of information. — / . . fort

NOSENKO has furnished iniozmation concerzing SCD, XG3,
recruitments of Unitec States citizens and foreign nationals covering

the period of 1953 through 1963, This should not oe interpreted as a

statement that NOSENKO has furnished information in regard to all

SCD recruitments, even of Americans, Gurisig this period, His infor-
“mation based on personal knowledge is in general limited to the First : ‘

Department and Seventh Department, He hag furnished information

* -eoncerning cases of several other Gepartments ian the SCD and some

FCD-cases, but this information was in generai acquired indirectly

from social or business conversations with other KGB oificers.

NOSENKO has furnished information in regard to a number of
cases which weré previousiy known to United States Intelligence, Waile

e : : : 5 - : tae
the value of such information cannot be considered high, the additional

detaiis which NOSENKO has provided in a number of cases cannot be

' .. dismissed as being of no value to Weszern gence, even if the

.information cannot be regarded as damaging to the KGB. Furthermore,

inasmuch as there is no reason to question his sourcing of informatioa a a

already known, there is no basis for suspicion of NOSENKO for his so. i

. having provided such information,

3

SS Ss


--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

. NCSEN

“O has iurnished informciion in regard to a number of

recruitments by the KGB oi non-Bicc nationals who were. knowa by ‘oy
: .

Western Inieilizence to be pro-Communist or even connected with

fication as a recruited AGB

in
G&
ha
et
8

Communist organizations, The i
agent of an individual previous.y known to be pro-Communist is of
considerable value to Western Intelligence and may be considered to
have resulted in some damage to the 4GB. Admittedly, the potential
to the KGB of an agent who is known as pro-Communist is less than
7 that of a "politically clean" individual, However, “pro-Communist"

or even "Communist" are not synonymous with "recruited KGB agent.

. "+ NOSENKO has furnished additional information on cases in

which there wag some previous but limitec information. In a number

oi these instances the additional information from NOSENKO has per- wR,
oe

mitted identification of the individuals of interest and the closing of an

"Unknown Subject" case, In such instances the information from

‘ oe NOSENKO must be considered valuable to Western Intelligence since

the incomplete information known previously would in many cases not

have permitted ultimate identification of the individual of interest.

: . ,This category of cases must be considered as having resulted in Gamage

_ to the KGB and in benefit to Western Intelligence, ; ; so ‘

!

ehaig

NG

ARS

SEN ESN St

SOR

S nats 8
SoA Se

a

By


--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

i > - +. , pet fort : : - r
i NOSENKO nas furnished iJorr.ccion in regard to a number of
- oe « individuals, bots American and non-lloc foreign, who were recru

by the KCB anc concerning whom Western intelligence hac no 62za ~
information,

- Of SCD recruitment or later in a position to furnish injormation ¢-
ot .

“. | interest to the KGB. in this regard, NOSENKO has steted that at least

2 there was a deiinite. tencency in the Seventh Dezaricnent te

though it was apparent the agent at the time nad no pot

ae

¢was-highly unlikely thy

ve would De a potential in the fume

“NOSENKO has furnished iniozmition on or leads to a nmucnoer of

cases, primarily third nationals but some simerican, in which he

ossible after additional research anc investigation, Until an icexii- :

, fication is made, the value of any particular lead to. Westers intelli-
earner ;

_ ence cannot be estimated, but that there may be a potential value



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

Ree

cannot be ignoree, AS an ¢xarwple of this category, NOSENAO has .

. - furnished a lea

probabiy not an American, wh

the UNATO Emergency Codes," deliver the codes to the AGS ior

* the security oi the tutes cunnct be gauged. os
wr . . 2
Soe : In all, the information arom NOSED XO in the category of cases nS

Where ‘Western Intelligence €ic not previcusly have signilicant. inior-
: pa PB &

* .mation must be considercd on dalance as having resultec

matesiag

image to thé-KGB and of significant dene:

Quantity alone of Cl or Fi information irom a KG3 defector is

not a siancard on which to judge von.

fices, The question is whether
thd amount-oi his intermation is reasonably commensurate wita his
.elaimed positions.in the KGB. This question es regards NOSENKO

has-been examined, with aifirmat 2 inGings,

... > > this paper.
. 7 A few samples 8 from the above cited categories oi injoxsmation

These cases arc given as

ATS
ca


--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

wu Ge :
Jamies Allea MINT REN GACSE neve been covesre an wad
BU aTy, I can Oe Cusco ered tel Gull weee ca yosed ar a Pesan
of a lead from NOSENSO
‘ . A
NOSE
*, . i mar
the First o ay First Dez. at i
thar[ROWA Spor rua} to me MCB. OW: oO,
interviewed in 1954, POWARS\cid = see
1
but suspicion o{[2O8.2R Sagese greac :
Sisies Fmbassy. There :
; i

(8 COuLC Tr, ,



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

ee a ceneeinenteeeminebanatentesieamaiieimbiieienebente ona 101. an ain sa: angna a. ohn nceenenehamaenetananeneantneenennnantita nd

. Oa

oe Cb

wane). He identified "ZHARI" (phonetic) ac an American code clerk

who defected to the USSR in 1961. An internal aseurnptlon was made

Baoced on the original lead toformation from NOSENKO that "ZHARI"

was Victor Norris HAMILTON, ska Fevu-t biltrt HINDALY, a former

NSA eroployee who defocted to the USSR in 1962, and the information

fvom NOSENKO was nover disseminated or investigated. (
Prior to the surfacing of Jobn Discos SMITH by the Sovists

fa the fnil of 1967, Glues {aformation conceraing KGB knowledge

of American code clerks was being investigated: and John Discoe ,

SMITH was & leading cuspect. After the curfacing of SMITH by the : ¥

Soviets, it became apparent that SMITH, rather than HAMILTON, was

tdentical to "ZHARI," Investigation disclosed that no defiatte informa-

tion could be established in regard to the actual whereaboute of SMITH

after circa mid-1960. It cannot be positively etated that appropriate

favestigetion in 1964 of the "ZHARI" lead would have led to the identi-

fication of Joha Discos SMITH as "ZHARI." However, such (dontifi-

cation would have been of considerable interest to tho Department of

Stete ard CIA, sad could wery well tave permitted certala ection which i

would have 6t least lessened the propaganda effect of the surprise

aancuzcement by the Soviets in the fall of 1967.

NOSEKKO, {n June 1962, furnished (rformation from which
William VASSALL could be quickly identified. GOLITSYN, ta late
1960 - carly 1961, hed furnished information concerning a Soviet pene-

tration of the British Government on the basle of whick the British
buy Kote

9 ae
SPECHT

PCa BNE Vet eg



--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

Ahetadiener re ee

rs

}

Servicos had complled a list at twenty suspects, including VASSALL.

- Even though it may be presumed that trvestigation of the twenty suspects

would ultimately bave resulted in a determination that VASSALL wag
the agent on whom GOLITSYN had furnished certain information, the
information from NOSENKO tn June 1962 resulted In the earlier termi-
nation by the British Services of a still valuable productive KGB agent.

Although not the cace of a KGB agent, the matter of tha micro-
pboags in the United States Embasey should also bo mentioned,
GOLITSYN, following his defection in Cecernber 1961, furnished
certain information in regard to microphones inthe United States
Embasay (Chancery). Since in fact the microphones we.¢ connected
to contral cables, location of ona microphone would logically have led
to the exposure of the entire set of inicrophones. However, appro-
priate action was not taxen on this information and the KGB would have
beon aware Mart no action was taken prior to June 1962 when NCSENKOD
firet contacted CLA.

Lf NOSENKO te a dispatched KGS agent, It is not clear why the

e

KGB would attract spscific attention to a system of microphones which
mat have still had some valve ae of June 1962. A preeumption may
bo made that if NOSENKO was a dispatched agent, the KGB had, as of
1962, an advanced system of monitoring devices which rendered the
above: microphone system obsolete. However, no concrete evidence
of such an advauced system is available and it should be noted that it
re GOULC75
CECKET

OTN emcee err TE ae cinta ete eeeen ete ynearee ie tne sine grange nel diy same,



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000 .

LaVE GCG Was Wace io

locai2e one remove the wiles nue ayee.. 6 waren GOLIYS TN hos

inter views with NOS

new American icads which are

mee ne ee

ave alsu resu.ted in more s t

Mexico, italy, and a nur mber of otier countries.

includeé in the more itaportant of these agent or other leads

to access agents for Armericin targets, to actual or possible illegal

_ 7 os 0001076



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

oa ooriisse

UaVes Gs oe

Dette

hogy

2

: ~ ee WOLD ee eva ett
SAGWe Tis SEBS MG Lee vety Ggaitst sul

in Moscow, GS cluacesi.ne cccess

Emvassies

Heant value to Western Inteligc

an

weoject to Eispute, This evaluatic:

re numerous foreign

.

12

: QTAAOT

= an a
eLuili

}



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

QSOESC j

web se ‘

intelligenco tnformation is wot a significant factor in a determination

- of bis bons fides. The qualification should, however, be added that

it ts not felt that NOSIENKO has, as of this timo, been fully debrisled

fa many areas of positive intelligence interest.

001077

3
SECRET


--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

SECKrA

~
RE EVIDENCI GC.
IN INFORMATION
WOULD WARRANT A CONS
WAS DISPATC
’ ‘

fee _ . ‘ . ren



--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

ive)
mo

“>
220
ra

F. Is there evidence of KGB deception or ''give away" in
inforraation furnished by NOSENKO which would warrant a conclusion
that NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB? The conclusion in this
summary is that NOSENKO was not dispatched by the KGh. in

reaching this conclusion, a full examination of the above «.< Siion has

a

been both a necessary and integral part.

It is inherent that the volume of information furnished by
NOSENKO is only one of the factors which should be given consideration
in arriving ata conclusion that NOSENKO was or was not dispatched by
the KGB. If NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB, the KGB would have
surely been willing to sacrifice certain information of value to the KGB
in order te support the bona fides of NOSENKO. However, if NOSENKO
was dispatched, it must have been to accomplish or further a KGB
purpose or mission, the nature of which has been and continues to be
unknown,

An examination of the circumstances under which NOSENKG first
contacted CIA in Geneva in 1962 and his behavior during these contacts is
particularly pertinent since during this period of time NOSENKO would
have surely been under direct KGB control if there are any implications

of KGB dispatch in the NOSENKO case.



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

NOSENKO has stated that his original approach to "sell two
pieces of information" was his own idea as to what was most lixely to
“be successful, NOSENKO has stated that he wanted to make a contact
with the Americans, was not psychologically adapted to defect at the 1
time, and felt that if he merely stated that he was a "KGB counter- '
intelligence ofiicer who wanted to give information," he very possibly
would be rejected. It should be noted that NOSENKO even during his
first contact did not limit his remarks to the "two pieces of information"
and began to talk quite freely on other matters,
If NOSENKO was dispatched, it is felt that he, during his 1962
contacts, would have been very carefully briefed and that his remarks
or statements would have not been of a nature which could cause any
suspicion in regard to the bona fides of NOSENKO. Instead, a current
review of his statements and remarks during his five contacts in 1962
indicate that his many errors, exaggerations, and actual lies were quite®
likely typical of a braggadocio element in the personality of NOSENKO
and may also have been evidence supporting the statement by NOSENKO
that he usually had a few drinks of liquor before each contact in

Geneva.

0001080

SECRET.

-
5
aS.

cee guggnetane Beene ot ce menmtae ces ce epee



--- Page 83 ---
14-0000

NOSENKO, during his five contacts in Geneva, made many
statements which in retrospect were impossioie, and the investigation
of which could only have raised certain questions con 2rning NOSENKO.
The following is a list of the more obvious areas in which NOSENKO
made gross exaggerations or mace incorrect or impossible statements.

{a) NOSENKO claimed he personally was with

Oleg M. GRIBANOV, Chief of the SCD, during the

recruitment pitch to[Tames siSasazag (This was

a lie and an interview wisn Bron Ben dwita display -

of photograph would have disclosed that NOSENKO

did not participate. )

(b) NOSENKO was involved in the recruitment

, approach to Russell LANGELLE. (This was a lie and
LANGELLE was available for interview. ) 6

{c) NOSENKO said he recruited [LUNT Corace

LUNT)\in Bulgaria. (Actuaily NOSENKO never met

(Loy)
My

| c001C81
Pe SECRET

4/6



--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

{d) NOSENXO claimed personal contact with] =dmund oO
STEVENS|who, according to NOSENKO, hae been recruited
by the KGB. (NOSENKO actually had never personaiiy met
(Erbvexg and only bad seen[STEVENS|once at a distance.)
({e) NOSENKO dated the recruitment of "ANDREY"
in Moscow as 1949-1950. At the same time he furnished
information that "ANDREY" (who is considered identical to
, Dayle Wallis SMITH) was in Moscow during a part of the time
that Roy RHODES, also a recruited agent, was assigned to
Mescow, 1951-1953. “ANDREY" (SMITH) was actually in
Moscow 1952-1954,
(7) NOSENKO said he, GRIBANOV, and another officer
met Edward Ellis SMITH. (NOSENKO has since stated he did
not meet SMITH and that his only role was obtaining a foreign
typewriter and paper for a KGB agent involved in the SMITH
operation. }
(g) NOSENKXO in a number of instances spoke in the
firet person, saying “We did this," or "We did that," in

xeference to a particular KGB activity in which he now admits

4 G0041082

3/GR


--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

he was not involved but had some knowledge. (If

NOSENKO was under <GB control in 1962, both he

and the 41GB should have known that these indicated

exaggerations would eventually lead to a question

concerning the bona fides of NOSENKO. )

In 1962-1963 a number of similarities were noted between
information furnished by NOSENKO and information which had been
furnished by GOLITSYN prior to June 1962. These similarities were
quite striking and gave riseto certain suspicions of NOSENKO because
he provided information which the KGB would presumably have considered
already compromised as a result of the defection of GOLITSYN. Certain
of the similarities at the time could only be explained in terms of
NOSENKO being a dispatched agent. The following are some examples of
the similarities noted,

(a) Both furnished information in regard to
[Johan PREISFREUND} OG
{b) Both furnished information in regard toa
[military code clerk case (James STORSBERG}L 0%, Ok
(c) Both furnished information in regard toa
trip of Viadislav KOVSHUK, under an assumed name, «

: to the United States. (GOLITSYN was sure it was

connected with a reactivation of an agent formerly in

oe SECRET

metaep yet “a sents : see ee -
weet earttettan a ' bok ge THER ee eae

et nee ene pc


--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

i
{
‘

; 2 Sree
peiaihineateaneenaiiae an isteaactrittaetamm ae

cere

Moscow, or a recruitment of an s\rnerican formerly

with the United States Embassy in Moscow; and NOSENKO

related it directly to the "ANDREY" case, giving the

assumed name which KOVSHUXK used. )
(4) Both furnished information in regard to
microphones in the United States Embassy in Moscow.
(e) Both furnished information in regard to
{Bamand STEVENS|and[isaac Hen HAPIRO}

The above list is not complete nor does it indicate the actual
differénces in the amount of information furnished on any particalar
topic by GOLITSYN and NOSENKO. To cite the above in detail in this
summary is believed unnecessary since the only point of real interest
is whether the fact that NOSENKO was aware of certain events, cases,
ov situations of which GOLITSYN was also aware raises a legitimate
question concerning the bona fides of NOSENKO.

The above area of concern has been thoroughly examined and
itis considered that the fact that NOSENKO iurnished some information
on certain cases or situations previously mentioned in lesser or

greater detail by GOLITSYN cannot logically be construed as evidence

go01Cs4

SECRET os


--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

i
Be
é

‘that NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB. NOSENO has during

current interviews satisiaciorily sourced his information in alm: st

every instance, In a few instances he has said ne did not recall -

how he learned of a particular piece of information but these

apparent lapses of memory were not large in number and are

considered to be in no way suspicious. j

The general area in which there was a similarity between

: information furnished by GOLITSYN in late 1961 ~ early.1962 and
information furnished by NOSENKO in June 1962 and which would have
been the most significant insofar as the security of the United States
Government was or is concerned related to certain activities centering
around or in the First Department, SCD.

It is the conclusion of this summary that NOSENKO was an

officer of the First Section, First Department, SCD, during 1953-1955

and was Deputy Chief of the same section in 1960 - 1961. Therefore,
the fact that NOSENKO furnished information concerning certain cases
or situations in the First Department and the fact that GOLITSYN
furnished information concerning the same case or situation is not

unusual or necessarily suspicious. NOSENKO has stated that GOLITSYN

On

4 9001085. . - a
~~ SECRET

sg nishetoc ASEM Me eOamewerr mom Smee tee



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

Ne

2ST N and NOSENNO cone

t
ia}
#.
we
nh
oe
isfy
y
Z
¢
Oo
r

cterly correlute cevin

with information from NOS?

—~
mw GOLD

KOSOLAPOV oi the

se

oilicey ©: sepast

Section, First Department, SCD, cuving 1966 - 1901,

OLITSYN which is c

Bt in

rvaent, SSD.

respousibility was wor agains<s coce clerks at the United Sates

oscow, and that both KOSOLAPOV and

pee

the’ same work anc uncer his supervision,

ae Se

The statement by GO

(avi ess

53 142 - 103 of ihe previous

LT.

pase

aaAr cm ores:
NDNA eee a et

ATSYN Sood

ves

SYX

sees


--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

weet

that NOSENKO was not Deputy Chief of the First Section in 1900 has
been noted and commented on in another section of this summary.

GOLITSYN has furnished certain information which he re-
ceived from officers of the First Section, First Department, SCD. t
In each instance where this information, which was fragmentary, could
not be immediately correlated with information from NOSENKO, it was
previously considered to be evidential of deception or lying on the part
of NOSENKO, This position, however, failed to allow for the possibility
that the discrepancies between the two sources were, at least in certain
instances, more apparent than real,

In certain instances it has now been possible to correlate irag-
mentary information from GOLITSYN with information from NOSENKO,
making it evident that in these instances the differences could not be
construed aa in any way reflecting against NOSENKO. The four examples
cited below represent two probable correlations, (a) and (b); one possible
correlation, (c); and one instance where, no correlation is possible at this
time, (d):

{a) GOLITSYN furnished information which he
received in April-May 1960 from Gennadiy GRYAZNOV
that an attempt had been made by the KGB to recruit an

; 0001087

SECRET.



--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

NN

- was not a female secretary in the American Embassy, but

~raore
OTT
waa hen eed,

American female employee of the American Embassy

in Moscow through a male Soviet friend, but that the

attempt had failed. GOLITSYN also furnished inicormation
that the woman had left Moscow by the time he iearned of

the information but that the Soviets hoped she would return

to Moscow so that further work could.be undertaxen to

efiect her recruitment, He did not recall the name of the
secretary, but did recall that it wasia long and "German Oo
sounding"|name,

NOSENKO has furnished information in regard to a
recruitment attempt agains: {Collette SCHWARZENBACH,| Ok
who it is considered is identical to the "American secretary"
referred to by GOLITSYN. However] SCHWARZENBACH
had been.employed as a secretary to the wife of Ambassador j
BOHLEN during 1955 - 1956 and from 1958 - 1959 was employed
as a correspondent by the United Press in Moscow}, The
recruitment attempt against{SCHWARZENBACH] according to OG
NOSENKO, occurred in 1959 and was an operation of the First

Section, First Department, SCD.

g001.088

Ok DY


--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

es

Sure: .
(b) Page 163 of the previous summary conta: infor-
mation that GOLITSYN also learned from GRYAZOV in
the spring of 1960 that GRYAZNLV had developed an operation
against an American Embassy rnilitary code cler« in which the
KGb was "99 per cent sure" that the target would be recruited,
This is believec to undeubiedly be a reference to the case of
[James STORSBERG|wio was actually the subject of a recruit-
ment approach in 196}.

There is considered to be a good possibility that
GOLITSYN actually learned of the above information from
GRYAZNOV in early January 1961 when he was again in Moscow
rather than during the spring of 1960 when GOLITSYN was
‘preparing ior his assignment to Helsinki, Finland. This
theory is supported by information on page 163 of the previous
sumimary that GOLITSYN has stated he learned in January
1961 from Vladislav M. KOVSHUX (Chief of the First Section)
that\Johan paPSFREUNSpad recently been used in the .
successful recruitment of an American employee oi the
Embassy. [Johan pazist eunS}wae used in nefStonsb ERG]
operation, according to NOSENKO, and NOSENKO was also

6001089
1

SECRET

Y/5Q

— _ . ~ _ - .
Se ERR Se PCE eee ee ne em


--- Page 92 ---
14-0000

™~ oco2iT

Uivyices
aware that GOLITSYN had a conversation with KOVSHUK about
(BarsPReunD}pince GOLITSYN wanted to use[PrEisr bund]
in Helsinki, NOSZNKXO has stated he was not present during
the above conversation. It is very possibie that KOVSHUK
exaggerated a littie in his conversation with GOLITSYN in the
matter of why GOLITSYN could not eePazisPanenDpe an
agent,

NOSENKO has furnished extensive information in regard
to the| James STORSBERG|case and with due consideration to
the accuracy and recollection of GOLITSYN, there does not
appear to be an adequate basis for questioning the bona fides of
NOSENKO on the basis of the differences between the report-
ing by-GOLITSYN of information he received from GRYAZNOV
concerning what is considered to have been the James ) G
STORSBERG)case and detailed information furnished by
NOSENKO concerning th James STORSBERG|case. The
exact date of the recruitment attempt against/STORSBERG|
has not been positively established, but it is considered to
have occurred before early May 1961 and probably in the
March-April 1961 period. The statement by[Tames 06

yi 9001090
12

Be SECRET

tee eee,

BRO



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

~ OLE,

OL

[Stoaspzng}nat it occurred in October 1961 is com-
pietely unacceptable and is even contradicted by other
statements vf St iQbendnimecss

(c) Page 163 of the previous summary contains

>} information from GOLITSYN which he had received from
GRYAZNOV in April or May 1960 that an American
employee of the Embassy in Moscow was either recruited
or prepared for recruitment on the basis of a homosexual
compromise beginning in 1959 and concluding in 1960,
The previous summary also states that according to
GOLITSYN, the KGB had photographed the American in
various homosexual acts, but SHELEPIN, who had just
become Chairman of the KGB, was at the time stressing
ideoiogicai rather than biackmail recruitments. SHELEPIN
cid not exclude future use of the photographs which the KGB
would hold in reserve.
NOSENKO hae furnished information concerning the

homosexual compromise offiovert Baansri who was a
guide at thé United States Exhibition in Moscow in 1959, and

with whom "SHMELEV" and "GRIGORIY", two homosexual

> . . GO01C94
13

SECRET

B18R



--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

as No eee

agents of NOSENKO, became acquainted, Work against
the United States Exhibition was the responsibility of
the Ninth Department, SCD, but various Departments
were particip. ting under the direction of the Ninth
Department, ‘

One of the above homosexual agents succeeded in
involving)BADAE rH sn homosexual activities which were

photographed by the KGB but, according to NOSENKO,

_ although the photographs were of a good quality, the KGB

was unable to use the photographs in 1959 because of a

general ban by the Central Committee on the recruitment

of the United States Exhibition guides due to the planned

visit of President EISENHOWER to the Sovict Union.
NOSENKO also stated that the compromising materiai

and information on BARAET vas later given to the First

Department and that BARRETT was recruited by the Second

Section, First Department when he returned with another

Exhibition in 1961, and that he, NOSENKO, was not involved in

the recruitment operation. (BARRETT, following nis return

1a Gd01C92

SRT

ce ROP Rf SEES NNN aPC UTE ee HrrrecrereReerrrer een neertence marerrmnevercmrgery ner! racescenraneromsn rene sveereerracea-sreweni JEP nic ennm meeemerce wunn-teceteepen:renteremeaets iene a nen


--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

ROAST
OGLUisee,

to the Uniied States in January 1962, confessed to the
FBI that he had been recruited in 1961 on the basis of
compromising photographs which had been taken
during his 1959 trip te Moscow.

Although it cannot be established at this
time, it is possibie that the information furnished
by GOLITSYN which he had received from GRYAZNOV
actually refers to ene[ Rober: RRETT ase, It should
be noted inat ober BARRET7|could not actually be
charactcrized as an American employee of the Embassy
in Moscow,"

(a) Page 162 of the previous summary contains infor-
mation from GOLITSYN that in the spring of 1960 when he
visited the First Section, First Department, SCD, he learned
from GRYAZNOV that GRYAZNOV had as an agent an Embassy
code clerk who was scheduled to be transferred to Helsinki,
GRYAZNOV indicated to GOLITSYN that the code clerk had

already furnished the KGB with some information, that he was

15 - 6001093

2l6R



--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

which has been conducted in the matter, Although this is —

Moscow. during 1960 - 1961.. It is also possiole that the previous

| £rom NOSENKO with information from GOLITSYN. This conflict is

Site steretier bremnardeniotdelrainiare cate cecincetiniamaeeimen eh

anno >

re oa

considered by the KGB to be a "real" agent and that if.
the transfer of the code clerk materialized, GOLITSYN
might have the code clerk as an agent in Helsinki. , _ é
NOSENKO has furnished no information which car be
correlated in any way with the above information from
GOLITSYN, but neither has the information from GOLITSYN

resulted in an identification despite the considerable investigation

considered to be a. valid lead, it need not necessarily refer

to.a.code clerk ho was in the United States Embassy in

oe

remark by GOLITSYN concerning the above "code clerk"' who

might bé transferred to Helsinki as well as his cited remarks
in a-c could be clarified or at least additional information
obtained if a specific reinterview on these matters was possible,

The trip of Vadim V. KOSOLAPOV to Helsinki, Finland in

~

November 1960 should be mentioned in any comparison of information '

TS tata ett a SAS ha BEA a oe thee os,

~



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

2 considered by the KGB to be a "'real'' agent and that if
: the transfer of the code clerk materialized, GOLITSYN
might have the code clerk as an agent in Helsinki.
NOSENKO has furnished no information which can be
correlated in any way. with the above information from
GOLITSYN, but neither bas the information from GOLITSYN
resulted in an identification despite the considerable investigation
which has been conducted in the matter, Although this is
@ considered to be a valid lead, it need not necessarily refer
to a code clerk who was in the United States Embassy in
= Moscow during 1960 - 1961, It is also possible that the previous
remark by GOLITSYN concerning the above "code clerk" who
might be transferred to Helsinki as well as his cited remarks
in a-c could be clarified or at least additional information
obtained if a specific reinterview on these matters was possible.
The trip of Vadim V. KOSOLAPOV to Helsinki, Finland in
November 1960 should be mentioned in any comparison of information

from NOSENKO with information from GOLITSYN. This conflict is.

® 6 GOOLE -


--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

ate tracteertinteiestey nei nem ne

SECRET

the

also mentioned in another section pertaining to the 1960-1961 career

of NOSENKO. GOLITSYN stated that KOSOLAPOV came to Helsinki

to accompany an American Embassy code cierx on the train to

Moscow and that KOSOLAPOV pianned to strike up an acquaintance

with the code.clerk which could be continued.in Moscow.

The American Embassy code clerk referred to above was

Ob
undoubtedly[3 John GARLAND|and the train manifest lists(John GARLAND]

and Viktor KOLOSOV (Vadim V. KOSOLAPOV) as passengers on the

- same train from Helsinki to Moscow, NOSENKO is aware of the

entity offobn oneandfout elaimé no know! edge of the above trip

of KOSOLAPOV to Helsinki, although being well aware of a previous trip. |

NOSENKO, as Deputy Chief of the First Section. specifically

. charged with work against code clerks, should have been aware of the

; November 1960 trip of KOSOLAPO¥ to and £: from Helsinki, His lack of

‘knowledge may or may not be explainable in terms of his other activities

auch as his trip to Cuba in November -December 1960 but it cannot be

: interpreted as evidence NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB since, if

“he ‘had been, the KGB should have briefed NOSENKO on the trip of

KOSOLAPOV to Helsinki in November 1960, as this was an event the

KGB knew GOLITSYN was aware of.

600105 5

“ geopey

Stoneman naMG ia Sane epee ye ooo aE

aot



--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

A theory which has previously been given consideration and
warranted full consideration was that if NOSENKO was dispatched,
his mission was to confuge leads furnished to American intelligence

and/or to denigrate the. value of information furnished by GOLITSYN.

In connection with this theory, it should be noted taat NOSENKO during

current interviews has not made any remarks which could in any way
be construed as derogatory to GOLITSYN. In addition, NOSENKO does
not claim to Have any detailed knowledge of the FCD and frequently,

when some topic peculiar to the FCD has been broached with NOSENKO,

his immediate reply has been to the effect that "I didn't work in the FCD,"

Lots

ni ‘should ask GOLITSYN about that.”
In-conneetion with any consideration of whether the contact of
NOSENKO with CIA in Geneva in June 1962 could have been initiated by
the KGB as a result of the defection of GOLITSYN,: the timing, of certain
events should be noted.. GOLITSYN defected on is December 1961.
NOSENKO departed from Moscow in March 1962 for Geneva, ‘Switzerland,
where he remained until 15 June 1962. ,

, ‘it is felt that it would have been practically impossible if not

imposéible for KGB officials to complete an assessment of the.actual or

potential damage which could result from the defection of GOLITSYN,


--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

SeGuks

et ces

select NOSENKO as the individual who would be dispatched to counter-
act tne possible damage, and appropriately brief NOSENKO prior to
his departure for Geneva in March 1962, Therefore, if NOSENKO : 7 4
was dispatched by the KGB, it would appear that pians for this would
have predated the defection of GOLITSYN and that any GOLITSYN

aspect could only be a related aspect and not the basis for the original

plan to dispatch NOSENKO. In addition, if NOSENKO was dispatched, . , i
it would hardly seem necessary for the KGB to send NOSENKO to
Geneva two and one-half months before his first contact with CIA.
The theory has also been considered that NOSENKO could have ‘

been dispatched to confuse and divert American intelligence and thus

“to protect an important KGB penetration or penetrations of the United
States Government, particularly CIA. This is a theory which should
and has been given full consideration, out it is not possible to factualiy

substantiate or refute this theory in the absence of specific information_
prenmare of vet.

that high-level KGB penetrations do or do not exist,
Actually, as regards NOSENKO, the primary area which should
be given consideration in the above matter is if all the information from

NOSENKO is accepted, what effect would or could it have on the efforts :

coocevwtace QO0LC87

Sa re see aa eae tie Bahasa ee mee nmin oe



--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

« .(Dayle Wallis SMITH) and|Herbert HOWARD} The basis for this

to be aware of all recruitments of Americans by the SCD. As an

SECRET Oe

of American counter-intc.jigence td determine the identity of and

take appropriate action against KGB penetrations of the United

States Government, The only answer to this question seems to be

that there would be little consolation or assurance to American intelli-

gence even if every statement by NOSENKO was accepted at face value,
The only specific area in which NOSENKO could be even con-

sidered to claim full knowledge is the United States Embassy in Moscow.

In this area hie statements could be construed as assurance that there

were no recruitments of American personnel in the United States Embassy

in Moscow from 1953-December 1963 with.the exception of "ANDREY" . : |

expressed. opinion of NOSENKO is considered elsewhere in this summary

and analysts may differ as to whether a recruitment could have occurred

of which NOSENKO did not have knowledge, assuming that his statements

are made in good faith, It should be noted, however, that at this time

there is no specific information which is in direct conflict with the

expressed opinion of NOSENHO. : ; ! 7
NOSENKO, as previously mentioned, has never claimed any

particular knowledge of FCD activities, In addition, he does not claim

- . ‘

4

gooitee

ewe

< wanttabn dune nese

weeny ot gets at et



--- Page 102 ---
14-0000 1

—- ‘DE 7
st . _SECKT es.

example, -he has made it clear that his knowledge of SCD activities
against members of delegations, foreign businessmen, foreign students, . .
and individuals in the USSR on the invitation of a Soviet organization or
a@ component of the Soviet Government is extremely limized and at best
mainly of a collateral nature.

NOSENKO does not even claim any detailed knowledge of

activities of the Second Section (Active Line) of the First Department, SCD,

nor does he claim to know all of the cases of which the Chief of the Seventh
Department was aware. The latter is.specifically supported by certain
notes brought out by NOSENKO which are short references to a number

of Seventh Department cases which are identified only by the KGB code
name, These notes, according to NOSENKO, were made when he had an
opportunity to review a notebook held by the Chief of the Seventh Department

and constitute the only knowledge NOSENKO had of these particular cases.
. 7

- SORT

irene x ceengemiananmomen nn een

trae conan as ei ne tn en yee



--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

SECRET . —_

G,. IS THERE EVIDONCE OF A POLITICAL OR. ANY

OTHER TYPE OBIZCTIVE WHICH COULD JUSTIFY A DISPATCIY

OF NOSENKO BY THE KG2Z WITH PERMISSION TO SPEAK

FREELY TO ClA CONCERNING HiS KNOWLEDGE OF TEE KGB

AND WITHOUT NOSENKO ¢

NG GIVEN A SPECIFIC

H NISSION OR MISSIONS?

ig ant
ectassificetios



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

on
oN tyes
The wLove tosci-
Ly incaleulable. , avds NOSENXS,
with the single exception detaiive DLlow, theve is no evacunce cla
political er otser type sdjective wiics c
7 importance by the KGS io warrant tue € us & AGS octices
the knowledge of NOSENAO to spetk
ic raission oy mission
et The
1g the XGB to dis
~ to United States author

limitations on the KGS

hat such act would, in the estimate of the leacexszip, ve .l¢in 2 net

potitical gain for the USSR, For such a possibility to be seriously

p

entertained by the Soviets, Lowever, it wouid Save to involve an issue o:
major importance to the Soviet leacership and presumably would Lave to

2 "9904104

znsce

: LAL

vend



--- Page 105 ---
14-0000

Kennedy; the involvement: of vey Gower in tle essaselsacien

obtaining at the time shat there was Soviet i

¢

assassination, (5) t.e premise teat in fact there wes : a

involvement, and (c}) a hypothesis thai the Se

cor.cexned lest erroneous conclusions be Crawn whic could Lead to

ivreversable actions, it is conceivable thet the Soviet leadersiis mi

to the United States Governmens of the alicgediy completa Sovics con.

"inside" KGB information on OSWALD: intormation waich purzorsciy

art nen nena i mA ae

TENET

St



--- Page 106 ---
14-0000

. as a ee * 2 tiles on OSWALD

nis iniormation clear. no ACS seletionsnis

wita OSWALD, that the KOS hic io opovational interest in CSWAL

ere ry

and that as a maser of fact OS’

continuing series of problems.

oe Upon examina’ » BOWeves, N

‘requirements premised above ior ser

|. KGB defection, The folowing reasons render this unace,

v -.° a, The chronology, in itself, presents vir

problems, for.such a theses, viz. NOSENKG!s
oe .

in June 1962, 17 months pricy to the as

7 b. While the informat irom NOSENXO oan CSWALD is

eresting and portinest, itis uot, in nature,

sufficiently cenvincing ior United States, authorities to reasonaeoly Se

ausiole not to assume that the Sovicts would

c. Itis imp

assume that United States autaorities, in any examination of the
>

_ possibility of a Soviet (KGB) hand in the assassination, would presume

/  go0L1e3

: e *



--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

~
'
. Concerned Wiis miatiers Of tals meture.
pecs ‘
azoove very limited category.
It is accordingly con
- rnovivated free dispatch can in the case of NCSENXO be satisiactorily
eliminated. .
. The possibility has also Deen con might
' .

have theorized that by disparching an agent, int

with nurnerous leads to non-valuable or non-current

" cases, the facilities of the United Stz

be practically neutralized for an extended period of time.

only be based on an assumption that the United States Intelligence

comraunity would involve a major portion of its personnel:and eZiorsis

in the investigation and resolution of cases waich Lad little or no curvent

or potential value to the KGB. ‘The adove rossidili

y Cannot be
r. -

arbitrarily eliminated. without.iull consideration. It is not believed chaz

g001104

ene

SCOR ESSC NASSAR

th SET
ne SRERRE


--- Page 108 ---
14-0000

ij
ered

NOSENXO in the ads

evaiuation of the Geterreas eLicct o
by the KGB caused by Lesat aor

information from the Cispatched agent or officer, The deterrent clicct

¢ conviction anc sentescing of peysons weo Lave commitz.

th

on others of

rag

a crime or crimes has long been a part of the legal theory of why person
who commit a crime should be iaiprisoned or‘punished. |”

The deteZrent eifect on others of the trials and convictions of

iliam VASSALL, Rébert Lee JOHNSON end James Allen MINTKEN-

BAUGH ‘should not be undecestimaied, . The KGS aiso could not have

Known that information Zurnisked by NOSENKO would not result in tae

Lt
triai and conviction of other KGB agents of recruitments concerning
a > oy

whom NOSEZNKO had some knowledge.

feos wena non mnent o ay Eee denate eeten ope tanerue se eee ana

beer at de

&



--- Page 109 ---
14-0000

SECRET

H, IS THERE ANY EV

2 THAT THE CONTACTS CF

NOSENKO iN 1962 OR IN 219i 00 VERE ANOWN TOTES

GB PRIOR TO HIS DEFECTION OR THAT NCSENKO

‘WAS EVER BRIEFED BY THE KGB RELATIVE TO HS BEHAVIOR

ee
re

“OR KGB OBJECTIVES DURING 7

CONTACTS OR

AFTER HIS DES

TION?

FTN mene enedtnn ehh yl eats ing cat



--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

OTAas ; : -
OLUNEE,. oo ft

H._Is there any evidence that the contacts of NOSENKO in 1962
or in 1964 with CIA were known to the XGB prior to his defection or
that NOSENKO was ever briefed by the KGB relative to his behavior
or KGB objectives Guring these contacts or aiter his defection? The
conclusion is that there is no evidence that the contacts of NOSENKO
in 1962 or in 1964 with CIA were shown to the KGB prior to his
defection and that NOSENKO was never briefed in any manner by the KGB.
The basis for the above conclusion is substantially contained in
_ Previous sections, It is being. treatec here as a separate area of interest
‘since it is a sufficiently important area as to warrant individual consideration.
It is recognized that since positive factual confirmation such as
the KGB file on NOSENXO is not available, any conclusion concerning

whether NOSENKO was or was not dispatched by the KGB can only be

based on the full review of available information from NOSENKO,
" collateral sources, independent investigation and the opinion of the ©
individual analyst concerning the significance or non-significance of

\.- ‘each item of available information.

The conclusion that the contacts of NOSENKO with CIA in 1962

- and 1964 prior to his defection were not known to the KGB is

go0i40?

annette ne sternite donee &


--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

Seuees
necessarily based in part on a judgment as to whether any of his
activities or information logically warrant a substantial suspicion
that they were or could be in any part the result of KGB direction

or control, One of the particular areas considered was his apparent

behavior during his contacts with CIA in June 1962 and the conclusion |

was that it was incomprehensible that he could have been under KGB

control at that time.

Consideration has been given to the possibility that his 1962

. contacts with CLA were not known to the KGB," but became known to

the KGB.Jater and NOSENKO was doubled by the KGB, It was con-

cluded ‘that there was no basis for or information which would warrant _
serious consideration of the above possibility aside from the separate
conclusion that the IGB would be very unlikely to reward a traitor in
KGB eyes by sending him again to Geneva where he would be quite free
to defect, . : _ : : -

~ Worthy of comment in this section is the fact that NOSENKO,

‘during his 1962 contacts, expressed considerable concern over his

“personal security, requesting that knowledge concerning his identity be

“kept to an absolute minimum; that no communications be sent to the

Si esiateeeen cpanel onetime eave nea ns ontntoo- eaeaeir niente betta



--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

aN Ne ey we

sites Emvissy ia Mores ink

Eangers to NOSENKO in any conccs dF Etterapied contiet wil NCSINKS

te eee, TIER
}, am the USSSA.

msi : GUGVe indicated concézn of NCSLNKS

itis recogniz

not substantial evicence that NCSENKO

about his personal seci

- was not under KGS conivul; however,

evidence that NCSENNCG wes |

vw

NOSENKC wicsin the

waich very iikely wou.

was uncer KGS control.

The matevial whics NC.

carefully reviewed to cctermine L

participated in any way in the ass

of material. None of the matezial epoe:

"
u
i
an
wo
ifs
&
&

type and, on the contrary, it appears that NOSONAO couic have %

ail of the material to CIA and returned to the Sovi

“ever ata later date becoming awaze what the mateziai was actually missing.

The latter statement evea includes the travel document whic authorized

FOREST

SUAS NCA
Cs

ay
a

ne

Ce



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

3

Tae ieip in Decuswer i805, according to NOSENAC, was vo

7&F 24S!

or Alekuencs CLIALDPANGYV, ccovcing to

NOSENKO, this pasticwway Gocumens we

only necessary

wont for travel
Ment Lor wrevel

expenses. NOSENAG waicd aa. ns ead n

arnount of Money to which he wos centile

seally bDrougni the document cloag Guccuse it geve

oz Lieutesan: Coloacl,

NOSENKO. bas completely retract

vank of Lieutenant Colonel, stating chat even

rive

ment he was only a Capiain aitsoa,

7 go he wes

receive the rank of Majoz i

nearly 1964, NOSE

giving him the rank o. Lieutenant Colonel 2

tae error of KASHPDAGV, the odficer of Cuty in the SCD on Sunday, a2
that practically all Deputy Chiefs of Deparmment in the SCD ned at lezst

the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

The above explanation by NOSENAO may weil we con

readers wita at least a cegzee of s: However, ic NOSZNAO

was dispatched by the KGB, it would seem ta2t he could have been sro-

vided with something a little moze substanczial to Cocument

the vank of Lieutenant Colonei, in eddivion, it would seera that the KCB

GOO1110



--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

@ Of Gocument welch

Would support at ivast one of Lis clolvec positions ia the SCD, “C3, .
. 2 s tes . ne te ate i
Even the Cherepanov Papers Co io: in aay Way owpport the clain ;
NOSENAO teat ue was Deputy Culil of the Flisst Section, Pivss
* :
of. NOSENAS
i 7 ° .
! .
i
i ”
t
i ° . . »
: v :
f
|
; i |
. |
. !
.
7 ' , ov . a >

SERN


--- Page 115 ---
14-0000

SECRET

IV. COMMENTS COMCERNING PREVIOUS CONCLUSIONS |

IN REGARD TO NOSENKO

: ; y /

than enn cst re. Sane 28> SOMA SES ISDN eR Res ens



--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

jin direct conflict with the above conclusions and are basically tha!

February 1964 period.

;’ Committee for State Security and predecessor organizations, .

COMMENTS CONCERNING PREVIOUS CONCLUSIONS

IN REGARD TO NOSENKO

Attached is a verbatim copy of pages 357 - 360 of the "Examina-

tion of the Bona Fides of a KGB Deiector" which contains seven (A - G)

x

‘primary conclusions concerning the claimed Naval RU (Navy Intelligence)

i cand KGB career of NOSENKO, These conclusions or findings are

independently. treated in separate attachments.

. With. the exception of "G," the conclusions in this ‘summary are

. NOSENKO served.in.the Naval RU {rom March 195] to early 1953, was.

a KGB officer from March 1953 until his defection in February 1964,

.and held his claimed positions in the *XGB during the March 1953 «

* For purposes of clarity, the term KGB is used to refer to the

‘unless otherwise indicated,

-Attachrnent: _ i ot me “ _ oe a . eS
iCpy Pgs 357-360 o: Examination pe
9f the Bona Fides: of a KGB Defector" .

€
Enchaéed
Gawaztaciag 324
eaties


--- Page 117 ---
14-0000

PREVIOUS CONCLUSIONS RE NOSENKO
AS CONTAINED ON PAGES 357 - 360 OF

"THE EXAMINATION OF THE BONA FIDES OF A KGB DEFECTOR"

The foliowing is a quote of the previous conclusions in the case of Yuriy

Ivanovich NOSENKO. (The specific conclusions have been given the designation

of A - G for purposes of easier correlation with other sections of this summary.)
"SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

CONCERNING NOSENKO'S BONA FIDES"
"NOSENKO claims that he served for a decade in the KGB in

successively: senior positions of auhoriy from which he derived
extensive knowledge of the scope, character, and results of KGB
operations against Americans in the Soviet Union in the period
1953-1963. To substantiate his claim, he provides an impressive.
array of information about KGB personnel, organization and opera-
tions which, to the extent that it has been confirmed, is presumptive
evidence of his bona fides. Various Soviet officials, including
intelligence ofiicers, have generally corroborated NOSENKO's
claims. According to some of these sources, NOSENKO was a

- senior KGB officer who cecupied a series of sensiive. positions, who

es 0001114

Oo

ad



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

ay SELAEL

enjoyed considerable autioniiy and trust despite personal short-
comings, and whose defection, 'the greatest loss ever suffered
by Soviet Intelligence',. paralyzed the work of on KGB GRaEet ,
- Legal Residency, and justified the formulation of plans to assas~.
sinate him."
“The examination has compared each element of NOSENKO's
biography relevant to his claimed KGB service with known ©
facte and reasonable surmise, The examination reflects the
test to which his accounts were put: whether his accounte are
- internally coherent and consistent with known fact, and whether
., he actually gained the information he has from occupying the
KGB.positions’he claims to have. held. In short, is he what he .
_ Says he is, according.to his own-accounts?"
“This examination hed led to the following findings, arrived
at independently:
A. NOSENKO Gid not serve in the Naval RU
in any of the capacities or at the places and times he

claimed,

'B, NOSENKO did not enter the KGB in the

‘manner or at the time ‘he. claimed.

C. NOSENKO did not serve in the American.

ssy. Section throughout the 1953-1955 period as
: sot wi OF c A ns a

. oo AenaArct
. SALA RAD ani nL ee a ER



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

ereren res)

D. During the period 1955-1960, ne was neither
a senior case oificer in, nor Deputy Chiei of, the Seventh . co _ : * , 2
Department American-British Commonwealth Section.

E, NOSENKO wasn neither Deputy Chief of the

American Embassy Section nor a senior oificer or

. supervisor in the Section during the period 1961-1962. (sic)

F., NOSENXO's claims, that in 1962-ne was Chief
of the American-British Commonwealth Section and was
thereafter a Deputy Chief of the Seventh Department, are o . He . . '

not-credible.

*.” G. “NOSENKO has no valid ¢laiin to certainty’
-.that the KGB recruited no American Embassy personnel
between 1953 and his defection in 1964. oo, oy
These findings differ somewhat with respect to degree of probability
‘or certitude, but they reflect the preponderance of available evidence
in each instance. "
“The above judgments, if correct, rebut presumptive evidence

of NOSENKO's bona fides. The contradictions in NOSENKO's accounts ‘ *

of his. life and KGB service are s0 extensive as to make his claims |

of as a whole unacceptabie. While truth and fact. in this case frequently



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

Wavitare

io tee

rr

“cannot be established with certainty, it is evident that truth and

fact are not what NOSENKO relates. By almost any test, virtually co

any of NOSENKO's above claims are impugned by iact or probability, -- i

oer contradicted or retracted in his own statements. NOSENKO is

not what he claims to be, and thus he is not a bona fide defector."
"Given the conclusion that NOSENKO is not a bona fide ,

deiector, it is necessary to attempt to determine his true motives

. 1

for contacting American intelligence and for providing the information

- he has given. Here, it must be recognized that the evidence, largely . oo —

consisting of NOSENKO's own assertions, does not permit unequivocal

conclusions. Neverteiess, the question cannot be ignored. The
character of the information NOSENKO has conveyed, the fact that
some of his false claims have been corroborated by Soviet officials,

and the necessity to make decisions about NOSENKO's future all

require that at least a provisional judgment be made."
: "Of the reasonable explanations advanced ior NOSENKO's
misrepresentations, the chief ones are that he is a swindler posing

as a former KGB officer for reasons of personal advantage; that he

suffers from a deranged personality or unbalanced mind; that he has
~.,. greatly exaggerated his actual rank, status and access in the KGB, for - oo s

simply, personal reasons; or,. finally, that he is a dispatched KGB 60041417

ped SERRE

To rm ede raceme ne eb

ra RUT STE
es me REET RSG
DRRARAEIAS Ba Se SAR Sa RRS



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

C7
ay
¢
re

“The iirst two possibilities are easily dismissed, That
. NOSENKO is aot sirnply a swindler who falsely claims for personal
‘advaniage to have been a KGB ofiicer is evident, we believe, irom

the confirmed details of KGB organization, personnel and operations

which he has provided and which couid only derive from within the
‘- KGB itself.”
, "Second, as noted inthe ext, extensive psychiatric and
: - psychological examination by Gualified specialists rule out the‘
Any

_t ' ‘possibility. that NOSENXO's actions and testimony are the product

“ofa deranged personality or unbalanced mind." i

"It is somewhat more plausibie that NOSENKO is a KGB
‘officer who served in at least some of the components for some
fi or all of the time periods that he claims, but who greatly exag-
: .. gerated his positions, Tank and access to intormation, and
_ invented some matters outright, to achieve greater status with
: American Intelligence. This explanation, however, fails to
accommodate the fact that several KGB ofiicers have asserted

that:NOSENKO did in fact nold senior positions in the KGB. Also,



--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

"Because none of the above explanations is consistent with
the data developed in interrogations and investigations, we are
; left with the hypothesis that NOSENKO was dispatched by the
KGB. While this explanation does not reconcile all the anomalies,

none of them renders it untenable, "'

"In the absence of further revelations by NOSENKO, or , .
other persuasive evidence to the contrary, CIA finds that the
evidence establishes a presumption that NOSENKO was dispatched
by the KGB, and believes that prudence requires that he be

regarded as still responsive to KGB control, and that his infor-

mation should be assessed accordingly." : :

SECRET

a - eabetactperer = anne

op etk ectliins



--- Page 123 ---
14-0000

'
1

!
H
|
|
i

Re cc a

HSER EEN SRY

SECRET a

A, NOSENKO DID NOT SERVE IN THE NAVAL RU :
IN ANY OF THE CAPACITIES OR AT THE PLACES AND :

TIMES HE CLAIMED



--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

Sener car pees iabast be ped an mom mente sents ont ee

.

sane

ow
mm

C2
ww

ry

na}

A, NCSENKO did not serve in the Navai RU in any of the capacities

or at the places and times he claimed. (Previous conclusion)

The above is conclusion "A" in the previous summary in regard
to NOSENKO. The current conclusion is that the claimed servicé of Oo a
NOSENKO in Navy Intelligence (Naval RU) during March 1951 to early
, 1953 in the Far East and the Baltic areas is adequately substantiated
and should be accepted.

The interrogations of NOSENKO prior to 1967 were complicated

by. NOSENKO changing the date of his graduation irom the Institute of
‘International Relations from 1950 to 1949. because he did not wish to
admit that he had failed to graduate in 1949.with the majority of hie class,
However, ‘previous eZforts of NOSENKO to revert to his original 1962
statement that he graduated in 1950 were not accepted and an unwarranted —
significance was given to the 1949 - early 1953 period of time.
It is considered that NOSENKO has adequately explained his

“stupid. blunders" as they relate to the above and to certain other personal |

matters and that his claimed service in Navy Intelligence from March

G852-3
badsaed tow aatecnatte|

Ef
. .

RAN
BAN
aN


--- Page 125 ---
14-0000

° Headquarters RU officer NOSENKO identified was the Personnel Chief,

35 GRU officers and| 400 lother Soviet nationals.

OLUecmeas
1951 to early 1953 both in the Far East and the Baltic area is fully
acceptabie, it is not considered necessary to comment concerning all
of the ‘remarks in the previous summary regarding the claimed Naval

RU service of NOSENKO as reflected on pages 49-59 and remarks will,

for purposes of brevity, be limited in scope,

The statement is made in the previous summary that "The sole

Colonel KALOSHIN, He identified no ranking officers in either the Baltic
or Far East Intelligence Staffs. Some 30 GRU officers he did identify,
by his own admission, NOSENKO knew not from his Naval RU service,
but: through: social acquaintance, later, in Moscow, or through hie visits
to.Geneva. "

Attached is a copy of a handwritten memorandum voluntarily

> prepared by NOSENKO in late i967 containing the names of a number

of GRU personnel of whom ke had some knowledge. The attached was
not prepared as the result of any inquiry concerning his claimed Naval

RU service, but was only a small part of the material prepared by

NOSENKO at this time. The entire material included remarks by

. 0 0
OSENKO regarding ap voximately| 875 GB officers,[100 KGB agents,



--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

‘of approximately 20 GRU officers whom NOSENKO relates to the early

- whether NOSENKO ever served in the Baltic area with Naval Intelligence

existe n

- place was not nonexistent, that it is currently known as Primorsk and

It is interesting to note that the attached list contains the names

1950's period. In addition, NOSENKO has, during current interviews
and in other memoranéa, furnished the names of additional Navy Intelii-
gence, personnel whom he knew in the 1951 - early 1953 period.

Page 52 of the above summary and other related pages question

_and even question his geographical knowledge of the area, Attached is a

copy of a handwritten memorandum with certain diagrams prepared by

‘NOSENKO on 21 February. 1968 concerning his. assignment with Navy

. Intelligence in the Far East and the Baltic area, ‘The memorandum was

.. completed by. NOSENKO without any reference material and a review of

his diagrams indicates they are quite accurate,
NOSENKO had previously stated that his service in the Baltic
area was at Sovetsk Primorskiy and during current interviews recalled
that the former name of the place, an aimost deserted fisnermen's . s
village, was Fishausen. The previous designation given by NOSENKO
for this place as having the mail address of Sovetsk Primorskiy had
caused the conclusion that his alleged place of assignment was non-

A further checkin the-matter would have disclosed that the

e former German name of the fishing village was Fischhausen,

“(001123


--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

~ . Ulan

The previous summary aiso stated that despite his claimed

active cornamissioned service in the Navy, NOSENKO knew nothing of
. . . . ooh
Soviet Navy tradition, doctrines, or organization of procedures, It

: . f

shouid be noted that there is a considerable difference between being

a member of the Naval RU and being.an actual member of the Soviet - : :
Navy. The situation could be compared to a career civilian employee :
” of the Office of Naval Intelligence and a line officer in the United States :
Navy. . . x
/ Attachments: .

. List. of GRU Personnel as Prepared by NOSENKO
‘Diagrams and comments as Prepared by NOSENKO

| 7 _ uduLL24 |
SOR

ae te ate,

See wea ee

“

om on

at



--- Page 128 ---
Sc akrenevLerid = Vile Fit on O18 a depict of chef of nary .
Lute Ajineey thea aches fe cf nery wallgenee , lader ke (Wtd degety of iif
Wf fia ( Serle w aad Jiashatin). I ean he wad te Andy | atfacke oi ter xz af
an sabes 7
it. bespiber “nk Metfer, “eucde - cing va hes meg. t titeLleprsce if Eifel
ts Goal, Larboodt re Legion ts 1651-16,
(8. boydans sesbly not dept af chef» fhe vey » calel ae
‘Sast Cn m ageuts %) om by AT-HE =
% bxbakh a ae officer f he heey teligcoee, pecathofe elle Case,
UATE in Soviets  Bbcscing nd's disticl pA.
eee snnel, covthel 0h Mop - ef fete 4
‘Ap, at fi hen Meeceey’ Les “y fiferee, .
t. Mevibthiy - 0 lull és (hie arnled iteedepsvtaaat an
: Brin of e furs f fee t eid, ig if Mefende., oo a
2. Atuchertes Detwclenken Léa 5 t Goon he navy eulells, jease posit Peis mY, Pie.

ie Soviets ie, (lines, weenpred 1 di zed

Fe Rewisenle - a a mibeclary atacke (porriel enkeity ind tu Bern,
I. belting Youre - - ae @ Ufrecr Pl (oeemef) 4, wag oe Che “de,

tones. header Cote of fees epney Tees? 0 !

I. bubpenin der KO hy tbe rE arvrbed to GRU, oe |

7 te Sallyge an. AG ffecer #9 fe. us ; set Le. Syerte)._ ~ - |
le hbeshin - aa eebucl, by ADVI, eile V4 [evserenel dipertaant” 7
te bale iprace ee. oo, vOU1125 ' be

epanjube - oa 3 Linn Sotded he inf Z é. f lero tinal ealalin :
han tn Lo mg evtellgerse pal sect oerel i 7 beeles (Encwes a

lane

N



--- Page 129 ---
Mt Kigallin = 2 geurrel us CibO® ep a depuly fbf 7 wilite yo :
Aplennalia weadetey, | he ks ee t Seas? a piblee rlhen 1 Seige ym histakedl has Baer , ;
& Ab wns in GEM... wrrked in Haly Gand in Tecate, thes teifeen Macey Lib of .

fasslee Tinesheuke OE ye fy [hice shed the nhl o f frreiza teed); ipl te
he - - 4 COS sfudbd at estideal iy te US elie weortes in Gh, _
a ket ki ba loner | Vedlitwin - re ingee, ke seneer ee eee ft faery” bale tlgjewce _
Sf Mla i AO, ; ae
ELEN oe a dguly obey f 9: saec dhilvckmeat=
14 af A aaey enlelligtwce “f P Five: tC. tn -

ot

if. Maytor &. J. wa deputy t chi, [os Wpowatisl Praag sulellt _ :
ges fF Fiecl tis H40-S4.

oe a kon! Pope ralpiy fobip “fine ey tilellj ence of PFlocL in. Anse. : “ee

tr. kegle iskery - ~ be L105 tn ffecer of dh Lyerticcal f frreipe. Mires, fee:
nity “f. defen,

e- Hitelilener — 4a “iffiee f gee [is 400 i
Me ‘n Ouior faust ~ tn USS he otlinendst nt tee ce Ufo. £ het bane sey 6 laa =
: tees nucle fe fee. __ :
a  Pogedin Boris - -a chop £ he seca whrtale fm, ‘eb ijewce, fiat.
. be 80-12. | __) * bf ye Cricgeenrye.. :

Low, %. heze weer = EO fi pary ee ipeute polit of. he ‘etedijeee.
| anne A. Serietel, fabeniny rast Abul 7 ae
i

ay, Shakes 74 A peucral, bir byt. Mees 4 se ta A  Milabery de (plemabicacy

ev ich —

“th
H
:
alt a et

w fil; i Filla Ursa rset


--- Page 130 ---
14,0000

Me. Mel niker Incler Se ayy = a dhe of tb ery wilelligeace sf PUT ator,
i bf ‘Matunabadyg ~ A ytustaly a chip fey tele ltipaceat Black se, Mob
- w. Beye Jt = bh agence ~ free Celned, | 4 Senior Mf heer ff uz My.
ivtellizenee | f 7? Tht ii a SPS [carbixa hi. sovrked eo Tinka)
: 4, Susboriok nm tia CEP LL ee Ce eget ler ff ange detache et fille
le vy legac fp Fick a ee A
» be. Srishelunor— en iffiirr ef: pes, “arsed i wt, Uf Leto se nem
wen fom here ters deoeblingf | :
Ie Fishbein wa reg -alucinl 65 COB « lepily iy

| Mill heey i

Legare pth rncetay ofnclelary meeg. ; ;

ace hesilewshe Hy Yond . words ty GRU | gon te wwe thel flHTn, |

fs: fitenbe Mat anf A Merry iin BI Hlak oo BL, |

J. borentser Mickel - A Ftee. adncral a force hifi he Y iubelOigenn ist)
Apeelfetbeelssebeyh etoclenpeliilendfe Lie reel pe ey oes

aperch iesrcgeectm AGS. -

36; Yenshas = Whee flier f prise fhe hey 6  ialeltige pete. ep PT i

ak UR, Peces 2 v chinese Can 7 ed fee

ie es ee - 4o “hem mee eer eee, ee tee ee ae eee tem ete en ee

Deas a
fa io. of o



--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

- 4
..
Mattes

" # Ff fe dbors L ALLS wat Tez ecd an €3 ulin about. “V ne

lo

je lieu e4 ae eulewpre' Be f he adey Milellgeuee fl Gb
1» Soviet Lenfoun, free eohiy legliel, , akira S bnee. g mw
Gy a Draet anal uae “a Me perce C4, yypeses Cheese C ea EL,
Cad 2 Jf Marek. US seat + fu i: Ategetum le thalarersh, lee
ehevipedl we Toetic th Lenseselsh en whats Mew crested the
Poet weal 4 fens lade Fosse! “eel hs Soviet he staal eits

“by Hacer, } \ (
bay Pesteray, S } ;
sth, nent: Te hillerbs- o—— ate a ; ‘€ cesbind Slabs,
Oop Saad fo ne

Sep eraevoren Acne real - -

a dle ella bate i, TSbet wal Cee’ ected ti ts A y Beery, here

cn, hse \bitial Mictiory freer, salsa nel cag bet,
he head, feast is of TG bet wet Coated ty sll lmewl Lhilelen tert,
aA corncts atuder ly il f P Hic, aad adjuecral bay her dread, .

: <2. haf if stefe = - eee wadiccral Kegatten. a ; . GO01128 ;
, He haf fs heey talele sense. of if 7. Tle "sone 1 egies phe weal
“Te 0% neler fay & a eet. ~ et bes ace reak ‘by plats bei,

pometat or et Oe
ce inte wes cute te omer ¢ ao



--- Page 132 ---
as ;
(ye alt ay pe. tucent) Ge ighien f lewals his jlie-Si seca Si (Gifernwlece ;
pcsteanby open of “a We Keenthey: (omy Ate lijens), ef
Bu releskos Te cormisfar) ;
S was telcy la He. lifertenleey efi pastacust Yfteces. fade A Gi.0r :
Cfiner mere torkeny ty Mer hy a laceuh, Var off On legoest in — .
Mew Kevilenadt - colnet. Ling opel, Liateacgtm frou hav Abverl, 4 heey ;
Eskew: y, Ca tsing Ockker. hedesuer, te, poten, be. ys Coe duel $f ( More.
; iffecrs., Here ‘sre Lee Sea rpenTe anf vad vs Le,
4, h ‘ert ff pul, A944, J fiw his thetecr Ce Hapey Ss St
elegy we MMeckerinsk] fer a Gave. thick. elicelory f
A pone - ra MR w pleseunl hy sarbaral™ of Uathsey be ~
jee (e ag, - colonel Lataghex, j wed’ ibeibely & hee. been ” bn a
uy Tarn forouse. beaacete fh heen, Mud J ang é phe bd é ln Ue, hoes
tile l@5 [tte prt ry aacy Euleldszes ec ‘ 4 Fact ln Seutch [ln
calool hfe & pertssuke ZL bltripgh ~ fortcer AGau)., sche se J
erviceed ty Shezee at, Ate beberceg dal ls Mivteset- fence feussia),
Sorte Ba cide co rly walleye, oe fervice fat wee et t fo -
ethene, it toe kek & Mdtce. Fils.

| Lette a sensliled Let ern, hes ze
Weze a Asse, leery abe. rh, -
— Ghee nitth tiheclleiit é Riel

oe ne Mats tak fig

~~ corerannttas — —

I ° : , | 7
: betel ant a bse wd “bea ie 1b

oa “eens!


--- Page 133 ---
He cerecniwteser - ha edecf’ f wa Feet Wed altelied ¢ felerle hg

he he chef p my ‘ “a cule, sense patel 2 ters eon clan 7, BD wud hycsaalicw,
Mere weene fess id! Flieger, bula Lh ab lee "tale earl rte ach seagyeals a
tad price. . 7
bifirs sy hee avijel (dy) ae ney § jal lijenecpoiat aes “Febafl (am -
seed frm. LA fereinny “ Siisl, of én Jeruncey Ye cook, off Le ce
poet was Vackaceted well ezewl 6 werk, here? Cheat. wes tantter,
“fh. - a praparelicn uf We oF oe C-cbtcre etiin pe So bey take sfe pelea
(F4 pests cel poe), aa elie. haley Heenbey Fone MELE Co
A the cud of Vecenler I Tee. Loa Geee abensny wt avl ay Mees,
Lr Leet te neil 2 Lae tsfernec | ty etsthes plree .
dh melee he Marek, HS3 d bys al é G eevel Had if bieitey phe,

| @ brake My. AEE wo ee need

CO ae oe



--- Page 134 ---
14-0000

a
SECRET
: . {
; B, NOSENNO DID NOT ENTER THE KGB IN THE
MANNER OR AT THE
.
‘e \

citer cnen teenie ae sit aee yee ete

eee Ag ene nee ten

Leng min eine nari ager utan ten re ener



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

~ . SECRE: 4

B. NOSENKO dic not enter the KGB in the manner or at the time i

claimed, (Previous conclision) ; Lb g

The above is conclusion "B" in the previous summary in regard |
te NOSENKO. The conclusion in this summary is that NOSENKO entered

the then Second Chief Directorate, MVD, in mid-March 1953 and that his

entry was not only facilitated by but due to the influence of General
Bogdan Zakharovich KC3ULOV.

Previous statements by NOSENKO and changes relative to date of
entry into the KGB have been mentioned in another section of the summary
and will not be repeated here, His statements during current interviews
that he entered on duty in mid-March 1953 as a case officer in the First
Section, First Department, Second Chief Directorate, MVD, are con-

sidered adequately substantiated and should be accepted,
j The conclusion of the previous summary (pages 61-74) that
NOSENKO did not enter the KGB in the manner or at the time claimed

“was primarily based on conflicting statements by NOSENKO as to when .

he entered the KGB (MVD). In 1962 NOSENKO said March 1953 and in

1965 NOSENKO again said March 1953, soon after the death of STALIN.

_ SECRET == cotta2

G

|
1
}
i
\

Ne een eet ah .
° . eR Nts, Cee Rema tv eee”

2

~ eee eee : oo



--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

-~

Qlotlen.
VoluAle

in 1964, NOSENKO had given two dates in 1952 as his time of entry into
the KGB in an effort not to admit that he had: failed to graduate from the
Institute of International Relations in 1949,

The previous summary gave considerable weight to the statements
of NOSENKO indicating that he. did not enter the KGB (MVD) under what
are considered normal KGB procedures. Proper allowances were not

given tor position of ‘the father of NOSENKO, the Minister of Shipbuilding,

sand the influence .of General KOBULOV: An analyst can either accept or

reject the statement of NOSENKO that he entered the KGB (MVD) through

. .the influence of.General KOBULOV;.but,. if the statement is accepted, ‘then
sthe failure. of NOSENKO to be required. to follow normal, KGB, procedures

.-should.also.be.accepied.. A Communist society or.a Soviet intelligence

organization is not and could not be immune to influence by a high official.

General KOBULOV as of mid-March 1953 was First t Deputy to > BERIYA,

the Minister of the then MVD.

The Previous summary raises several points concerning the

“etighbitity of NOSENKO for the KGB (MVD). It points out on page 67
that other than his undistinguished ‘period of service with the Naval RU,

the was no more. eligible for a KGB. appointment in 1953 than he was at

he time: of his previous rejection in 1950, This statement is not contro-

ve: tible and-is: fully accepted with the qualification that in 1950 NOSENKO



--- Page 137 ---
14-0000

“was not sponsored by any person of influence as was the case in 1953
with General KOBULOV who in mid-March 1953 was the First Deputy
to BERIYA.

The previous summary also states that according to KGB .
defectors familiar with the standards in force at the time, no candidate

was accepted who had ever had tuberculosis. This is a flat statement

‘which it is doubtiul any defector or series of defectors could fully ~
er TT . sos tne

substantiate; r namely, that it never happened. Until and unless it is

medically Proven that NOSENKO did not have tuberculosis, itis accepted

that be did have tuberculosis in 1952 and was ata sanitarium | --. zest.

place in n Kubinka, Iti is also accepted that he wag an office

after mid-March 1953. The influence of XOBULOV could undoubtedly
have permitted NOSENKO to enter the KGB even though he previously

: had tuberculosis, but the flat statement that no candidate was accepted who
had ever had tuberculosis is not and cannot be sufiiciently substantiated.

The previous summary contained a number of additional remarks

; and conclusions intended to show that ‘NOSENKO was not eligible for and

therefore could not have entered the KGB (MVD). Comments concerning
; these will be brief since there is considered to be no adequate basis at
“this ’ time on which to contend that NOSENXO did not enter the KGB

1
|. Ta (wiv) as an officer: in, mid-March 1953, .A comment was made that’
|

SECRET

Sememeemones SAUNA aI oman eme TS



--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

a

This statement makes no allowance for the influence of General

" era,

’ speak to any person: fficers or visit the personnel office. It would
peak to any personnel of P §

ea ome

NOSENKO did not take a pnysical examination in connection*with his
processing ior KGB entry, and that such a medical examination was

a routine and mandatory part of the processing of a KGB candidate.

KOBULOV; but, in addition, does not ccnsider the fact that. the Naval
RU dossier on NOSENXO was available to the KGB (MVD).

a The previous summary also failed to note that the MVD would
have had independent information in regard to NOSENKO’since the MVD
would have conducted any necessary inquiry in connection with the entry
of NOSENKO into.the Naval RU. As of 1953, the MVD undoubtedly also

had a dossier on the father of NOSENKO since this was still the STALIN

The summary also states’ that NOSENKO did not complete the

necessary lengthy Anketa before entry into the KGB (MVD) and did not

ee,

seem that the influence of General KOBULOV could have permitted the

elimination of most if not all of the necessity of complying with normal -
procedures, but NOSENKO has during interviews stated that he com-

pleted the Anketa while sitting at his desk after entry into the KGB (MVD). -

Page 70 of the previous summary states that NOSENKO did not

know.the designation of his own Directorate either at the time he allegedly

001135


--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

ime rman ciem amen Maman Latte eo atte Piaapele ti tajtte BRIAN otal

entered on duty or during his first year of KGB service. While
NOSENKO has claimed that the designation of his Directorate at the
time he entered the KGB (MVD) in mid-March 1953 was the Second
Chief Directorate and that it subsequently was redesignated the

First Chief Directorate, DERYABIN has stated this reversal of
designations occurred in March 1953.

STALIN died in early Marca 1953 and that same month the

MVD and the MGB were merged under the name MVD with BERIYA

as Minister, BERIYA held this position until his arrest in early June
1955. BERIYA was succeeded. by KRUGLOV, who held office for less
: than a year. Yuriy RASTVOROV. was recently queried concerning the
date of the reversal of the.designation of the FCD,and SCD and places
itas the end of April or early May 1953. GOLITSYN has indicated that
the change occurred "soon aftex the advent of BERIYA as head of ‘the
MVD in April 1953,"* In the light of our inability to fix the effective Gate
of the reversal of the designations of the SCD and the FCD, it is
unreasonable to impugn NOSENKO on his statement as to the designation
of his Directorate at the time of his entry into the KGB (MVD).

was’ ‘responsible for the reversal of designations. ‘of: the FCD and. the. scp.
‘NOSENKO i is of: the: ‘opinion that i it occurred. under: KRUGLOV, which i is

5 - cautt36

~ SECRET

There isa disagreement between NOSENKO and others as'to-who



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

in cornfiict with the statements of DERYABIN, RASTVOROV and hog,

-GOLITSYN, all of whom maintain that BERIYA was responsible for " , ot
the changes. As for the issue of who was responsibie for the reversal

of cesignations, it would appear that NOSENKO is inerror. However,

the fact that he was a new junior officer and that this was a ‘period of

—_—_—_——

upheaval in the KGB (MVD) effectively eliminates any significance in

this issue. .

NOSENKXO is criticized in the previous summary for not knowing
the location of the Chief Directorate of the Militia or the history of the
KI (Committee of Information). NOSENKO has stated that he had no
contacts with either office during 1953-1955 and there is no adequate reason : : ; GS :
to disbelieve this. statement. He is not aware of when the XI ceased to
exist (1951 given in the summary, but other information indicates the KI
continued to exist in a nominal capacity until the mid-1950's)}, but care
should be used in stating what NOSENKO should know if he held a certain
position. Readers of this summary may wish to reflect on theirown :
memory concerning the location and their knowledge of Agency facilities at

any given period of time or when Agency components or related organizations

were organized or ceased to exist. . .
io‘
ea oe _ GOULLeT
| . SECRET
- peeves cow Ronan Se. we tas remeenetve apute ne -

ENR ae
See



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

Leer

The point has also been made that any career of NOSENKO
in the KGB should have ended or he should have at least encountered
difficulty when his benefactor General KOBULOV, together with the
brother of General XOBULOV, was arrested with the BERIYA group in

“ early June 1953. NOSENKO has during current interviews stated that he

encountered no difficulties but is aware that the KOBULOV connection

was discussed.by an officer from the Personnél Directory with an .. : : ue : i ;
official of the First Department. Under other circumstances NOSENKO _ _ Co
would very possibly have encountered difficulty; but, it shouldbe noted : os

that the father of NOSENKO retained his position, that. NOSENKO only. - ds

met General KOBULOV through his father, and that NOSENKO has. stated
that although his father knew General KOBULOV, his father could in no

way be ‘considered a member of the BERIYA group.



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

e

SECRET

‘ SECTION THROUGHOUT THE 1953 -.1955 PER‘OD :
ASHE CLAIMED - a
o a *
; |
7
a 1 a

(eos meee eet ate es em se eT



--- Page 143 ---
14-0000

|
|

Sh cia cements A nntetened Manta gy

C,. NOSENKO did not serve in the American Embassy Section

ws

throug hout the 1953 - 1955 period as ne claimed, (Previous conclusion)

The above is conclusion "C'"' in the previous summary. The
conclusion in this summary is that NOSENKO was an officer of the First
Section (American Embassy Section), First Department, from mid-March
1953 to late May 1955 when he was transferred to the Seventh Department,
ScD,

This period of time has been covered in detail with NOSENKO

‘Guring ‘current interviews, The conclusion is that NOSENKO was an
ofiicer in the First Section but was not a very effective officer and that
both his work and behavior were decidedly influenced by the fact that he
was the son of the Minister of Shipbuilding. NOSENKO is reluctant to
admit that he was other than slightly lackadaisical in his work curing
this period of time, but is not hesitant to admit that his personal be~
havior was such as to cause him to be removed as Secretary to the

Komsomol] unit in 1954 and to cause an unsatisfactory "characterization"

SECRET G001140



--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

Weeks teed ney,

to be prepared in early 1955 which necessitated a decision as to whether

he would be fired from the KGB or transierred to some other component.

The influence of his family is quite apparent in the above since

- his father was advised of his difficulties in 1954 by an official of the
KGB and his mother interceded on his behalf in 1955 with the Caief of

SCD. The result in 1955 was that NOSENKO was transferred to the

Seventh Department and not fired from the KGB.

The question has been raised as to how NOSENKO could remain

on

in the KGB when after 1954 he was not a member of the Komsomol and

“ a

+) Was not eligible to become a candidate for the Communist Party. This

is.a valid question but a plausible explanation is again the fact that he was ; tee 5

the son of the then Minister of Shipbuilding.
NOSENKO has stated curing previous and current interviews that

following his entry into the KGB and until circa mid-1954 he was respon-

sible for work against American correspondents in Moscow. He has not

claimed that he had any successes and has stated that the work with news-
. 4 ;
paper correspondents already recruited was being handled by other officers.

NOSENKO has explained that during this time he was a "new officer,"

indicating he could hardly have been expected to act as an experienced -

officer.. His knowledge of correspondents in Moscow during this period -

C

po, vk time, together. with-his knowledge of other. KGB.officers and his | : . . :

2

SECRET

“GOuLt at.

Lelie eater wale

WS eee ea BLE A ee nn AEA

aera
SS
PEs


--- Page 145 ---
14-0000

| information concerning his own agents is believed of sufficient weight

; to accept the statement of NOSENKO that work against American cor-
xespondents was his assignment from mid-March 1953 to mid-1954,

From circa mid-1954 until his transier to the Seventh Depart-

ment in late May 1955, NOSENKO ciaims and has claimed be was an
officer of the First Section with the responsibility of work against the
Military‘Attaches (Army) at the United States Embassy in Moscow. It
is considered, based on his knowledge of the various Military Attache

personnel and other collateral information furnished by NOSENXO, that

NOSENKO was an officer. of the First Section during the mid-1954 - late

May 1955. period of time, that his primary work was against members

of the Office of the Military Attache, but that the quality of hia work

undoubtedly left much to be desired.

In circa mid-1954, NOSENKO was removed as Secretary of the

Komsomol unit and by early 1955 his performance was such thatatleast a
certain officials in the First Department desired his removal from the

. a
First Department, if not the KGB. Under these circumstances,

NOSENKO could be criticized as having been a very poor if net
undesirable KGB officer, but his knowledge of the First Section during

this period of time and his knowledge of the members of the Office of

C:

3 ; _ oasis?
SECRET

Dox Sofie Ub sree

a


--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

wn
ri
o>
ae)
teri
=]

the Military Attache supports the claira of NOSENKXO that he was an
officer oi the F.rs? Section with the indicated assignment ab related
by aim.

NOSENXO has stated that the work against the Military ‘
Attaches was not primarily directed toward development oi recruitment
possibilities, but was directed toward control of the Military Attaches
on trips in order to prevent observation of sensitive areas, sensitive
sites or sensitive activities in the USSR. This attitude by the KGB
would appear to be compietely plausible and NOSENKO noted as
exception2zi in this regard the recruitment attempt against Captain Waiter
MULE. NOSENKO explained this exception as retaliation for approaches
to Soviets in the United States in that period,

NOSENKO has been Criticized because he did not know all the
details concerning the Military Attaches which it was considered he
should have known if he had the specific responsibility for work against
the Military Atcaches during the indicated period of time. it is submitted

that this may be evidence o: his failure to satisiactorily fulfill his

(

4 . 0001143

SECRET :



--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

ao Te kOS LY ALLL WaLce

ty
e

inwh

ae on was being mace on nis case, anc a period of:t

went on& “big drunk" which culminated in his spending about 46 days : a :

lity of recurrence ¢: hi

1a] care Lecause of the poss

wndes nos

CADeTCUILSSIB.

the Military Attzches. It is considered that NCSENLIC 2. . + . cy

wekGlls, anc 46 *

current

sation concerning '", 7 LODINA

i Weuld appeer that there was no ut 22 by

iivele, bu:

- We Le was never il .cl wo Emmy San age Fecers ce

t these individual...

anv entinieeenrmte cates +

*

BFP



--- Page 148 ---
1 SRM 2a cute aetna

CE

| "Lhe effectiveness or non-eifectivenéss, of NOSENKO during his

assignment to the First Section, First Department, from mid-March
” 1953 to late May 1955 can have little pertinency in the. question of the |

_ bona fides of NOSENKO if it is accepted that he actually was an officer

in the First Section during this period of time. It is felt that information
furnished by NOSENKO in current interviews and in previous interviews

‘is of sufficient scope and detail that his claimed service as an officer

in the First Section during this period of time is completely acceptable.

he tet dete te



--- Page 149 ---
14-0000



--- Page 150 ---
D. DURING THE PERIOD 1955 - 1986, HE WAS NEITHER 4

SENIOR CASE OFFICER IN, NOR DEPUTY! HLEF OF,

THE SEVENTH DEPARTME

TAMERICAN-BRITISH

~.
~ COMMONWEALTH SECTION

_ mo a oov1i47
| , ; — tine 4 ; ,
| es SECRET |"iesss |

coerce

wee


--- Page 151 ---
SECRET
ClLUAL:

D._ During the period of 1955 - 1960, NOSENKO was neither a

senior case officer.in, nor Deputy Chief oi, the Seventh Department, mon

American-British Commonwealth Section, (Previous conclusion)

The above is conclusion "D" in the previous summary. The
current conclusion is that NOSENKO was an officer in the Seventh ‘
Department, SCD, from late May 1955 to December 1959 and was
Deputy Chief of the American-British Commonwealth Section, Sevenin
Department from 1958 to December 1959.

‘ :
During current interviews, NOSENKO has furnished extensive

- information concerning his own activities in the Seventh Department

during the 1955-1959 period. Interviews of persons who were the sudject

of KGB interest collaterally confirm that NOSENKO was personally in- .

volved in certain claimed activities during 1955 to December 1959,

These activities include among others the recruitment of Richard BURGI| OG
Ny 0
in June 1956, contact with|Sir Allen LANE Arbor BIRSE{in the

summer of 1957, the recruitment oi[Giseifa Ha HARRIS jin 1958, the re-

v4 ; ;
cruitment of George DREW|in the spring of 1959, the recruitment of

SECRET

6001148

5/64

Base



--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

cS ere iy

Ulu.

° 6
[intiam sane wa’ in June 1959, the recruitment of David sry
in the summer of 1959, the recruitment oi|Gerard MERTENS |in July -
August 1959, and the recruitment of [irsene PiprEiin 1959, The
foregoing is not a complete list of all cases in which NOSENKO claims
personal invoivement, but is representative of cases in which his alleged
participation has been confirmed by interviews with the individual who

(6, Oo, OG

{Sir Allen LANE, Arthur BIRSE, William Stanley WILBY, and

was the KGB target.

ace TAYLOR wore [Bi Nieifcitizens and the other above-named indi-
viduals were Unite brated] citizens. This would seem to substantiate
the claim of NOSENKO that curing 1955 - December 1959 he was an
officer engaged in KGB operations against American-British Common-
wealth tourists in the USSR.

in addition, NOSENKO has furnished specific information about
an operation agains fiiartie MALIA, an American tourist who was in
the Soviet Union from approximately September 1955 to December 1955.
(MAELA|nas not been interviewed and eviil not be interviewed, 50 at this
time no particular 1955 case in which NOSENKO claims involvement

ox personal knowledge has been substantiated by interview of the

individual involved. : : ae

goci149

cee gee eee cen coms

Rennie =

1S ae



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

es Ulu
NOSENKO has furnished information on the travel of certain
United States Government oijiciais, including Congressional represent-
atives to the USSR in 1955 - 1956; and the trip of Supreme Court Justice
1
William O, DOUGLAS in 1955 which, when consiuered with the previously
\
mentioned specifics, adequately substantiate his wsimed service in the
Seventh Department and work against American-B ritish Commonwealth
tourists during the late May 1955 - December 1959 period.
NOSENKO has stressed that when he transferred to the Seventh
Department, the Tourist Section had just been established and an agent ,
network was not -vailable for operations against American and British
tourists, This seems quite logical since the infiux of tourists into the
USSR was jut ina jormative stage.
NOSENKO has spoken in detail about an agent network he de-
veloped after 1955 which primarily consisted of Intourist personnel
and two homosexual agents, "SHMELEV" and "GRIGORIY" (KGB code
names), whose extensive use in KGB operations has been confirmed by
interviews with individuals who were the subject of homosexual] com-
promise operations.
The previous summary contained remarks on pages 101 - 150 re
in regard'to the claimed 1955 - 1959 Seventh Department service of

Og1150

NOSENKO. To comment on all the aspects mentioned in those fifty

vet



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

SeCret
pages would be repetitious and in many instances superiiuous, li is
considered that even ii the statements were accepted in toto, there
would stil: not be an aGequate basis ior 4 conclusion that NOSENKO
was not an ofiicer in the claimed positions in tne Seventa Department
during the period of late May 1955 - December 1959, Nor is it con-
ceded that, if all the subd-conclusions and the interpretations of various
areas of information were accepted without quaiification, there is any
evidence that NOSENKO was dispatched by the KGB, "However, there
are certain assumptions and interpretations which appeared in the
previous summary which are particularly worthy of comment and which
are considered erroneous or require additional clarification,

On page 145 it is stated that the evidence suggests that NOSENKO
was an English-speaking specialist in sexual entrapment, not a counter-
intelligence officer responsible for the identification of foreign agents
among tourists or for the development, recruitment, and exploitation
of agents for the KGB. The Second Chief Directorate, KGB, and the
MVD have used homosexual and heterosexual compromise in numerous
known (and presumably unknown) successful recruitments and recruit-
ment attempts. This activity has not been limited to the Seventh Depart-

ment, SCD; and the innuendo that NOSENKO was "only an English-

speaking specialist in sexual entrapment" and not ‘a KGB ged wien

; 4

: _SECRE | .

--



--- Page 155 ---
14-0000

considered with the cetaiicd information NOSENKO has proviced on

Seventh Departrnent personnel, activities, procedures, and topice of

a similar nature is not considered to have any foundation in fact.
Page 145 of the above surnmary lists eleven operations which

were Seventh Department cases prior to 1960 and which were included

in the notes furnished to CIA in 1964 by NOSENKO, The named operations

were those againsi{ Bernard PECHTER, Patrick PRESSMAN, John RUFE, Ob 06, bby OL, 04,06, Db d's

Gerald SEVERN, Sofia SHATTAUER, (inu) KARLOV, Norman FISK,
Ralph MATLAW Marvin KANTOR{ Michael GINSBURG, and William ob 06
TARASKA, The criticism made in regard to the above eleven cases
was that NOSENKO could not describe the individual operations other
than to say that he had recorded the name of the target and such details
as he could acquire when he reviewed the activities of the Seventh Depart-
ment in 1962 foliowing his return from the First Department.

The notes brought out by NOSENXO ave considered in another
section of this summary, but it should be noted here that a fuil review

. o

of all of the notes of NOSENKO currently availabie indicates that his
statements as to how and why he obtained the information in the notes
are completely piausible. A detailed explanation of the notes furnished
by NOSENKO would almost. necessitate a separate listing of the approxi-

mately 150 cases or names mentioned in the notes,

gooL1L52
- SECRET



--- Page 156 ---
14-0000

ns

ee Clade

During curreni interviews, NOSZNKO furnished specific
information on certain of the above cleven cases, including| William
TARASKXA, Bernard PECHTER, Michaei GINSBURG and John RUF

.
it shouid aiso be noted that certain of the cases suchas Marvin KANTOR.
and Ffitiam TpRasiy were cases in which the tourist was visiting
g

relatives in the Soviet Union and that NOSENKO has given a satisiactory

expianation of how he iearned of the KANTOR case. NOSENKO has, in

’ discussing his duties as Deputy Chief of the American~British Common-

wealth Section, aiso explained that if a tourist indicated that he intended

to visit relatives in tne USS“, the case automatically was assigned toa

group of officers in the Section who reported directiy to the Chief of

Section and were, not under the supervision of NOSENKO.
NOSENKO has stated that he noted the names of three of the
individuals when retiring the files of "GRIGORIY" and "SHMELEV,"
two homosexual agents of NOSENKO previously mentioned. NOSENKO
has explained that "SHMELEV" and "GRIGORIY" had the assignment of
identifying American travelers with homosexual tendencies, that they
had contact with numerous Americans, and that they‘had homosexual

activity with individuals on whom they reported but on whom no overt

action was taken by the Seventh Department. In some cases the individual

001153

ie ee ras

SECRET

& vb
a 06, 0b, 06,8 »



--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

ye

ernnrtyr
OCAOT
sibact

was not considered a worinwhile target and in others the information

' was just maintained for possible use at a later date if the individual

revurned to the USSR,
06
NOSENKO has also explained how he learned of the[Patrick :
ssycax Ob os ne tieti 7
PRESSMAN land Gerald SEVERN cases; and, the listing of the Sofia OG
SHATTAUER |case in connection with the 1955 - 1959 period is in com-
plete error since page 427 of the previous summary contains information
from NOSENKO on her recruitment in 1962, During ‘current interviews
the notes which NOSENKO brought out in 1964 have been discussed in
detail with NOSENKO, He has given a detailed explanation of the material
which he brought out and his explanation of all aspects is very convincing.
The previous summary (page 144) suggested that the involvement
of NOSENKO in certain cases being handled by other Sections in the
Seventh Department or by the KGB Directorate of Moscow was unusual,
An examination of the cited cases does not indicate that his participation
was unusual, but rather that his explanation of why he was involved is
logical and normal. No consideration was previously given to the English
language capability of NOSENKO or the fact that his own homosexual agents
were used in two of the four cited cases,

_ The summary also.noted that there was a question concerning

whethes|Gisella HARRIS jwas necessarily a Seventh Department case.
OL go01154
. 7

7 SFCRFT

fore I gn marron ee re ERT meee



--- Page 158 ---
14-0000

ae

ULVee

_ Hb >

TAD a in the USSR

This question seems quite superfiuocus sincefi
on a tourist visa and "real" tourists are the PES pOiL LD lity of the Seventh
Department. Deparimental responsibility within the SCD for an indi-
Vicual traveling in tie USSR is decided on the basis of now the individual
is traveiing; i.e., whether on a tourist visa, as a member ‘of a delegation,
as the invitee of an organization in the USSR, as a iormer diplomat ;
Stationed in Moscow, as a diplomat not previously stationed in Moscow,
as a member of the Cuitural Exchange program, as a student attending
a university in the USSR, etc, There are also various other factors
which affect the determination of which Department or organizational
component of the SCD has the responsibility for a tourist case. These
factors include whether the individual is already suspected of foreign
intelligence connections and whether the individual is a businessman,
In addition, certain actual tourists in the USSR may never become the
responsibility of the SCD if the individual is of specific interest to the
FCD.

.

: On pages 148 - 149, NOSENKO is criticized for not knowing at
least some of the substance of the information furnished by George
BLAKE in regard to the CIA-MI-6 program of utilizing tourist agents
inthe USSR. This criticism completely ignored the fact that NOSENKO

made severai references in 1962 to the KGB having such information

6001155

te
Onl
£>
pe)
Fry
bene |

_ be



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

Sun:

although he dic then and stiil suspects that William VASSALL was the
source, The references py NCSENKO to the KGB having such inior-
mation were not developed in 1962 or later interrogations, and it was

not until current interviews inet it was estabiisned that NOSENZO had
ei face oe Ae

‘actually seen excerpts of information passe” by George BLAKE.

According to NOSENKO, the information which was obviously only
partial was furnished to the FCD by the SCD and could oniy have come

from an agent,

The previous summary (page 149) also notes that in 1961 CIA

acquired a lengthy Top Secret study on the subject of the use of tourists

by American Intelligence for espionage and operational support in the

Soviet Union (document was furnished by GOLITSYN following his de-
fection in December 1961). it was noted that the summary contained
references to certain 1958 - 1959 tourists whom the KGB counter-
’ intelligence identified as Amcrican agents and noted that NOSENKO
claimed he was Deputy Chief of the American-British Commonwealth
Section in this period of time and that he claimed the KGB identified
no American Intelligence agenis during this period of time. What later
‘ is described as a claim by NOSENKO is neither an accurate reflection
of what NOSENKO said prior to 1967 or has said since 1967.

Hoo g001156
“9

: - SECRET

-?


--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

Nas

cane TTP ER,

NOSENKO ias never claimed to kiiow all activities against
American traveiers in the Soviet Union curing 1958 -1959. Many
of these travelers would have been the responsibility of a section in
the Seventh Departnent, other than the American-Britisn Commen-
weaith Section, or another Depariment in the SCD, NOSENKO was
quite aware that certain of the American tourists in 1958 - 1959 were
actit.g suspiciously from a KGB point of view,

NOSENKO has stated he was aware thata document which the
Seventh Department had prepared and iurnished to the FCD in an efiort
to obtain further assistance from the FCD in the work against tourists
had been compromised by GOLITSYN, NOSENKO stated he was not in
the Seventh Department when the document was prepared and did not
review the document wnitil after the defection of GOLITSYN and foiiow-
ing advice from the FCD to the Seventh Department, scp, that the
document had been compromised. The document furnished by GOLITSYN
has never been reviewed with NOSENKO to determine if it contained
additional information not in the document which he was aware had ‘
been prepared by the Seventh Department for the FCD.

NOSENKO has been impugned on his apparent unfamiliarity with

a number of cases cited as examples in the document furnished by

GOLITSYN. In current interviews, however, the descriptiqn i {MS ENKO

10

-  SECRE |



--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

Ogee We OVS

foreiscey travelling .o te Vian one couriet ving, Such a povecn

Unoisiuity Gs the Tourlt

B25 weid by the MOL,

ior . . wets Mees et ett re
Secunia Tal Divcctoveic; namely, 2 touriet! lo io

eo oumber of iaveless vs 2

& Sovict orzentizivion, students

2a Fegard to the 2

ment, 2s NOSENXO claims. Alvnough several avenues o- poss

freitcl inves

cli a6: e *
@ valid United

iole tov hirn to have been & tourist wider

the USSR and, therefore, a target of tne Sevenva Depirt-

. gogsi58

tigation have not yet been Zully explored, 88 is no

ce

a


--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

WP Notes etree en te eens ee

RETERNENENT

Sou.

Amesican-British Commonwealth Sectios of se Seventn Do purtment

in 1958. --1959; neither wi

wuld such an inaccuracy relect on his claimed

service in 1952 - 1903 in the Seventh Dinirimeaty : Lo : :



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

SECRET

< om 7
oO). 4
nd 143)
fy tH .
Q )
5 id ~ .
a BLS .
id ‘o .
Q vi =
A fe} $3
i or
a v0 - . :
“ Bl
~ 3 ;
(3) by o i
y, a
gs} yl 8 j
ga 4 bs :
7“ a 9 M4, ;
ow Q i
g >a > q
S fale Ba 5
=
fe} O . ;
NA Q Dp , j
fh a a j
A 3} . i
Q .
“
ti
> - i
: 5 i
. 4
veces ee tery eda pane 2 aw ae senate econ me ng ft


--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

RS

RBRR

poner tag
Seats she

position of Deputy Ch
SCD, from January 1960 - December 2981,
Tne claim of NOSENKO that he hele the above position in 1950

- 196] has been the most diliicuiz claimed position of NOSZNXO to
bose Seetiee

satisfactorily resolve anc accent. Acceptance or x

acceptance 6:

his claim to bave held this particular position is a critical factor in
a decision as to whether the remainder of his claimed KGB career

is valid. It is belfeveé scoasonedle to presume that if NCSENKO was

Deputy Caief of the American-Britisa Commonwealia Section, Seve
Department, prior to December 1959 in the absence of any indicacion
that he was demoteé, ke should have been at ieast a Deputy Chiez =
Section during 1960 - 1961.

Position in the SCD, KG3, and throughout tae XGB is important

from a monetary point of view as well as a prestige point of view. If

eae oF one ate

Ep gouries



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

vxesponsib

NOSENXO was oOsly in the Fire. Section us a Senior Case ONicer in

oa in position with resultant

1966 - 1961, this would have Seen @ cern

2GSS OF DOTA Money

have held the position ©.

sideravie Gout as to whei

as well as wacther ke uel his
It is apparent that the kaow vase 5e oz NCSEN HNO concevsing ali

First Department, curing i¢50 -

aspects of activity in

1961 is incomplete when iudged by what are considered the normal

tities of @ Deputy Chiel in C1A.~ During

an eiiort was made to Getermine what the responsibilities os NCS ENKO

acteally were in 960° - 1963 and whether

this area

§ statements

were impossible or could be accepied as not negating his claim to have

-been Deputy Chief, First Section,

According to NOSZNXO, in the early 1960's there were only

cz Section in the entire SCD and

approximately fifteen Depsty Ca
Etcertain departmnenis none of tre sections aad a a Deputy Chies of Section,

aGdition, transier of a Deputy Cates wi Section was uct always followed

“by a replacement in kind, according to NOSENXO who stated that he was

not replaced by another Deputy Chief whea he transferred to the First

a
Pesce

A be

i:
ms Rae TE

TT tere geen see

Sy Rte



--- Page 166 ---
14-0000

Accoraing to NOSLNAG, wiesu veo nota jod des

eee ce fee Re tap gent che q
were in actuality what the Cn

t

Gecicec would be his wssigne

between early state.

entezed on cuty ia the

claim that he replaced M

Section. Along with @
other ofiicers in the Section wich previous responsibility for certain , :
matters which were assigned to him upon his arrival! there, then later

~ stated that BAXHVALOV had been responsibic for these matters. The

previous summary noiec ©)

by
ra
te
#
°
4
°
an
Hs
uh
°
tt
tt
b
ou
n
6
"
%
©
8
LY
<
ny
o
ct
hr
®
ue
o

contradictions.

In the light of the present clearer picture of the nature of a
8 Prose! ‘ eo ; a

Deputy Chief of Section, the statements ol NOSENKO on BAKHVALOV
7 a eal . an
and on the issue of who he, NOSENKO, Gidor did not replace are not

‘

contradictory, There is no reason to cuestion that BAKHVALOV, with
ec cue >

‘whom NOSENKO, incidentaliy, did not overlap, was a Deputy Chiez of

* Section in the First Section before NCSENXO, .and that he was respon-

‘ible for certain areas which later fell to NOSENKO, On the other , : :

7 GOOLLES

Sate Paved phn ems SOL oh elie SA one Bren:



--- Page 167 ---
14-0000

io L.CSENAG,

to ihe Pirei Section was

at

a Suosiantively Dew areca,

the prececessor

interpretation of

being in conflict appears to Se the result of co thi

m this 2 .

ail concerne ed. :

According to NOSENKO, at ine time of hi

- Section, First Department, in early 1960, ne nad not been told exd Zor ,
a short period thereaiter was not told -vhat his actus. cuties woulc Se, cr fot

KOVSHUX, Catei of the. First Section, wanted to ass.jn NOSENKS co

supervise the work éJainst Service Attaches at the Untied States Zrabassy. .

NOSENKO felt that the proposed assignment by KOVSEUA was

to keep NOSENKO cccupied with nonproductive works

for work against the Service Attaches was primarily one of contre: on
trips and not active work towards possible recruitmeni.
After a short period of time, NOSENKO was iniozmed by

a GRIBANOV that he, NOSENKO, had been tranoferred to supervise the : : ‘

work against code cleras (also code machine mechan: ics ) at tae United

oar’ States Embassy. GARIBANOV defined this work as being of the greatest

gou1ii64

ireweuieeronenaaurnnatnieiy

$

RERERRSHT
EAS

ES RAEN tas



--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

of NOSENKS, Gersaciy 1,

YAZNOV and KCSOLA ;
were experienced oflicers

although both as Senior Case Oiiicers were of

NOSENKO coes not claim that he hac to train eNher of

scer or to minut

t

scrutinize every action oz proposed action of GRYAZNOV aad KOSOLAPOV.

NOSENKO coes claim he was responsibie for sugervision over their oy

work,

Accoréing to NOSENKO, GRISANOV =

puasized that worse

against code clerks was to be his primary work in tae First Section

_ and that it would taxe precedence over, any othex activity, Other than

as generally defined his reszon-

work against code clerks, NOSENKO

sibilities as joliows: : . o.

(a) Responsiditity for file of (work agai:

9
3
w

2
ba
©,
py
3

ABIDIAN, Security er at United States Embassy.

(b) Responsibility for preliminary review of re-
a :

ports rom OTU (XGB technical unit) of "take" irom

.. Microphones.in the United States Embassy.

een



--- Page 169 ---
14-0000

(c) Responsibility f

security Tile on the Unites Sicies Embassy.

by his dedinit

: by NOSENKO, wouid not coincice with

: Deputy Chief of Branch or Section in CLA. An analyst can either accept 7 u,

or reject the theory that there is necessariiy an equation 2 between the .

er

” responsibilities. of 2 Depuiy Chief in CLA zad the KGB, but if the analys

accepts the theory, ne must offer some 5u: upporting evice ce on this point.

+ Pages 151 - 261 of the previcus summary contained comments
and conclusions and sub-conciuSions in regard to the claimed service

oi NOSENKO as Deputy Caiei of First Section, First ¢ Department, 1960 -

1961, The previous primary conclusicn was that he was neither Deputy

: . Chief of the First (American Zmbassy} Section nor a supervisor in that

. section, The conclusion of this summary is that he: was Deputy Chief

and had supervisory responsibilities for work against code clerks, The

. matter of the responsibility of NOSENXO for work against coce clerks

“wilh be’ considered later, Comments will. first, be mace on the respon~

.
| _— ar sibilities listed i in (a) - (d) above. . ae a
po Ee oe go01166

Me eT ’

: x
cant tam Wah AR ENT LT AE SEN aldanem@e ie OTE ate oe


--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

een

Pages 205 - 222 of the previous summary contain a Cetalicd

basis ior ihe previous Conclusion inat NOSENAO was not

cer ior John ABIGIAN., The cosrest conclusion is that he weo

oO.

responsisie case oiticer jor AD or nOt his work against

ABIDIAN compared favorably with what is considered tobe the MO of

a responsible CIA case ofiicer is immaterial; w.

whether NOSENKO reasonably fuliilice the requirements. of the XC3

direction of determining if ABIDIAN would lead the KGB to "

for work against the particuizr target, John ABIDIAN. it is ely thar

the answer to ihis is that NOSENKO did.

s#.0C0rding to NOSENKO, the work against ABLOLAN was in the

omer

POPOV, "and no consideration was given to active agent work against
ABIDIAN for possible recruitment. This explanation by NOSENKO
appcars reasonable and logical and his knowledge of ABIDIAN and Lis
Gescription of his work against ABIDLAN should be considered only

‘

within that framework.

Admittediy NOSENKO was unawaze of a considerable amount

of details regarding the background of ABIDIAN, but on the other hand

if the statements of NOSENKO are accepted that the only aim of the

KGB was.to see if coverage of ABIDIAN would lead to "ancther POPOV,"

At follows that: such personalia information on ABIDIAN would have had

goGs1e7



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

PRE TENTT
SS

REN REY Ne

ao Lars aN

R Lh. ADLOLAN was consicerce to

ecclion ABIDLAL assumed the

formerly 2ole Sy Russell A. LANCILLE,

who was mown by the AGS to be CIA. No iivesii,

or n07, - -

The previous summary, 32z

maic, a XG3B

specific statements relative to ASIDIAN axc a Soviet =
operational contact according to NOSENKO, which are erroneous.

This i

vaiiGates one oF

NOSEN KO was not the responsitie case t: for ABIDOIAN,

NOSENKO fae previously siated that in circa Octover 1966 he

wate :

prepared an operational plan on ABIDIAN which incluced

of the placing of Meta ox.the clot.

maid who is mentioned abd FEDOROVICH, The statement:

is madein the summary that this coulé rot be true because FEDOACVICH
did not work part time for ABIDIAN until az least July 1961, ABIDIAN
has recently been reinterviewed concerning the above anc the resulis
invalidate the previous conclusion *hat FEDOROVICE could nct cave

treated the clothing ané effects of ABIDIAN with Metka prior to July 1961.

cOLL168 |

SEL

Ree tts:

SUP RN UR Ast

e@ bases for tne previous concicsion the: aa

fa tere

'
4



--- Page 172 ---
14-0000

. AZIDIAN has now sited thot he arrived in Moscow ia March :

2 the inter

ee months

aGClanon cont

MMZER, a Departmen: of Ss

yo

ZEMMIZ ESDOROVICE

OVIOE

& ASMMER, PEDOROVICH
. eo. .

ba.

@ in the

= -_ “Ars

02 i960, From that time on FEDOXOVICH, according to ABIDIAN, Zed :

uncontrolled access to nis living quarters since she

entry for cleaning purposes. . |

jl any operationz: Letters within the Soviez

ABIDIAN Gid zoit x
ar .

“hi ei) af “Meare= 1964) and shevelo re in Via feea ch «how
ve >

Union until after Marca 1901 and thereiore in view of the cbove, there .

. loka ot
ehre an
Bree pailed :

operational ietters intercepted by the KCS anc mailed by ABIDIAN au

>

is no reason to contradict the statement of NOSENXO that che

showed evidence of Metxa. It is interesting to note that NCSENKO in
ee

June 1962 warned CLA about the KGS use of Metka for s
ae aaa

letter mailings by United States Embassy personne.

i ABIDIAN, according to NOSENXO, was the subject of a 24-hour

ie: Pry

surveillance with the Seventh Directorate assigning a specific surveillance

brigade to cover ABIDIAN, The actual surveillance of ABIDIAN was ihe

_, ‘responsibility of the Seventh Directozvate wich submitted reports to the a or
, gooiis9 tt



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000

AGB wowed have attempted to ex:

ABIDIAN, ¢

weaknesses were Gisciosed, according to NCSENXO, and the patcern

i
ie
o
a
u
”
G
B
f
&
yj
re)
ty .
fe)
s

of coverage to see ii ADIDIAN would ida

remained unchanged.

Pages 210 -2i2 of the previous summ

zy notes that NOSENXO

was unaware of countries visited by ABIDIAN curix, ssice the
USSR and that no effort was made by NOSENKO through the FCD to find

out such information, According to the previcus summary, NOSENKO

stated that the FCD "would not accept" such 2 request for "operational

action against an American ¢

lomat coming srom Moscow." The
surveillance which would have been required on the part of the FCD

to achieve any sort oi seasonable coverage of ABLIDIAN abroad would

certainly have placed a severe burden onthe FCD. Further, NOSENKO .

contends that the results which might reasonably. de expécted would be

i

. °  of.little or no practical value to eSCD. 9 , , -

s  gaois70 7 oe

seat



--- Page 174 ---
14-0000

>

a the matier of the Pus

wed on 30 Decemver 1962, it Shoule Se noted that a current review . .

of tne 1964 - 1966
they were unuble to clarity the saatier and cia muck te confuse the issue.
Curvent interviews, as indicated ctove,

conzlict or confusion,” It is apparent thet NO,

. Section, First Departmers, gor any racterial period of time aite:

30 December 1961. It is also clear that he either read the surveillance

report on ine visit of ABIDIAN to the Pushkin Street ceacérop site or

was fully briefed on the details oi the visit. NOSENKO insists that ve :

read the surveillance report at the time or shortly alter the event.

There is no reason.to question nis assertion that he read the report

since his accurate knowledge oz: the route of ABIDLAN axe fis actions
~~

in connection with the visit support this claim. However, his consistent

inability on his own to approximate the Gate of the visit or relaeit to bs
‘his change of assignments raises a question regarding when he actually

read the report.

' +. NOSENKO claims that the visit of. ABIDIAN to the Pushkin Street

“deaddrop area ledto the KGB setting up a stationary surveillance post

ee gga a7

Shee tienen a neat egg


--- Page 175 ---
14-0000 ~

Seventh Department as of early January 1962, NOSENXO went to
2 y

Geneva in mid-March 1962.

we
oe
G
ra

it is conceivabie that, Bins, Le wa

advised of developments or norcevelopsments ioliowing the visit o:

ABIDIAN to tie Pusakin Street building by Veniaemin KOZLOV, a Chici :

of Department in the Seventh Directorate who had been known tu

sav KOVSHUK or Gennz

. NOSENKO since 1953, or Viadi ZNOV, oy c,
Chief and Deputy Chief respectively of the First Section, First Depart-

ment, Even so, however, his Jailure to cail o

yt

June 1962 would seem to require explanation, especially in view of
the fact that he did warn us about the danger of operational letters mail- : .
ings by ABIDIAN -- a warning waich would appear clearly to have been

derived from KGB coverage oi the activities of ABIDIAN in the spring-

summer of 1961,

It is to be noted that during the June 1962 meetings NOSENKO , : :

was not specifically asked for ary additional informatioa regardin,

- any known or suspected intelligence activities of ABIDIAN, Beyond re a

base

<oreeueriiaumitrndigsrneniemsnte
RR
JERR SERS

SSDS



--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

xplanation, however,

derived from the alreacy noted ty of NCSENKO io pin Cowan a daze

ior the visit, is that he icarned of the stationary surveillance post il not

4

: of the visit itself after his. meetings with us in June 1962, Tit shocld be

awcdrop undoubtédiy Secame -

the subject of widespread interest within the KGB.

That NOSENKO is. at a minimum still confused about the visit
of ABIDIAN to the Push«in Street ceaddrop and its consequences is clear
irom the recoré, While it is entirely possible that NOSENKO has con-

sciously exaggerated his involvement with the visit and its aftermaia,
. 4
it is also possioie that the evident Gistortions of his accounts oz the
aiiair derive rom honest confusion.
Currest interviews and a check of the tapes of previous inter~
views leave no doubt that NOSENKO was aware of the visits of ABIDIAN
to the upper Gorkiy Street area circa March 1951, These visits by

D ' | ABIDIAN were for cover purposes and preceded his start of operatiozal

— go0i73

BR eae mene on pee

pe taleve mea oy eabe tee son toe

aN


--- Page 177 ---
14-0000

4) inai Visits of ADIDLAN to @ corns,

anown to and considered suspicio
. art shop, according to NOSENXO, wis se 5 A i ”

place for picking up or placing

2 oc time Jollewing the vis: 4s

_ . was placed on the

its of ABIDIAN az the time

ABIDIAN, Ojficiai recorcs coz
and to the buildings descriseé by NOSENAG, : , : “3

: . - Pages 216 - 220 of the previous summary contain no reference . ne!

erest in the

to the specific statements of NOSENKO relative to AGB in

visits of ABIDIAN to the upper, Gorkiy Stzeetiarea, it is also clear ceo :

froma review of certain transcripts o2 previous interrogations that |

no disferentiation was rnaGe concerning sis siatements relative to KGB |

coverage of the activities of ABIDIAN in the upper Gorkly Stirect arca

+ 7
circa March 1961 and his statements concerning Bis:«nowlecze o: the

‘ae '.. /Pushkin Street deaddrop site aiter the visit os ABIDIAN to that site

{30 December 1961).

It is impossible at this time to siate that a detailed cebziedsi:

gz
3
of NOSENKO concerning ABIDIAN prior to hostile interrogation would rs

. have permitted the clarification of ali issues including the above, but

Loy Cite BASLE 1am anrneeontn mare Pe ete

x


--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

y i902, whe fact th

, . " . + , . se ve
oi KGB dispatch. If disp alG have Bad the
Gate right. - : ~

: . 4
In vegara to (b), the respox it reliminary re-

. view of reports from GTU (Technical

<e" irom micro- .
iones in the United States Exnbassy, the previous conclusion was that his
> Y

ciaim that he personally reviewed tae KGS monitoring reports was no’

Pr

sustained,

it is not felt that the previous conc

ance for the explanation of NOSENKXO of what the responsibility actually ‘

entailed, Information izom microphones in the United States

Embassy,

according to NOSENKO, was handled very specially. Telephone inter-

cepts were given to a designated officer for distribution to the appropriate

case, officer, but microphone: reports, to prevent wide Cissemination even ‘ . Loe

. L Lal
within the F ; gooil 5 ‘

First Section, were brought daily to the Deputy Caief or in hi , ,

absence Sto the Chied and t then were: distribuied to. the. indivie Gual responsible



--- Page 179 ---
14-0000

number of qualizied monitor-transiators, As a result, according to

to NCSENKOG, no one below the

case Gificer, In this way, according

sunk of Deputy Cries was aware of the toial microphone "exe!" izom

e
i
G
Cc,
Hl
iw
"
i)
wu
e
p
er
o
o
19]
z
g
&
a
i

oa
.
ui
Lai
o
Oo
te
%
ics
f
uw

Ss
ise
oe
o
ae
oO
Hs
sh
o
i
3

this was consicered the most iraportant by the MGB and CTU, NOSENKO

Lis, or the Central Committee

mation to the Chief, SCD, the Cy.airman,
since this was the respoz ice Of the Chi

NOSENKO has aiso stated that

working microphones was "dying" an
3 3

reception difficulties was also having ¢: valty obtaining a sufficient:

—_——

NOSENKO, OTU was not providing complete verbatim transcripts from

“most microphones, but actually was reporting only those portions which

OTU considered pertinent, Despite the fact that full transcripts of ail
ve

conversations in areas covered by active micropzones would have been

of interest to responsibie officers of the First Section, OTU, according

to NOSENKO, did not provide full transcripts and when askee to provide

more gave the routine answer of, "we could do so if we had more

personnel,

e According to NOSENKO, the tapes were maintained at

— .

-OTU-and could: not be furnished.to the First Section, . An ofiicer_of £36
oo . 4

go0L

LTT ety gees a



--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

me

it is believed

Ve micropnones

realistic.. It is aiso

éucted within reasonabie ¢i

compromised to the KGB.

aay damage assessment; it.i

that NOSENKO fee ¢ ve been aware o7 @

one had a conversation in one of the rooms in which there was an aciive

microphone and NOSENXO has claimed he reviewed she "take" fzom

id

microphones in the United Siates Embassy.
It is apparent that there ‘are a number of impondcerasle factors
to be consideree such as whether the conversation could be picked up

by the microphoze, whether the monitor could recover suificient portions

of the conversation to understand the gist of wnat was bein,

even if he did, whether he would consider it of sufficient im

interest to incluce in his report in verbatim or in surnmaszy form. ue

In regard to (c), the claim of NOSENXO that he was responsible ; Lee

. for maintenance of the physical security file on the United States Embassy, °

end, . GOO ane

Den HEE WR RAS a nett ee TT oon . ern



--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

‘ the work against diplomatic personnel ix, che U:
He has stated he is sure he would have x:own of anything "important"
such as a recruitment or attempted recruitment, but he does not claim

‘, to have reviewed all the reports of the various officers of the First

itis not consice

current snterviews with NOSENXO have fusther indicated:
on this point should be accepted.

In regard to (G), the claim of NOSZNXO that he acted in piace

of KOVSHUK, the Chief of Firs: Section, wnen KOVSHUK was absent,

itis consicerea thai : providing it is not coz-

verted into a presumption that therefore NOSENKO knew everytaing
that KOVSHUX knew.

NOSENKO claims that he was noz yvessonsible for the direct
supervision ¢f approximately two-thires <i the officers in the First
Section, ‘These oificers normally reporved Girectly to KOVSHUX and
would only report to NOSENXO when KOVSHUK was absent, Asan

“example o: of ¢ this, NOSENXO has shown z leck of detaiied knowledge of

ed States Embassy.

g001178


--- Page 182 ---
14-0000

Section, His recug.

adequaic, |

i agercs
iagerncs

0a
Qe
B
ir}
%
e
an
ie
o
y
fd
B
e
te
5
ou
°

criticism, NOSENKO indicates that in
.in the First Section was the responsibility of incivicua:.case officers.

It is also apparent that the philosophy in the KGB was to maintain

a single handler-agent relationship 23 much as possible, and that respon-

sibility for an agent would not be transferred merely because the agent

had access to a target who was the responsibility of a case oificer other

than the handler of the agent, This apparent philosophy is of particular
7 “e
interest in connection with NOSENXO, who even though he was the case

officer reaponsible for ABIDIAN and together with KOSOLAPOV ané

GRYAZNOV worked actively against code clerks, Gid not have an agent

.network which he specifically handled, Mere use of an agent for report-

‘ing: on or a specific activity against a particular target was normally

. 6001179

X :
err a NO Se ten Fat Eh tt peter ee vores

ee EE

ot



--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

responsisilit

éuring 1960 - 1961.

s: tity for supervision of work against the Service wtwaches in cariy

1960, he was, according to NOSENKO, vesponsizie ior supervision of

the work of Vadim A. KOSOLAPOV, Cunnaciy =. GAYAZNOV, Via
EM.XIN and Yevgensy GROMAKOVSALY

GRYAZNOV ané XOSOLAPOV. workes only egainst code clerks

. ete +

‘and therefore were supervised sole.y by NOSENKO, whereas DEM
- and GROMAKOVSKiY, who handiec indigenous agents in American
House, came uncer the supervision oz > ENKO oniy in those cases

where these agents were directed against code clerks. +

It is quite clear that the knowledge ci NCSENK! LO coucerniz aig the
7 ‘° . .
‘ code clerks, code machine mechanics and pouca clerks who, according
t to NOSENKO, were incluced in his targets in 1960 - 1961, was much

greater than his knowledge of any other category of American employees

at the United States Embassy during this period except for ABIDIAN.

srw g001180



--- Page 184 ---
14-0000

AGB,

COnsic
KOSOLADPOV and GRYAZNOV.

The first case

177 of the previous 5

necessary on this case since there Gocs

reason to cuestion the general
efiort agains{ STORSBzAG\ ob . oT
It is recognized and mexiioned elsewhere that, NOSENKO in 1902 ,

exaggerated his personal involvement in the case, particular

himself as present with GRIBANOV when the recruitment

‘
tofSTORSBERG! NOSENKO Bas retracieé this particu

there is no reason to Gowst that he was engaged ior approximately a year

ich preceded the unsuccessful approach
tol STORSBERG}
: An issue was previously made over the timing of the approach
. _ Ob .
tofSTORSBERG|since BTORSBERG fated this as October 1961, NOSENXO
has indicated about June 1961, aud information from GOLITSYN, baseé

a on. remarks by KOVSHUXK to him, had been interpreted as indicating the

os  OOLBE

ce re erhitert teem Neate tere #

AS



--- Page 185 ---
14-0000

given an accepinble

roach at the Moscow a

, his description of collatera. events makes

to have taxen place consi

who o will be the- subject of further discussion below, has seen

erably eaxlier,

06
sepa 3 MORCNE| another code clerk at the United States om

on the basis of statements by TORSBERG| hae] oaBSSuas presect in : ‘

American House the night of the approach, Analysis of the staiements
o7' JRONSKE teary indicates that the evexts[STORSZERG descrives

: could not have taken place later than the period February-to early May

i . 1961. °

. The best estimate possible at this time is that tne approach to

. 06
(stoxss RG|oceurreé in March - April 1961, which is quite compatible
with the approximate dating of the approach by NOSENKO. In the face

of this. approximation oc the date of the approaca ws soaeat it is

gooLt

penitent Sat

* Pr ens = : mek

ak Heh TEES

ERHANS Miaanbouioeaees


--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

believed reasonadl.e to Ine Maat the

mnt rmor t
GOLIST an

& Succes sia oO:

end of 19690,

vee

_ approach, or was pre

Pages 178 - 1S1 of the previous summary contain information

record information and information fzom NOSENXO waick ia any way
refiect against NOSENXO. | xe VeS pss not recognize a photograph

of NOSENKO as

ne Soviet who mace a fast appwoach to him at the cir-

post, but this does not provide a valid reason to disbelieve the staternent

Oh
SERS}

There are certain stater.ents relative to saelKsyszas|ccse as

set iorth in the previous summary which recuire specizic comment.

(a) The-statement is mace that no AGS oilicer
Ob
__ Girectly connected with the case coulé regaré KEYSERS)
as the replacement for|STOaSBEAG} In fact, [REY =R5| 0G

_ actually was being trained by[SToassZaclas a substitute,
coe ‘.»:  « nota replacement, evea though his primary assignment

io Co ~ 6001183
rye 23 . .

epee Sedna yleaenat aed Bet inebanamnen one nhac tara ea

NS



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

had been away irom. coce work ior 4 consicerable period

 oftime. Inany event, te impression or NOSENKS wes

0
a eieronieens was having

,oted, was deing trained

: —_ that he could act as a substitute.

the circumstances, it is consicered ee Logical that the

se [k=

' eventual replacement of Srontang :

KGB woule assume at tne time

Bsus to be the

(b) The previous summary stated that, “srior to his
06 .

Separture £ from Moscow, |X [KS¥S=AS|scknowiedged to Ris

- supervisors I o,onel URSA his homosenual tendencies

| and he admitt ed involvement in three homosexual incicerts,

‘all at the American House" (page 179).

oo = covised

SEARS
SS,



--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

eid

[NOSENKGI asserted that

curec from microphones [KEY

receipt of the Gefection leter vofC 2onel 06.

oe
3
o
e
a
+
(

~S
°
ct
as

URBAN|n the oifice of Gere Bony it soe a noted

YSERS leit

the Embassy for the airport. NOSENXO has stated that in

that this occurred less than one nour defore|

the absence of information to the contrary izom microphone

and telephone taps, the KGS had concluced shar[KEYSERS)

had not reported receipt of the defection letter and there-

Ob

. fore had decided to approach[KEYSERS|at the airport. In

: view of the shoxt time between[ KEYSERS|zeport of receipt

206 6001485



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

bloscow, it would

is considere

aN a>

Lew Ober Bu who succveded[?

ber igc., GRYAZNOV was the

ia segure _ wloong

aaving arrived in Moscow in m4

responsible case officer for gles accoruing to NOSENKO,

The previous sumraary states {page 133) thal ZUsUS} Curing 4

2 =

routine debriefing, confirmed an Embassy report that in the summer of

1962 he had been intimate with an Austrian woman, "LILLIAN, " wro
visited the American House with someone irom the United Araz Resudiic.
"LILLIAN" was interviewed by the American House manager and she

claimed to be from Vienna but traveling with

her employer, a Czech,

we

to.

ing

Further izquiry revealed that no Austrian passport nad been iss
"LILLIAN, " and she was later asked ior her passport. "LILLIAN"

replied that she had Jorgotvten it, then leit, and ¢id not return,

The previcus summary stated that the above incident had been

aescribed by NOSENKO but in connection with attempts to entrap Joseph

[HoRSnEin 1960, -not ts in 1962. : GOCLLE6

Me Mate Relies a

Cet ett

ia Pale anatase

ferry



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

NOSINKO that GRYAZNOV went to Zoe. beviin in early 1940 to obiain

two German women who could L

OSENKO, GAYAZNOV acra

these two womes, agents of the Beriin KGB Residentura, to visit Moscow
‘uncer false Cocumentation, one as a West Gorman anc the ciher as aa

Austrian, NOSENXO curiner

Cen

fan

@ cover of a journalist, anc stated he believed

NEANNA Ej asesiss House. Ina recent interview,
anes aizm
t American House who claimed to be a journalist, The statements of

. pions ‘Elthereiore appear to -substa

Concerning the agent documented as an Austrian, NOSENKO re-

in early 1951 he had met a West German giri

tiate the report of NOSENKO,

ported that sie was queried about her passport at American House and
as a result the KGB returned her to East Germany without further
attempts to use hex at American House.) NOSENKO places this incident

in the same time period as the "HANNA" case; i,e., 1960-1961, He

has never suggested any connection win 203% , nor is there reason

to assume that he could be referring to the experience of ZUIUS| since

this took place in the summer of 1962,. aiter-NOSENKO haé left the

a , American Embassy Section. . , 9001187

me satin

sated nuntag tan BMTER EN neta a Be

aye eee Pn oeaes



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

it was the conclu previous summary that NOSENKO

“ob

Eid not KRow enough wbou}Zus wShoz She Gack round to nave exercised

any supervi-ion in the developmen: of ee v5} Granted that NOSENXG : :

_ Basically, NOSENKO had reporied that waen ise AGB learned that
Paul SENNER] .who was thought to be a code cler«, was coming ic
Moscow through Helsinki, a plan was made to send Vadim V. KCSOLAPOV '
¢
to-Helsinki to travel on the same train Gibeza Moscow. A iemaie
‘agent of GRYAZNOV was to be piaced on this train at Vyborg aiter the
- train enterea the USSR. The female agent was to became acquainted

0)

/ 8

eo witr| JENNER]as a part of a iuture operation agains JENS za}ia Moscow,
and KOSOLAPOV was also to become acquainted with JENNER} 06

; - = NOSENKO has stated that the operation was successiul, that both

‘"KOSOLAPOV and the female agent made the acquaintance ofFENNER} 66

re G001188

ectieas an ene tam ease abtehie mia teeye

Oneness SE toe ele a



--- Page 192 ---
14-0000

appearance he was much younger and that he could have passed as a

HOSCLAPOV on ‘

ob

oy TWO Yo!

anc a girl, probably universiiy stu

Moscow, About three months lever] SENNI

again by the same girl, this time at the Moscow airport w!

gone on courier business, Tuere was

[SENNzR]« phone numoer, insisting tha

advised|JENNER not to mention the conversation to anyone, NOSENAO

has stated that in an effort to follow up the initial train acquaincance,
the KGB hac arranged for the iemale agent to encounter JENNERJat

the Moscow railroad statioa cr airport wnea he wert alone to meet

couriers,
Insofar as is known, PENNER nas never been shown a photograph

of KOSOLAPOV. Although KOSOLAPOV waS approximately 34 years of

age in 1960, his photograph and remarks by NOSENXO indicate that ia

university student.

o001189


--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

nay WIGo COW 5S

i March 1960 train from Finlandto Moscow, and that one V:

KOLOSSOV fa mame NOSENXO ia.

_ KOSOLAPOY)-was on the 2 April 1960 train to Moscow.

The above obvicus ciscr ezancy has not been and ca.

- - . fed withsavaliable information, KOSOLAP. OV (ROLCSSSV) was

~on.the same train asl SENNER]or he was not. Train max

7 that KOSOLAPOV was not, Neverineiess, the

Struck . “Da Conver-

university students" who, accorcing of: Q
sation with him on the train woule appear clearly to be part of the

operational effort described by NOSENKO, particularly in view of the
later approach of this same girl wo[FE NNER] the airport. There is
no reason to question that this girl was the female agers: of GRYAZNOVY.

In view of the conflict between the train manifest and sia:ements by
NOSENKO, however, it is not clear who the "boy student" was; whether

this somehow was KOSOLAPOV. or whether it may have been some

Go01150

RI Nein eyontemmertnmted ose

30 i

erantzy
OL ore

Lahn Me



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

ests are incoAsirovert

between the train ma.

0)

KOSOLAPOV an¢ [TENNER were on the si

cié not travel with PENNER, Qk’, cocs

that NCSENXO is wrong; it is evicence tha: oon sox: z -

he, as the supervisur of KOSOLAPOV,

his own statements.

Pages 190 - 192 contain a summary of previous information in
regard to the Frobn GR LAnBlease. [GARLAND)was idertified by
NOSENKO as & code clerk whom the KGS was stucying, but on whom
no Gerogatory information was developed. NOSENKO provided practically

Ob

no details in regard to[GARLA \Dlother than to identify him as a code

©

clerk.

GOLITSYN has reported on aa incident which it is consicered

relates to the trip otfGan ek ‘D from Helsinki to Moscow on 16 November
1960. GOLITSYN reported that in NovemSer 1960 the Helsinki KGB
Residency received a cable from Moscow acvisizg that an American

code clerk would be arriving in Helsinki en route to Moscow and that

a — G00L194

AS REA


--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

a en ee

Era

w

GOLITSYN walked to ACSULAPOV

a place in the compartment of the A

to Moscow.

eisinki he inquired of another SCO ofticer "i.

Section" (First Section, SCD) about the case on waich

gto GOLITSYN, the ofcvicer reiused to Ciscuss

KOSOLAPOV. Accor

the case and he, GOLITSYN, concluéed from this reaction that it must

have resulted ina successiul recruitmers
It has been Getermined that GCLITSYN, in an interview with the
‘€BI on 20 March 1962, referred to the above "SCD officer from the

GOLITSYN also stated that the officer was in Helsinki uncer the alias
of SERGEZEV (SERGEYEV), but was unasie to‘furnish a rst name and
patronymic for SERGEYZEV. GOLITSYN referred to (imu) ZENXIN zs
' being from the American Department, SCD.

It is considered that there is no doubt that the (inu) ZENKIN

referred to by GOLITSYN is the individual of the same last name

GO0LLS2



--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

concern whoin NOSENAG has fe

eG ZANZIN (whose virst

ra rod red {
gecup of the Second Seczien q

NOSENKG has veled
wits activities of the Second Secvion, Sut that ne had no specific Know.eége

'. segarding the activities of ZENK=IN oa these trips, NOSENKO has iur-

aformation wh

cs he learned

ZENKIN ané when the full name of SERGEYEV (ZENK2N)

his photograpa is obtained, this iragmentary information irom NCS =NKO

may prove quite useiul, og . : . : :

As regards tae KOSOLAPOVIGARLAND fmatier and the opinion

=: - . x - fee i: x. . i
expresseé oy GOLITSYN based on the resusal of ZENKIN to Ciscuss the ‘
H

case GARLand) that i¢ must have resuited ina successiul recruitment,
there appears to be an inadequate basis for this presutmpiion. According
to NOSENKO, anc there is no reason to disbelieve NOSENXAO on this

point, ZENKIN was in tae Secozd Section, not the First Section, in

"1980 - 1961, He was not Chief of the Section, but only a Senior Case

33 9004193



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

Oticer, Since KOSOLAPOV was cnc

- the work agains [Gade xd|was

it Coes noi appear that ZENAIN would uveessarily have knowles any

to Moscow tr.

1 O8

XOSOLAPOV) as passengers. [Gant

any Soviet with

. ‘following the lead from COLITSYN, <

inKi-to-Moscow

ion of KOSOLAPOV on the Hels

. the physical descrip

~ trip, and denied ever being approached by Soviet Inteliizgence, Later
interviews by the FBl anc a polygraps interview cid not indicate tha: he

ever met KCSOLAPOV or that he sac ever knowingzy been coniaczted : : : . &

WE

by any foreign intelligence agent.

It is accepted tnat XOSCLAPOV went.from Moscow to Helsinxi

vo .

in November i960, that he talked with GOLITSYN there, and that he
was on the same train as[GARLAND som Helsinki to Moscow, it is
also accepted that NOSENXO is unaware that KOSOLAPOV made a trip

‘to Helsinki in November 1960.

Travel for an SCD officer outside the USSR or Bloc countries

requires ‘high-level approval, according to NOSENKO, It does not

_ 00Ls94 |

34 mo , :

0 SEREV

ee a an et Bierce Cte DB rn ae Pe PH"



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

. _. further supports the assumption thay NCOSENKO should have k.own cbour . ¢

CSSLADP OV mnie

ie adds only

offGa ang, he woulé 3 have been aware of it. . : . a +

.NOSENKO, as super rvisor of the group working against coce

pre eren

ny trip of KOSOLAPOV to Finland in

".. . 1960.0 1962,

SOSENKO himself, .was out of Moscow on a trip te © 4

from 15 2 November 1969 to cirea 17 December 1960. The possisiitiy

xists that ¢ tnis could have account ed ior his iack o: mnow.ecge of the mo :

trip of KOSOLAPOV to Helsink

‘ane return to Moscow on 16 Novemoer

1960, However, 3 NOSES KO has. not a attempt ed to use his Cuban trip a3

wee te

go: the November KOSOLAPCV

ie ag

As with the JENNER} KOSOLAPOV case, it is not pogeibie at

this time to resoive the discrepancies pertaining to the[GARLAND} . :

KOSOLAPOV trip. The fact that NOSENXO denies any knowledze. oe
% The asa y koulatrs

co



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

. a SAT ADDO

*\ this operational activity of KOSOLAPOV is another’:

the JENNER lease, snot Knowing something née, by his own

“as ac

Videwe .igtitements; should have known,

fos Veewed in-the context of the total kucwledze of NOSENKO of © : ..
vi so Operations against-code clerks, ‘however, neither the problems in the

Pekan, [FESNER case nor those in tad PRS pare, singly or combineé,

in any'way represent conclusive evidence tat NOSENKO was nov super-

Wi of KOSOLAPOV:-our that he wzs not reszonsible for the code clerk

: ‘operations descrided-by NOSENKO, This statement, ‘however, wzs not

‘.. (substantiated in the previous' summary.

-- = + Pages 193°- 199 of the previous summary contain an account of ~ !
c..5.. ° KGB activity against code cleri{Foseph M RONE from various sources, . :

“+ tnéluding NOSENKO,” -NOSENKO first mentioned the case ii 1962. :

x for work

* According to NOSENKO, the responsible case offic

do& . .

web ces against|MORONE|was: KOSOLAPOV. When :t was learried that{M@oRONS] OL
. ; : b

: ‘and an Embassy colleague, a Marine guard by the name’ of BEGGS} were

sence ---planning a vacation trip to Warsaw, ars ements were made with the

is SS 2 CLUB (dhe Polish Security.Service) for 4 iemale Polish’agent to come to

‘Moscow and travel. irom there to Warsaw on the same train as[MORCNE} :

~ana[BEGGS} . The-intent was.for the agent, either on the train or subd~

, 06. mys» ot
sequéntly in Warsaw;-to meet and compromise MORONS | eitually. She

aD ee ma
; g001196



--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

successiully accomplished this, but Cue to cériain problems in KXG3-UB

liaison relations, it was not poosivie for the KG3 to expioit this cirectiy.

The previous summary stated that with respeci to the

UB-agent, there was persuasive evidence
KOSOLAPOV played the roles in ee ONE kase deseriscd by
NOSENKO, That summary cited the travel oJ NOSENXO to Cuba and

oF KOSOLAPOV to Finland at approximately the same time as sie[ORONE |

trip to, Warsaw as evicence or the ispo ity os NOSENXO ance
_KOSOLAPOV being invoiveé personally in this part of the[MoRoN=) OG
case,

NOSENKO has stated that KOSOLAPOV met the Polish female

agent and: made the arrangements to place her on the train to Warsaw,

iol Hana) BERRS eopartea Moscow on 12 November 1960, it is not

known when KOSOLAPOV leit Moscow for Helsinki, but he was on tue
16 November 1960 train manifest 2s Geparting Helsinki for Moscow.
NOSENKO departed Moscow on 15 November 1960 fox Cuba. Tre
activities described by NOSENKO are therefore possibile within the
known time fxame,

It is clear that NOSENKO in 1962 exaggerated his personal role
in the| MORONE|case, particularly when he stated that he, NOSENKO,

-placed the female agent on the train, NOSENKO now clearly states that

G001197

’

hm



--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

KOSOLAPOYV wan

we only GB oNicer in contact with the Polish agent,

NOSENKAO previously stated that a NGS technician weo was on the train

| from Moscow to Warsaw reportea back to NOSENKO the Cay after the

train arrivec in Warsaw.
to the technician personaly, he may have reac the report of

aiter he returned from Cuba.

_The activities Cescrized by NCS

&
th
sat
o
3
®
:
HW
of
w
i"
6
a
Hy
i
t

“are accordingly possible within the Known tim
sidered that the retractions NG5 ENKO has made from his original
-.. . .Statements on this operation are oi sufvicient signiiicance to materially

- @iscredit him.

- ' Page 198-of the previous summary contains the statement that

mate with Svetlana

, [ woroxz} when interviewed, denied having been inti

IVANOVA, a KGB agent employed at the American House. NOSENKO

had stated that IVANOVA wis instructed to report everything she saw

or heard concerning] MORONE {page 194). The summary, however,

, . ' cited'a number of reporis that[MORONB\nae been intimate with IVANOVA

and with Ella UMANETS, also a KGB agent employed at the American
House, and commented that NOSENXO therefore was apparently unaware

: ‘of the sexual involvement o: dbxg with "IVANOVA's friends,"

6001138



--- Page 202 ---
2 IVANOVA wit

G
¥
n
<
o
io
<
§
&
ot
©

Oo
[GaRciA (Anthony A. GARCIA} »
with IVANOVA, He hes also siate

Ob

oi using IVANOVA ageinsi| MORONE fo obicin compromising paotograpas,

This pian was seriousiy affected wren it wos learned irom the
militiaman/XGB guard at the United States Dmibassy that IVANOVA,
her girl friend, |MORCN=Zland a Marine guard, possibly GARcial had
been "in the city," then returned to the 'Zlat" of one of the Marines
where the girls spent the night, This apparently placed the reliability
of IVANOVA in question in the eyes of the First Section.

According to the previous summary, NOSENKO stated that Pictro
ent of KOSOLAPOY,

CECCHI, ltalian cook at the American Embassy anda

e

reported on Americans at the Embassy, but NCSENKO recalied noth

°

specific that CECCHI had reported abou MORONZ} The surunary als
states that{MORONE Was said by other American Embassy employees
to be a close friend of CECCHI and that RioRO nae admitted black
market money exchanges with CECCHI.

During current interviews, NOSENKO has stateé that CECCH

bg
furnished "pieces" of information concerning MORONS} but he, NOSENKO,

Go0L199

=
SERS |
eeeen Bare

INESAA



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

ita CZCS

Wiha wie AGS sometimes suspectec,

whether he reported to the AGB everytn:

' The comment was mace in the previous summary that NOSE
was unaware sna BOOT rae some Sovier females in the spring of
1961 at the apartment of Sarwat el SHAZLY, an Sgyptian-national KCS
agent of the Sixth Department who was aiso reporting on Americans,
and was intimate with one in this apartment,

A review of oificial

having met some Soviet girls at the apartment of Sarwat, but there is
no indication that he admitted or that anyone cise has reported that ne
was intimate with any of them, The conciusion of the previous summary

in this regard was baged on a misixierpretation, Accordingly, since

there is no reason to believe that any compromise incident took place
in the Savwat apartment, the story of NOSENKO on this matter is con-

sidered completely acceptable,

oe

40 GoUL12E

uA


--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

concerning five code clerks, Macvice ZWANG, Joan TAYLOR, Frank 08, 06 06, 06 , Ob, 06

DAY, Robert DWELLY and Joseph

sper‘iically stated,

NOSENKO on these cases was con
not supervisor of ali KGB operations agai
ing observations may assist in placing

perspective: i

{a} (Maurice ZWANG - ZWS

NOSENKO as a code clerk who was actively "worked ox"!

during 1960 ~ 1961, The previous summary suggested .

that the nowledge of NOSENKO regarding XGB activity

agains ADA inadequate, First, reporting of

NOSENKO on(ZWANG\contained no reference to the . :
relationship of Z2WANG]with his maid, whom NOSENKO
in another case has identified as a AGB agent. Althouga :
[2WANG|denied sexual relations with his maid, he did

admit to some intimacies with her in her apartment.

4 .
During polygraph examination ZV ANG)reactes when he '

\
41  G0GL2CL
; etrorcy ~ ; °
: Clune i

SERN
SAAR



--- Page 205 ---
14-0000

oe

le relalioneuly cin be Gecrised io izaorance,

Dut also Can be PinuSivly exp?

Coy iauliy memory on

his part or failure on the part of the maid to report Ceiazls

of this relationship to the KAGE.
Second, NOSENNO had not reported nesew Ra)

was invoived in tae currency operations of Pietro CECCHI

(A tact that previous sur eG Ge BnOUlG have

Tye

known izom KGB agent CECCHI,) From the record, how-
ever, it appears that the cealings of ZWANG\were not
directiy with CZCCzill, but rather tharcugn other Embassy

employees, making it plausible that CECC

unaware of the invoivem ct of[zWANG)oz, as NOSENKO

himself stated he suspected, CE&CCHI did not report all

Getails of his currency operations to kis AGB handjer,

as{a State Department code clerkjand target of KOSCLAPOV.
The KGB was aware of the involvement: of FAY LOR|with 6
0

his Soviet maid, but no attempt was made to recruit(TAY oR} .

before his departure in early 1961 since to cdo so might

g0U1202

wibR



--- Page 206 ---
14-0000

o
”
ct
3
G
3)
Ng
iw
ee
+s
e
iad
*
ts
iy
¥
f,
t
G
+]
re
a

pproach tol James

‘STORSBERG) who hac Seen uacer deveiopment for almost

a year and was considered more valuable,

Tne impiication of the previcus summary that

the explanation given by NOSENXO was suvject to cuestion

failed to take into account the fact that although! STOXSBERG] 66

the speration againse(STORSZ=RG|was underway besore

(FAY LOR) became involved with his maid. Further, itis
apparent that the KGB did not abandon interest injTA rLOR\Os
since he was approached at a later date outside the USSR

on the basis of his previous afiair with his maid in Moscow,

{2 State Department code cérk|who was the target of efiner
KOSOLAPOV or GRYAZNOV. According to NOSENKO,

nothing "interesting" was learned about[DAY land no oper-
*
db
ational measures were taken against{DAY, The previous

summary noted that in July 1961,[DA¥|traveted to the

Caucasus with his iriend and|iormer overt CiA employee, 6 06

Agricultural Atiache G. Stanley BROWN] It was also

stated that the two were uncer surveillance by five persons

6001203

43

ee)
rey

pe)
ey
aa



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000

atal
at all

ia their Botel room wies

that on anoines occasion
female" was Deleved to have Geen wlamicd in theis train
compartment,

ccording 10 NCSENKO, surveillance ané any other

>

local coverage of any employee at the Uuiied States Saicassy
who travels in the USSR is the responsibility of the local
KGB organization, not the SCD. It would appear that the
locai organiza tion was trying to do a thorough job on Day | ob
and[BROWN] ‘but it apparently was nonproductive, It does
not seem justiziable to expect that NOSENXO should have
recalled a trip ‘ol procuced no resulis.

(a) | Rober Ooo Robert DWELLY|- N ENKO hes related in con-
siderable cetaii the eiforts of NOSENKO, GRYAZNOV anc

04,0
KOCSOLAPOV to involve|Robert DWELLY, code eier'x|is

Moscow irom April 1959 ~ July 1960, in & homosexial com-
promise operation. According to NOSENKO, a homosexual

agent of GRYAZNOV was of the opision BWALL was a

“homosexual,

Go012C4

|
|
|
|
|
|



--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

There is oO Teiecw io cocdt the statement of

NOSENKO concersing “GL ellosts to Cotermize ween

to the city” Qviescow)

ao that 4 hor.osexual compromise situation could be

arranged.

their eifor “6 va ing ig NOSEIN KS.

Buse LYfhas categoricz.
sexual; NOSENKO has not said ne was, but ory that the

0)
homosexual agent of GRYAZNOV assessed DWLLY| as

a a homosexuai. There does =c0t appear to be any reason
to consider the statements oc NCSZTNKO abou[ wait) OL
aa reflecting adversely on NCSENXO.
(ce) Tose
Foseri GAFFEY\as 2 ode ch =x The previous summary

am that NOSZNKO had siated the KGB had tried to luxe

CA FEY)- NOSENKO has identified

ealay} nto downtown Moscow, using Svetlana IVANOVA,
an agent of DEMIGN in the American rouse.
ad way of comment, the previous summary stated
saa GAPF=YJarvive in Moscow in Semen 2961 and
that| Fred KADERAIhad reporte @ tha GAF EF told him

he had been intimate with a Russian girl-at the Ameirec 5



--- Page 209 ---
14-0000

0

ness ang Gurin

wniiied being intim!

a.
a
;
t
oO
t
<
£
6
=
Hy
re
t
gf.

ay

os

o

with IVANOVA at the

ment and that she nad cieimed pregnancy.

uestion concerning NCSENXO, the icllowing Zacters
. 3 3

should be comsidered:
(1) NOSENKO has stated that curing th
Jatter part of December 1961 he was part tine
in the First Department and part time in the
Severth Department, and that.-he reported full
time to the Seventh Department after New

Years Day 1962.

(2) In addition to the ins ation previously

rm:
FFiY \curing inter-

b

mentioned as furnished by\ca
cee Ob; .
view, GaF Ey)also Stated that h

: intimate with IVANOVA in his room on 27 December

oe

was first:

1961 and was also intimate with hes later on three

06
occasions at her apartment, According to|GAFFEY

_IVANOVA told nim of her pregnancy about 1 May

ore)

Go0L266


--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

2962,

Depariment,
The matter of review by NCSENKO of OTU veports izom ricro-

pnone coveraze on the United Sizies Embassy has previously been

i mentioned in this summary. Pases 226 - 239 of the previous suramary

contained a ceiailed account of information irom NOSENKO on the mitier

of microphones, countermeasures taken by the Americans in 1964

; Gamage estimates prepared by the Americans. The , previous conclusion

was that his information cid not sustain hi 4m to have been Deputy

oO
te

Chief, First Section, or his claim that he personally reviewed the KGB

microphone monitoring reports. Comments have been mace in this

summary in regard to this previous conclusion,

. A few remarks, itis believed, will essist in a fuller understa>

of the microphone matter. In the material brought out by NOSENKO x..

2964, there was a single sieet sper containing on one side hand-

written notes which NOSENKO identified as a list of the active micro- -
phones (those which were being monitored) in the United States Embassy
This list is given on page 227 of the previous summary and need not be

: repeated here, The acquisition of this list by NOSENKO was character-

- ized in the previous suramary as singular and it was stated that NOSENXO

9001207

cA
ia
oD

w)
a
|

SSNS


--- Page 211 ---
14-0000

PETROV,

Ci ieZ of the Second Section, First Department, cesired some 'zoints'"!

for use against targets of his section, NOSENKXO uses the term “point”

not as meaning just a micropaone, but as referring to an OTU sub-unit

which includes microphones as weli as the necessary monitors aud

translators to cover the microphone and translate the "take." The

targets of PETROV were primarily Americans anc, therefore, there

was a transcription-translation probiem.

According to NOSENKO, most oz the available "points" were

assigned to the First Section to cover microphones in the. U:

Embassy. The Chief of the First Department, Viadimir A.
held a meeting attended by KLYPIN, Chief of the First Sectioa Viadislav

KOVSHUK, Vladimir I. PETROV, ané NOSENKO, the purpose o7 which —

godi208

seat

pore Er SE tren meme nnmercedinimen seer crete H

ar



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

wes to ct
Embassy "poinis'" contre

PETROV to use these "puinis" asainst large

PETROV

ich he wished to give technical cover-

AOVSEUK avzare:

age. During the meeting, y 100K & piece of paper

which PETROV hac enc wrote on ic a isi ci active m
United States Embassy and resicences, When the meeting ended,
NOSENKO had this peser anc Le took it back to his office,

Contained on the reverse aa whe paper were the following
See eit Bt

names in Russian: [Luain, Ob.004| peve cRT}

anc[Sipe BURTO}
: At
The name A, A, MIXHAYLOV was listed next to the name of LUBIN] 06

and the name of Y. E, CHERN=ZTSEV was iisted next to the name of
ob :
SMITH NOSEN! O has explained thad LUBIN, SMITH, Wil BURTIN] 06, 06, Db
0%

and|Sipe BURTiN|were amon

the targets of PETROV; axd MIKHAYLOV
and CHERNETSEV were ofiicers of the Second Section,

NOSENKO siated he imew nothing more about the sour non-Soviet

names except that they were targets of PETROV, NOS

he could not be positive of the cate of the meeting other than that it

occurred while KLY PIN was Chiez of the First Deparimezt, (Accoréiz.
to NOSENKO, KLYPIN was succeeded by Sergey M. FEDOSEYEV as

0001209

ioe)
my
loge)

|

nee

Se ere te ten mee

ae



--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

has stiii not Seen ic

In view of

oi the meeting called by MLYPIN as cizca Sune 2961.

w

| According to NOSENAO, the piece of paper cescribed abov

was placea by NCSENAO with oiner notes he

of a bound volume waich NOSENXO calls a “working copy." This,

according to NCSENXO, wis an accouniable, registered notebook

issued to all officers in which they were supzoseé to write 411 their

notes, Cesiroying any other notes.

According to NOSENKO, he, like many other ofiicers, did not

completely jollow regulations and the tendency was to ivecuently put

loose notes in the notebooks so that the notebook ozten aciec as a ile

rather than being used inthe way required by regulations. NOSENKO
kas stated that when he leit the First Section ne took various notes

with him to the Seventh Departmext; these included notes he kad drafted

concerning certain First Section activities jor use in briefing FEDCOSZYIV

G0U1210

_ seen naan eer aia,



--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

In consiceration o: th

be noted that ne aiso i
of FEDOSEY=EV axc ceria:
in the First Section; e.g.,
Directorate in regard to a "mass surve..louce” on the American
Embassy.

By including a section (pages 236 - 239} on the mowiledge of
3 (Pag ‘I r)

NOSENKO of the KGB cryptologic attack on Unitec Siates Embassy
reason to question his information on this subject.

NOSENKO has asserted that the KGB hac never succeeded in
reading enciphered communications of the Service Attaches; however,

he said that the Eignth Directoraie (the unit of the KGB responsible for

communications intercept and cryztologic andiysis) was reading some

United States Embassy traific. While it is open to question to what

; extent knowledge of successes oi the Eighth Directorate would be known

coOs2tt

pigeweyenes 8 +



--- Page 215 ---
14-0000

Or tlie

conte

responsizie case civices

oO his claim, NCSENKO should

e

was CIA, but he has never ig entizied VICAZLivas CA. Surely KOVS

new MORELL was CIA but why NOSENXO is not aware MORELL was

CIA is not known, It has already been estadlished, nowever, that

NOSENKXO, 28 Deputy Chief, was not aware of ali of the activities ci

KOVSHUK,

As regards some of the other listed indivi

are appropviate,

(a) NOSENKO has never indicated any knowlecge
Paul GARBLER was CIA, and yet GARBLER was surely
known to the FCD as a CLA employee before gosng to
Moscow. It is presumec that the FCD furnished the SCD

at least basic information that Paul GARBLER was

“American Intelligence." GARBLER, however, did not

go01212

SRST RRS

NESE



--- Page 216 ---
14-0000

arrive in Moscow until Neversber 1962, only a month

veiozre NOSENKO ieit the First Section for the Seventh

ry stated that according
nOt Suspect shai] Bagene roxs

cer, yet he was a CLA officer,
2

October 1960 to September 1961, The "intensive KGB

oxs

surveillance" is based on statements oi[MARONEY and
Imay possibly be more a reflection of nis personal concern
over surveillance rather taan what was actually happening.

Ac) [Breve wASirennG)vas correctly identiziec by
NOSENKO as CIA. William HORBALY was CIA anc
identiiiea by NOSENKO as suspectec of being a Cid officer
or cooptee, :

is) Lewis BOWDEN, who was not CIA, was, according
to NOSENKO, suspected oi being a CIA officer,

George Payne WINTERS, Jr., has stated that

KOVSHUK warned WINTERS that BOWDEN was the "FBI

officer" in the Embassy. The Cherepanov Papers indicate .

9001213

vaca et ne eet - 8 neta



--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

i

that the KGB had reasons to consider the activities of

BOWDEN with suepicton.

It ip not balieved that the Hated failures of NOSENKO to identify
CIA officers are of particular significance tn establishing tuat be was
ov wae not Deputy Chief of the First Section. There are too many un-
known factors wuich would need to be cousidered. Despite our ascump-
tions as to what the KGS knows, It (s possible that (a) thea KGB did not
know of the CIA alfillation of these people, (b) the taformatton known
te the KGB was not available at the First Section, Tirst Department,
lewel, of (c) information available to the Chief of the First Section or
to a specific tase officer waa of no offictal concern to NOSENKO and
was not made available to him. The last of these possibilities is
suggested in spite of claims by NOSINKO that he had to have known
whatover was known in the Section regarding CIA identifications; a
propeneity on the part of NOSENKO to exaggerate the area of hia own
hnowledgeability hso been ceen elecwhere in this case.

Pages 252 - 258 of the previous summary contsia a report of
the 1960 trip of NOSENKO to Cuba and his 1961 trip to Bulgaria. With
regard to the Cuba trip, there Is colisteral evidence of his traval as
deseribed by NOSENKO, and there fs no substantive reazon to doubt

tds account of his activities on this trip. The statement wae made la

s4 7 gou1214

|
|
|
|
of
{.


--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

NOSENAG to Cuba in 2960

ihe previous summary that

damaged his claim that he was supervising operations against Embissy

: ou came ot

code clerks at the time, To accept che validity of this judgment is to

say that 10 supervisor in the SCD would be peri

abroad unrelated to his supervisory function, a judgment for which

there i

no supporting evidence.
As regards the trip of NOSENKO to Bulgaria in 1961, dor which

there is no collateral information, the previous summary conciu

Bulgaria, iz it did take place, at a time when he claimed the operation

againe{ STORSSERG|was reaching a climax and his subordinates were
“apparentiy planning to exploit|KEYS=ag} newly-discovered vulnerability," -
it would indicate that the presence of NOSENXO in Moscow was Cis-

pensable. There was, however, no evidence that NOSENKXO did not

travel to Bulgaria and oniy highly speculative reasoning as to wry nis _

‘ account of the purpose of the trip was untrue.
As to thé STORSBERG fase, while it cannot at present be proved e .

that the recruitment pitch took place before NOSENKO leit for Bulgaria,

it can be stated, on the basis of reporting évon] MORON, that it had to

have taken place before the time NOSENKO returned from Bulgaria.

- Since no serious question has ever been raised concerning Epa asf nce
: CULL:

55

LL ARANMDE Le mene:

Tt een wee

seta eh



--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

of NOSENKO in Moscow a this pitch was mace, it woule appear

that NOSED

KO was comparatively cree io go to Bulgaria because this

Ob 7

phase of tad/STORSZ = GJoperation hac been compietec, .

As to nee SR aaBlease th

- it is clear.that the approach tofK Y

n

re is no apparent proolern since

96 cer XOSEX ‘
SERS kook place aiier NOSENKO

returned irom Bulgaria, and furthermore that the KGB probably cic

not become aware ina

b.. RS |wes a homosexual, and thereiore
potentially vulnerable, until just before the pitch was mace,

In short, there is no reason to oclieve that the accounts by
NOSENKO oi his trips to Cuba and to Bulgaria are not essentially true,

or that if they are true they necessarily refiect on his claim to having

been supervisor of code clerk operations. : .

g001216 oe

ee INL RETA EDI Nees nessa

Panen

ws

&
R

a


--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

SECRET

fy,

*
NOSENKO's CLAIMS, TIIAT ID

N 292

OF THE AMERICAN-BRITISH COMMONWEALTH SECTION AND
WAS THEREAFTER A. DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE SEVENTH ; : -

DEPARTMENT, ARE NOT CREDIBLE

. o : A . ‘

7;



--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

a

deta aay tne tit

SECRET

F, NOSENKO's claims, that in 1962 he was Chief of the
American-British Commonweaith Section and was thereafter a

Deputy Chief of the Seventh Department, are not credible. (Previous

conclusion)

The conclusion of this summary is that NOSENKO was Chief
of the American-British Commonwealth Section (First Section) from

January 1962 to July 1962 and that he was.a Deputy Chief of the Seventh

- Department thereafter. |

. NOSENKO has. stated that, although he was offered the position
of a Deputy Chief of the First Department, SCD, by Oleg M. CRIBANOV,
Chief, SCD, and although an order had been prepared and was in the
Personnel Directorate, he declined the proffered position,
According to NOSENKO, he knew that Sergey Mikhaylovich
FEDOSEYEV, the Chief of the First Department, did not want NOSENKO
as a Deputy Chief, but instead wanted to promote Vladislav KOVSHUK,

then Chief of the First Section, to the position. FEDOSEYEV was

CO0i218-



--- Page 222 ---
14-0000

i
i

willing to promote NOSENKO to the position of Chief, First Section,
However, GRIBANOV cid not wish to promote KOVSHUK and NOSENKO
considered that under the circumstances it would be better for him to
return to the Seventh Department rather than to become a Deputy to
FEDOSEYEV who wanted KOVSrUKas a Deputy.

Vladimir Dmitriyevich CHELNOKOV had offered NOSENKO the
position of Chief.of the First Section, Seventh Department, pending the
reassignment of BALDIN to Germany at which time NOSENKO would
become a Depity Chief, Seventh Department, replacing BALDIN. The
above explanation of NOSENKO.seems plausible and credible and indi-
cates that GRIBANOV, the Chief of the SCD, for reasons best known to —
GRIBANOV, was assisting NOSENKO in his career in the KGB.

This ‘section actually covers two periods in the claimed career
of NOSENKO; namely, January - July 1962 as Chief of the First Section,
and July 1962 - January 1964 as a Deputy Chief of the Seventh Depart-
ment, Since NOSENKO wae in Geneva, Switzerland, from March to
June 1962, he actually cannot be seriously faulted for not having de- :
tailed knowledge of the activities of the First Section during January -
July 1962, The previous summary (pages 268 ~ 291) contains remarks
in regard to the January - July 1962 period, including the period of

March ~ June 1962 when he was in Geneva, Four specific tourist cases

g001219

ieee te eee



--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

BRAUNS| Apparent conilicts between information from NOSENKO and
information cerived from subsequent interviews with these individuals
were cited as evidence impugning NOSENKO, It is not believed that the
previous comments concerning these cases constitute any substantial

evidence that NOSENKO Gid not hold the claimed position of Chief of the . ‘

et

First Section, Seventh Department, during January - ay 1962, That

st

Ue hse kee
are discussed in the previous summary: the cases off Wallace Everett OG 06 Ob Oe
pod

JOUNSON, William Carroll JONES, Natalie BIENSTOCK, and Horst
BRAUNS hhas been confirmed through interviews by the FBI of all four
individuals.

A few additional remarks in regard to the above four cases are
warranted, not because it is considered that there are any substantial
discrepancies between what NOSENKO has said and what each individual
stated when interviewed, but because they may provide additional clari-

06

In the| Wallace Everett J OHNSON]case, it was previously noted -

fication,

that{JOHNSON prrived in Moscow on 31 December 1961 and that the KGB

operation against him occurred on 5 January 1962, The summary sug-

gested that the short lapse of time indicated that the homosexual tend~"

encies off JOHNSON were known to the KGB prior to his arrival, contrary
: : : : :

to the statements of NOSENKO, NOSENKO during curgant dintegviews

3

SECRE



--- Page 224 ---
14-0000

EMEC tela

whee

has stated that the KGB learned of the homosexual tendencies oi[Z0xNSON|
“by chance" soon after his arrival, "SHMELEV" and "GRIGORIY," two
homosexual agents of NOSENZO, were at the time operating out of a room
Og
at the Metropol Hotei where]7OHNSON| stayed, They mer{JOHiNSOX there
and reported his apparent homosexual tendencies,
iS

In regard to tne[ William Carroll JONES}ease, NOSENKO during

current interviews has furnished additional information on the XGB operation
0
agains JONES including the woman iudmila BUGAYEVA who was recruited:
0%
as an agent to work against{JONES|and was used in another case. The other
~ Vv) ; ;
details furnished by NOSENKO concerning the] JONES|case are compatibie |
with his claim to having been Chief of the First Section, Severth Department,
Q

In regard to the| Nataiie BIENSTOCK|case, NOSENKO did not claim
to have been the responsible case officer but was abie to provide enough
specific information concerning the case to bring about a confession when

she was interviewed by the FBI. That he did not know all the cetails con-

cerning th FiensoBck pase couid be explained by his claim to have been

Chief of Section and not the case oiiicer directly involved with the case,

In regard to the Horst BRAUNS|case, in the previous summary
. o
the criticism was levied that NOSENKO did not know why[BRAUNS wpites

the USSR and was not able to identify any Soviet citizens whom |BRAUNS |

met in the USSR, It was also stated that NOSENKO had explained that

!

4 9001224

SECRET

eet Dene Ragegte vette vee ae



--- Page 225 ---
14-0000

the Seventh Department was not concerned wita joreigners visiting
relatives in the USSR nor with Soviet expatriates. NOSENKO, accord-
ing to the previous summary, was aware sna BaAEnSoas a former
Soviet citizen and the summary siated that his plan to visit relatives
was information available to the KGB tsrough his visa application,
In regard to the statement that the Seventh Department was not
concerned with foreigners visiting relatives in the USSR nor with Soviet
~ expatriates, this is not in agreement with current information from
NOSENKO, * Cases of "true" tourists, which were normally the respon-
i sibility of the Seventh Department, could become the responsibility, of
another department or KGB component where Soviet relatives were
involved. However, if the case was not taken over or assigned by higher
authority to another department or component, it was and xemained the
xesponsibility of the Seventh Department, The fact maf BRACRS\was a -
former Soviet citizen could very well have nade BAS ot interest to
the Second Section, First Department, or a direction in the Service of
. the ScD, However, in the absence of an actual reassignment by higher
authority, the case. would remain the responsibility of the Seventh Departe
ment sine{ BRAUNS)was visiting the Soviet Union on a tourist visa. The
previous summary also indicated tha BRAUNS listed on mis isa appli-

cation that he planned to visit relatives in Leningrad. [BRAUNS}nad a

‘ %* By 1962 there had been a large reorganization in the SCD and in the : . oo i

. . 5 . a
Seventh Department, The situation was not the same ah beee4 , . ste

Are sree tenet een se

Bete ean

5
_ SECRET.



--- Page 226 ---
14-0000

eee penne se

so oote
a GARI Line Aaah

06

relative or relatives in Leningrad, sonevfince when interviewed by
the FBI, mentioned a number of items oi which the KGB was aware concern-
ing his background and occupation from his visa application, there is no
specific reference in these interviews indicating his statement of purpose
in visiting the USSR.

Pages 282 - 286 of the previous summary revitws remarks by
NOSENKO on the Boris BELITSKIY case and states that his claimed role
in the case was not plausible, There are several s:ccific points made in
the summary which imply that NOSENKO was lying about his knowledge of
the case, Taere is adequate reason to believe that NOSENKO exaggerated
his own 1962 role.in that NOSENKO now states he was to give assistance
to Vladimir Lvovich ARTEMOV in the handling of BELITSKIY in Geneva
in 1962 and not to supervise ARTEMOV,

The more important aspect and the primary one is the difference in
what NOSENKO specifically reported about the BELITSKIY case and infor-

mation from the actual CIA record of the case, There are major difier-

1
ences and without going into all the details of the case which is very involved,

‘an effort has been made toward determining whether these apparent differ-

ences necessarily indicate that NOSENKO was or is lying or whether there
is a possibility he is relating the actual KGB version of the case.
* NOSENKO has stated that BELITSKIY was a KGB agent whom

American Intelligence recruited in London in 1960 or 1961 and that the

. ; 0001223

SECR aT



--- Page 227 ---
14-0000

KGB purpose in running the operation was to-lure American Intelligence
into meeting BELITSKIY insice the USSR. The previous summary ‘stated
that NOSENKO did not know when the BELITSKI operation started
(Brussels, Belgium, 1958), did not know the nature of the British
involvement, did n:t know the operational details and contact arrange~
ments BELITSKIY had with CIA, and did not know BELITSKIY's pattern
of activity in Moscow or Geneva.

NOSENKO during current interviews has indicatéd an awareness
that the KGB (Second Section, First Department) had been trying to use
BELITSKIY against the British. However, he still has dated the recruit-
ment of BELITSKIY as 1960-1961 in Loadon and still states that the
primary purpose of the KGB was to involve American Intelligence in
contacts with BELITSKIY within the USSR, The latter was considered
completely inconsistent with the fact that BELITSKIY was recruited in
Brussels, Belgium, in 1958; that three letters had been mailed to
BELITSKITY in the USSR in 1959 and early 1960; and that BELITSKIY
had an accommodation address for contact outside the USSR.
| : There are at this time sufficient unresolved questions in the

BELITSKIY case to preclude any conclusion that the apparent dis=

crepancies between the statements by NOSENKO on the BELITSKIY
~ vot224

| -
| case and the actual record are a reflection against NOSENKO. = :
1

ee ee

~ SECRET | |

Fem eo ee

ae



--- Page 228 ---
14-0000

the other hand, there is some reason to believe NOSENKO has
furnished the actual KGB version of the BELITSKIY case and that the
KGB, at least as of 1962, did not know the true story of tne relation-

ship of BELITSKIY with CIA, There is a distinct possibility the

KGB believed the BELITSKIY recruitment occurred in 1961 in London
and BELITSKIY did not then nor has he since admitted to the KGB
‘his association with CIA actually started in 1958 in Brussels, Belgium. |
As a possible reason why BELITSKIY would have told the KGB in
1961 a partial story of his contact with American Intelligence, some:
at present unknown event may have occurred in 1961 which caused
BELITSKIY to believe his security was endangered and as a result
he told the KGB of certain events in London in 1961, relating these
events as being the original approach to BELITSKIY by CIA.
The following are certain of the points which suggest the KGB
actually considered that BELITSKIY was recruited by CIA in London
Zé ‘
in 1961 and that BELITSKIY may have never told the KGB of the
developments in his case prioz to 196];
. (a) BELITSKIY was in London in April 1960 at which |
time he was in contact with a British citizen who was also” a
reporting to MI-5, This individual reported information

received from BELITSKIY which may have been a lead to

6001225

SECRET

ae a ine ee Tree ge ee



--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

George BLAXE, (It seems highly untikely the KGB would

ever have directed BELITSKIY to furnish information which

may have been a lead to George BLAKE, or at least could

have caused the employees of the unit in which BLAKE was

employed from June 1959 to August 1950 to come under .

suspicion as having passed information to Soviet Intelligence. )
(b) NOSENKO has stated that BELITSKIY, aiter he went

to Geneva in 1962, managed to reinitiate contact with CIA

rather quickly because he met a girl he had previously known

whom he was sure was an American Intelligence agent and

that she must have reported his presence in Geneva to American

Intelligence, (If the BELITSKIY case had been controlled by the

KGB from its inception in 1958, the KGB would have known of

the internal mailings to BELITSKIY and the fact that BELITSKIY

had a cover address outside the Soviet Union through which to 1

initiate contact. However, if BELITSXIY did not tell the KGB

anything about his contacts with CIA prior to 1961 and-then

gave only a partial story of what happened in London in 1961,

BELITSKIY would not have told the KGB of the internal mail~ ;

ings to BELITSKIY in the USSR or the fact that he long had

a cover address outside the USSR. BELITSKIY therefore

6001226
9

-

SECRET BS



--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

Ge COntece

. ww “2

could have told ihe KGS uc hid scen a porticular woman

whom he Lad previously ksown, Le was sure one Worked

écagvican Intelligence became uwave SELITSALY was in

TO TGCT

within the USSR an ix

* However,

his agreement was. only under

the most interesting of which 2cuel must
be unwitting oi the true nature of tae relationship of
BELITSAIY with CiA. in addition, any message to

+ emecer: stl ts, x x

LITSAIY or any indivicual who met BELIT

o

SHXOY must “

maxe no reference to any previous meeting of SELITONIY

with CiA,

.

saree oc trs ne nance cas sanenery ee wanmempeneccn se Renee ements ani nee NE a on enennre mines em ee tne sean termes

The above conditions are quite explainable if
BELITSXIY had not been under KGB control betveen 1953
and 196] and in 1961 gave the KGS only 2 partial story of ‘

the 1961 events in London, : . :

6001227

10

WOT Are. . .



--- Page 231 ---
14-0000

As previously indicated, the conclusion is there are a sufficient
number of unresoived Guestions in the BELITSKIY case so that discrep- .
ancies between information fom NOSENKO and the actual record in the
BELITSKIY case cannot at present be considered as a reilection against
NOSENKO, and there is a distinct possibility the KGB actually did not
know the true facts of the BELITSKIY case.

The previous summary noted on page 106 that Nataliya SHULGINA
was an Intourist interpreter recruited by NOSENKO in 1955, It also
noted that NOSENKO had stated Boris BELITSKIY "reported to the KGB

. that CIA had warned BELITSKIY against SHULGINA," The previous
summary stated BELITSKIY reported to CIA that SHULGINA was a KGB
agent and "CIA did not warn BELITSKIY,""

There appears to be no doubt at this time that the statement by
NOSENKO that BELITSKIY reported the "CIA had warned BELITSKIY
against SHULGINA," is a reasonably accurate description of what actualy
happened in May 1962 during Agency contacts with BELITSXIY in Geneva,
The record reflects that BELITSKIY stated SHULGINA had confidentially
told him of her status as a KGB agent, stating she had been doubled by 4
the KGB after having been forcibly recruited by American Intelligence
whik previously in Paris, France.

—_ 7 6001228
i M ,

SECRET



--- Page 232 ---
14-0000

Ci

Uae

it was determined there was no collateral information which
would indicate that the staternent by SIIULGINA had any factual basis
; and BELITSKIY was warned SHULGINA may have been acting on behaif
of-the KGB in stating to BELITSKIY she had been "forcibly recruited by
American Intelligence" at a previous date. It was also suggested to
BELITSXIY that he should go to the KGB as a loyal Soviet citizen and
report the apparent indiscretion of SHULGLA,
Pages 282 - 286 of the previous summary, in connection with
the BELITSKIY case, made reference to Vladimir Lvovich ARTEMOV.
It was stated that ARTEMOV had been involved with a series of America:.
tourist agents in the Soviet Union and although NOSENKO was allegedly
familiar with ARTEMOV, he was unaware of the involvement of ARTEMOV
with American tourist agents in 1958 ~ 1959, The summary noted this
was during a period when NOSENKO claimed to have been Deputy Chief
of the American-British Commonwealth Section of tne Seventh Depart-
ment, Although not specifically stated, the above suggested ARTEMOV
was actually in the Seventh Department in 1958 ~ 1959 and that NOSENKO
was not even aware ARTEMOV was in the Seventh Department. NOSENKO
has consistently stated that ARTEMOV was assigned to the First Section,
First Department, from the time he entered into the KGB in approxi=_
mately 1957, .

12 6001229

SECRET

ere ee ee

cag ng eet x

ATR. ee

1 RSI Eae: Smear im te eee



--- Page 233 ---
14-0000

A closer examination of the cases described in the previous
summary as "CiA American tourist agents," reveals there is no con-
flict in the invoivement of ARTEMOV in these cases and the statement
by NOSENKO that ARTEMOV was with the First Section, First Depart- :
ment, As an example, one of the cases is the case of} Edward MeGOWAN} O68
NOSENKO has furnished information concerning this case, stating it was
originally a Seventh Department case and that after the mailing of a letter .
by the individual in Minsk, the case was immediately taken over by the
First Department, There is adequate reason to believe ARTEMOV only
became involved after the case was transferred to the First Department,
Another of the cases involved the contact of ARTEMCOV withla CIA O%,24, 4 -|
officer who was under Department of State cover in Helsinki, Finland,
and visited the USSR on a tourist visa. Such an individuai would under
no circumstances be considered a true tourist or the responsibility of
the Seventh Department, particulariy since apparently the individual was —
even traveling under a diplomatic passport, it is,assumed the individual
\ .
was oi interest to the First Chief Directorate and if the Fiist Chief
Directorate required or desired support from the SCD, it would normally
request the First Department for such assistance and it is extremely un-

likely that the FCD would request the Seventh Department for assistance

ina case involving an American diplomat,

0001230

2 13

oO SECRET

. ‘ cee wee a Se ae



--- Page 234 ---
14-0000

Vin tee

Pages 332 - 333 of the previous summary contain the basis
for the previous conclusion that the claim of NOSENKO that he wasa ..
Deputy Chief of the Seventa Department from July 1962 to January
1963 was not credible. It is considered that a detailed rebuttal is
not necessary since this conclusion was apparently based on inadequate
information, During current interviews, NOSENKO has furnished
details concerning his duties and other aspects of his claimed position
which substantiate his claim to having been a Deputy Chief of the
Seventh Department from July 1962 to January 1964,

An example in support of the statement that the previous conclu-
sion was based on inadequate information is the matter of the written
notes which NOSENKO brought out and furnished to CIA in early 1964...
The description of these notes on page 319 of the previous summary is
inadequate, inaccurate, and misleading. Prior to current interviews,
an effort had not been made to obtain from NOSENKO a detailed explan=
ation of his notes or of how he obtained the information in the notes.

During current interviews, NOSENKO has given detailed informa-
tion concerning ail aspects of his notes. This information supports his
claimed position of Deputy Chief of the Seventh Department and includes

collateral support to his claim of being Deputy Chief of the First Section,

First.Department, in 1960-1961, , 6001231



--- Page 235 ---
14-0000

Wea

Primarily the notes of NOSENKO can be categorized as

follows:

- (a) Snort case summaries by the Chiefs of the

First Section, Second Section ena Sixth Section, Seventa

i Department, NOSENKO has stated that he was in 1962 -
1963 responsibie for supervision over these Sections and
that Filip Denisovich BOBKOV,. Deputy Chief, SCD, who
supervised the Seventh Department, requested a list of all
recruited agents of the Seventh Department, According to
NOSENKO, the order from BOSKOV was to only retain the
files (cases) of agents in tourist firms and that the files of
other recruited agents should be sent to the FCD or Archives,
NOSENKO has stated that he in turn levied on the Chiefs of
the three Sections the requirement of BOBXOV, but also ex~
panded the request to include ail 19600 - 1962 cases, not
excluding previous cases or cases which had already been
given to the FGD. The notes of NOSENKO included hand-
written reports from the Chiei or Acting Chief of each Section
on recruited agents, with information varying from agent to
agent and even including some human errors.

Many of the above cases had previously ‘been trans-

i

} .

j ferred to the FCD, but the remarks of NOSENKO about thei 04232
| . 45
j :

j . n

oe SECRET .

4, oo . “s
a re eo, ep tte Seige



--- Page 236 ---
14-0000

t

Hl

i

’

z
3
2:
7

*

inclusion ‘support his statement that he had expanded
the original request from BOBKOV so that he would have
some "pieces of information to give CIA,"

{b) Notes by NOSENKO on other cases which he learned
of. during the 1962 - 1963 period. Certain of the notes were
made from a review of a notebook kept by the Chief, Seventh
Department, to which NOSENKO had access on at least two

occasions. Most of his notes were not detailed but were

sufficient to refresh the memory of NOSENKO at a later

date and yet were somewhat innocuous to maintain before
his defection.

(c) Notes for lectures to officers of the Seventh Directorate
prepared while with the First Department, 1960'- 1961, and
the Seventh Department, 1962 - 1363,

{d) Drait report for the briefing of the new Chief, First
Department, in the latter part of 1961, .

(e) One of three copies of an unregistered report pre-
pared by the Chief, Seventh Department, and two Deputy Chiefs,
including NOSENKO. This was a briefing paper for use by the’
Chief (CHELNOKOV) in an appearance before the Collegium

of the KGB which was reviewing the activities of the Seventh
6. 001233

SECRET



--- Page 237 ---
14-0000

Department. According to NOSENKO, the prepared

report was never typed as a forrnal Gocurnent,

The view has been set forth that NOSENKO took undue risk in
carrying written notes with him out of the Soviet Union. An examination
of this material suggests -aat NOSENKO was using extrerne care in
collecting material and was not attempting to obtain documents, the
possession of which might be incriminating er which if he had brought
out would have been immediately missed. Instead, he collected a con-
siderable amount of valuable information which he could bring out with
little or no fear that a search of his effects in the KGB after his depart-
ure for Geneva would disclose that certain niaterial was missing. None
of the material was registered and all could have previously been des-
troyed by NOSENKO,

The previous summary stated that NOSENKO brought three. KGB
documents to Geneva. These were typed papers but none was registered : i
or actually accountable, The reference to three documents was to:

a) The draft report for the briefing of the Collegium
which has been mentioned previously.
i - (b) A.typed two-page report on several cases, Actually ;
a Chief of Section had typed his notes on cases instead of

submitting in handwriting as the others did.

_,

7 G001234

SECRET |

whee nr

FERS Drala a pt Ala co. bs etenerase te



--- Page 238 ---
14-0000

eee,

(c) A second copy of a summary on a XGB agent.
NOSENKO stated that there were two copies in the file
_kept by the Ca-:f which he reviewed and that he kept one.

Of interest is the ‘act that the copy was not a registered

PR ennarpmnemnenergrer —resernamnen sewn neyes

document end did not contain the usual information as to

number of copies typed.

. 6001235



--- Page 239 ---
14-0000

. 7 SECRET |
¢
G.
PERSONNEL BETWEEN 1953 AND EIS DEFECTION IN 1964
a
ros oe 001236
1,
;
' . :
i



--- Page 240 ---
14-0000

™ : viundl

G,_NOSENKO i215 no valid claim to certainty that the KGB
recruited no American Embassy personnel between 1953 and his

defection in 1964. (Previous conclusion) , ; . |
The conclusion in this summary is that NOSENKO is of the
opinion that there were no KGB recruitments of United States Embassy
personnel in Moscow between 1953 and December 1963 with the exception
; of "ANDREY" (Dayle Wallis SMITH) and ierbest i HOWARD) who actually
was »(esu) employee but did work part of the time in the Embassy.
The question here is whether or not the expressed opinion of
NOSENKO is sufficiently based on actual knowledge so that this opinion
‘ can be accepted as absolute evidence that there were no other KGB
recruitments of Embassy personnel during this period of time. -The
only logical conclusion is that the opinion of NOSENKO cannot be
accepted as absolute fact and, therefore, there is a possibility that’:
a recruitment could have occurred and NOSENKO not be aware in any
way of the recruitment, This should in no way be interpreted as a
suggestion that NOSENKO could be lying, but rather that an unbiased
observer without personal knowledge could and should be hesitant to
accept the expressed opinion of NOSENKO in this particular area.
4 >) “The actual basis for the stated opinion of } NOSENSER, tse be

examined and can be cited as follows. ; 7 ‘

OT mera habe AEA See



--- Page 241 ---
14-0000

Pe Geet mee ype eee

' (a) During Marca 1953-late May 1955 NOSENKO
was a caSe Oificer in the First Section, First Department,
SCD, NOSENKO does not claim that he would have known
the details concerning any recruitments (other than
"ANDREY") in this period, but states if there had been
be would have heard "something."

(b) During late May 1955 to December 1959 NOSENKO
was in tae Seventh Department, not the First Department,
but continued to have contact with certain officers in the
First Section, First Department, NOSENKO is of the
opinion that if there had been a recruitment in the United
States Embassy during this period he would have heard
"something" even though he would probably have learned .
few details.

(c) During the January 1960-December 1961 period
NOSENKO was Deputy Chie of the First Section, First
Department, and he has made the categorical statement
that there were no recruitments by the KGB of United
States Embassy personnel during this period of time.

He has also stated that if there had been any recruitments
during the 1953-1959 period he is sure he would, during
1960-1961, have heard or learned some details of B)04238

case or cases. There is merit to this contention by



--- Page 242 ---
14-0000

os

fos

. of United States Embassy personnel. NOSENKO pointed

NOSENKO since the Chief of Section was Vladislav
KOVSHUK who had been an officer of the First Depart-
meni since 1953, actually working in the First Section
except for the periods of time that he was in the United
States to reactivate "ANDREY" in 1957-1958 and a Ton
period of time that he was Deputy Chief of the First
Department, ; ;

{d) During 1962-1963 NOSENKO was again in the
Seventh Department. However, he continued to maintain
contact with certain officers of the First Section, First
Department; in particular, Gennadiy I. GRYAZNOV,
who succeeded NOSENKO as Deputy Chief of the First
Section, then became Chief of Section, and in the latter
part of 1963 became a Deputy Chief of the First Department,

According to NOSENKO his relationship with

GRYAZNOV was sufficiently close during 1962-1963 that
he is sure GRYAZNOV would have furnished NOSENKO

some information in regard to any successful recruitments

. 06
out that he learned of the existence of the [Hexbert HOWARD]

case from GRYAZNOV in 1962, although it was not until

1963 that NOSENKO heard the name, NOSENKO actually

0001239

~~ __ SECRET


--- Page 243 ---
14-0000

learned of the name when the First Section, First
Department, needed the services of the Seventh

_ Department (Third Section) in obtaining a room ina

certain hotel for the Soviet girl friend offfiowAnd}

“In genaral the above constitutes the basis for the stated opinion
of NOSENKO that "ANDREY" and|Herbert AOWARBYwere the only
successful KGB recruitmente during 1953 - December 1963. It should
be noted that there are no other identified KGB recruitments during
this period of time which would specifically refute the opinion of
NOSENKO. However, in view of the cited actual basis for the opinion
of NOSENKO, acceptance of the opinion of NOSENKO as being an
honest opinion should not be converted into a statement that it is
absolute proof that another recruitment could not have occurred.
NOSENKO may be completely correct in his opinion, but since
NOSENKO was only in the First Department 1953 - 1955 and 1960 - 1961
his opinion that he wovld have heard "something" about a recruitment

in 1955 - 1959 or 1962 + 1963 Sannot be accepted as infallible.

g004.240

4

SECKET



--- Page 244 ---
14-0000

. 1
.

. 1

. !
.

+

- * . ’ ‘ ‘
’ -
r. :

. : Exchtes tia stems : Z
. : Gurney 26 . . :
eepestoret

tenant tbe da cy.

Me oe ete

EV IRERR TERA
REAGAN

SSeS SA a

Z

a


--- Page 245 ---
14-0000

os, . ett
vw

mee :

PP

@ previous sumr containec an Annex and an Annex
The p ous summary contained an Annex "A" A

"B" covering pages 316 - 435, Limited comments concerning Annex

"A," Statements of Soviet Officials About NOSENKO, and Annex "B,"

Summaries of Cases Not Examined in Text, are attached. In addition, °

: there is an Annex "C" to this summary which is entitled, "The
f
Cherepanov Papers," . t
a.
Attachments: . ,
1 annex A
Annex 3B . .
Annex C '
. 7
4 - — , ’

oa | | 001242

. .
Sen er ee etn ge

ea.

Ses aathared


--- Page 246 ---
14-0000

“SECRET

ANNEX B - SUMMARIES OF CASES NOT

EXAMINED IN TEXT

6001243

Tete tied Ot eee



--- Page 247 ---
14-0000

‘ED IN LENT

Pages 399 - 435 of the previous scaumary contain sumcnavies

7 08

on the cases of mericans who, according to information Jsomn

NOSENKO, were oi KGB interest, were approached by the KG3, oz
were actually recruited by the AGB, Is was stated that these cases
did not clearly relate to the specitic KGS positions held at pariowaer

times by NOSENKO and thus could not de usefully employed

in
his claimed KGB service, The sourcing of these cases has beex explored

in detail curing tne curxsent interviews wita NOSENAO, and it is now

Bh

eon these cases az
a

as well as all other cases concerning waica NOSENXO has furaisned
information, must be fully considered, not necessarily £ for the importance
or unimportance oi the information, but to determine how NOSENXO
Claimed to have learned of che case and wnetuer his statements con-
cerning each idertified case are supporteé by collateral information,
“These factors are important in assessing the overall validity oZ iaior~

_ . Mation from NOSENKO as well as beizg supporting evi hd244: 5

“elaimed positions in the KGB.

_SRORET

ee ctl an glans ee

SOE TA iy
Co


--- Page 248 ---
14-0000

&

additi

nat Noe has

fetes

The indicated inability of NOSENKO to compleicly source af fond

cases, Of even move sign

logically sourced his
° y

the cases is not cons.ice

knowledge of all te cas

in the KGB, In adéition, cx:

source all of his information would be waveasonabdle since it makes

no allowance for normal lapses of memory o 6 to recali some- *

thing which was insigniiicant at the time it occurred,

Without citin,

NOSENKO learned of a number of the cases ave considered important

since there is a direct relationship to Kis claimed positions in the AGS
during 1960 ~ January 1964, specifically the position of Deputy Chiei,
First Section, First Department, 1960 - 1961; Chief, First Section,
Seventa Department, January - July 1962; anc as Deputy Chief, Seventn

Department, July 1962 - January 1964, Certain examples of the above

‘are as follows: : ’

N

6001245

ce
lo)
ES)
re

. oe
ete cate eat pant see



--- Page 249 ---
14-0000

SSRN

SS

aan SA

Section ai.c Sixth Section in 1963, These notes were gre-

pared at the request of NOSENKXO who as a Deputy Chici,

Seventh Department, was responsivle

aG the x FeEucst was aciu ally an €x-

these three sections; a

pansion of the original request srom BOBKOV, Deputy Chief
of the SCD, for information on recruitments of the Seventh

Department, NOSENKO brought with him in 1904 the noies

prepared by the Chiez or Acting CxieZ of the First Section,

Second Section and Sixt Section anc

of the cases which had occurred prior to 1962, particular

1960 - 1961, was limited to information contained in the

notes. From these noies, NOSE} KO had prepared his re-

port to BOBKOV eliminating those which were nét applicable

to the request, :
(b) NOSENKO learned of several 1962 - 1963 cases of

the First Section, First Department, fror: Gennadiy i.

GRYAZNOV who succeeded NOSENKO as Deputy Chiei,

6001246

seereinas Heike Slee

Se a

|
t
{
1
1
{



--- Page 250 ---
14-0000

~
~

First Section, First Depa. OFTAGLLON Wes

furnished to NOSENAO primarily dDecause of Lie iriencshis

with GRYAZNOV anc nci as

ne result of mutual operaiioss,

However, NOSINKO learned of certain vu. ce casus oF

was furnisned additional details as a resus ole vequess

from the Sevenis

Departmen:, for assisiarz

Cextain of the[49 pases Msted were cases of the Seventh Depari+ ‘
ment prior to 1960 or in 1962 - 1963 when NCSENKO was in the Sevente
Department, Certain of the cases were cases in Waich the First Section,

First Department, was involved prior to 1960 or 1969 - 195i. The

knowledge of NOSENKO concerning these Svo groups of cases does not
materially support his claimed positions in the First Department and
Seventh Department, but does support his claimed assignment to the

Seventh Department prior to i960 and in 1962 ~ 19603, anc ais claimed

assignment to the First Depaziment in 1960 - 1941.

Itis difficuit to spec:

08
these Es}cases

since they do not iall into one ox two speciiic categories. Instead, they

ically comment concera

constitute a rather motley group of cases remaining after completion of
the detailed sections of the previous summary, Included are First
Department and Seventh Department cases covering a period of approxi-
mately five and one-half years. It should be noted, boRBtpgyp kat the

4
orpnes

sot

216K

vet



--- Page 251 ---
14-0000

Qs

explanation of NOSENXO concerni

o:

rh

is both plausible and compat.

igst Department anc Sevenis Depar

by

5.
_ Senpcy

OR.

0001248



--- Page 252 ---
14-0000

SECRET a

ANNEX C - THE CHIRDPANOV PAPERS

i

6001249

Snes ies seceiisue. . paperatemmen ot



--- Page 253 ---
14-0000

C

C4a

ee ee

ea OTe

Pages 309 - 316 of tne previous si ary cont
oi the Cherepanov Papers, and how Alexsandr Nikolayevich CHEAEPANOV
passed a package of documents to an American tourist in Moscow in early

November 1963. The conclusion, however, was th the assertions of

NOSENKO with respect to the CHEREPANOV case were not material to

the claim of NOSENKO that ne was Deputy Cried, Seventh Department,
in late 1963,

The definite relationship of the Cherepanov Papers to the bona
fides of NOSENKO cannot be ignored anc must be given specific consic-

eration, li CHEREPANOV was under KGB controi wien he passed the

apers to the American tourist, or if the papers contain "deception
pap . pap 2

information," the bona fides of NOSENKO are sudject to very serious
question,
NOSENKO had personal knowledge of CHEREPANOV who was,

according to NOSENKO, an ocficer in the First Section, First Department,

0001250

ee

*



--- Page 254 ---
14-0000

oe

a was f

orced into retirement 2

p

Zi960 - mid=1961 when
KGB, During the above period of time, NCSENMO claims to Lave

-been Depu First Section,

Gad a Girect supervisory respons

iav KOVSEU

we
i]
ii
@
ry
oT
v
®
J
a
°
°
Fa
er,
tr
o
i?)
be
be
ic}
re
°
an
ta
&
ao
+
rr
ra)
a
<
rd
D
f
f
te

+ aq

also claims vo have participated ia the bunt tor CHERID
December 1963.

Considevation has previously been given to the tLeory chat the

Cherepanov Papers were passec to Amevicans Sy the KGB thsoush

o

CHERZEPANOV to support the bona fides of NOSEN. '

seems to have iittle credibility sin.

which would even support tae claim of NCSENKO that he was in the

First Section, First Department, 1950 - 1961, The papers also contain

no inJormation waich would indicate there was even a Deputy Cai

or
the First Section curing 1958,- 1950, :
Statements by NCSENKO are emphatic that CHEREPANOV was

not under KGB control, that he passed the papers wich it iacer Cevelopec

he had taken from the First Section prior to bis retirement because he
was Cisgruntled with his treatment by the KGB, and that the action by
CHEREPANOV caused consternation in the KGB.

There is no collateral evidence which contradicts any of

_ the. statements by NOSENKO about CHEREPANOY. Further, there is

G001254

I . . 2
oo SECRET

- oF . .

Seem ae ne caratigomnmtte A eg ae QO prey ern TR ete wt tet eae lhe cent

N

oy



--- Page 255 ---
14-0000

covered in cetail wits NOSENKO, ne Cherepanov Pavers, woick
were originally shown to NOSEAC iz 1964 ater Lis éefection, have

also been coverec in ceiail on

&@ Sepuraic item-by-item basis, Although

NOSENKO Goes not claim to have speciiicaily seen any paxticular item

prior to 1964, his statements in regard to the various candwritings,

types of notes, and drait memoranca leave no Couct that NOSENKO
was very familiar with personne)

ment, and w:

néucted in regard: co the
papers and a detailed eaten will be prepared aia later Gate, it
should be noted that a considerabie amount of peysonal judgmen: cas
been necessary in maxing an assessme nt of the Cherepanov Papezs
since there are no exemplars with which to compare any of the material.

However, based on information developed thus far, and there is no

reason to believe additional work will alter the conclusion, theve is

> not an adequate basis for an opinion that CHEREPANOV was under KGB
trol, that th P: tain "deceptive infpzracioa,”
control, t the Cherepanov apers contain "deceptive fects easy
3 .
: 7 be sesteese ay a

fe HSN $

. 3 Raabe srsnchargan a eaeAtey SEN:



--- Page 256 ---
14-0000

or taat the papers were oiner thin the colicction of material by a

the removal of which would ony Lave constituted & minimal

CHERZEPANOV.

The entire Cherepanov Pz;

if

theve is any information whics could be coz

anaCSe areas ure;

ation that there
were any recruitments by the KGB of American per-
sonnel in the United States Dmbassy curing 158 - 1960
nor is these any iniormation suggesting the KGB had an

. American source or American agent in the Embassy

during that period of time.

(bj) Petry S. POPOV, a GAU

7

an extremely valuable Cia source from 1953 on, was,
according to the papers, exposed to the KGB in January
1959 as a result of a letiez mailing by George Payne
WINTERS, Jr. WINTERS was a CLA employee under .
\[Depaztment of aS cove: bssigned to the Embassy in ‘
Moscow. The letter, which was to POPOV, was obtained ‘

Ne by the KGB aiter mailing vy WINTERS and was a direct

result of KGB surveillance of WINTERS. _ ‘ “

_—- . ~  G001253 Fr
: : 4
SEpner



--- Page 257 ---
14-0000

ve only a rather

Gia tae First Section cur

the total papers pret

Emvessy or had an Arnevican source in the Embassy Curing the 1955 - : “4

q

1966 period is only a snattiz fox Consideration, It is not conclusive

prooi tuat a recruiiment was not mace or that an Amevican source

did not exist. The papers Co not cuniein a pos

either matter.
In regard to (5), the quite speciic information in the papers

that Petr S. POPOV was uncovercé Ly the KGB 2s a result of AGB

oe

surveillaace on George Payne WINTERS, Jr., wao mailed a letter to
POPOV in January 1959, this information should be considered as :

possibiy information of a deceptive nature unless an adequate ex lanition

can be made for its presence in the papers. POPOV was recalled to

ro

Moscow irom East Germany ia November 1958 ostensibly fox TDY.
The circumstances under whick Le was recalied and collaterai infor~
mation have given adequate grounds for a beliez that by November
1958 POPOV was suspecied by tae KGB of cooperating with Westera

Intelligence or that the KGB may even have been sure POPOV had

been cooperating with United States Intelligence.

It may be presumed that any lead to the KGB in regard to

POPOV or the fact that United States Intelligence, more sper aia 3: a : Soe

1354

5
mein gets scene es SECRET... ne

ee nr rn



--- Page 258 ---
14-0000

CIA, had a source i:

the GRU would have come irom an agent or
source of the FCD, NG3B, noi tne SCD, It can aiso be presumed that
& source of agent of the PCD ina posi to furnisa a lead toa : .

enetvation of the GRU by Western incelligence would be cay.
Yy 3

uy

‘ rotected even witain the KGB. The possibility of course exists that
ad a

&
tu
ps
i
ft
.
(a
&
_
oO
vu,
¢
&
oe

a lead from George BLAKE, an PCD agent, result

o
be

of POPOV to the KGB, buti

any reasor, to believe the [CD could not or did not Save another agent

or agents who furniszed information ¢ to the KGB pertinent to develop-
. ment of the case against POPOV.
‘The primary question, however, as regards the Cherepanov

Papers is whether, even ii it is presumed the KGB obtained information :

from an FCD source or agent waich led to suspicion of POPOV or

identification of POPOV, ‘this would be incompatible with information
in the papers and could omy lead to tie couciusion that tae pazers contain

"deceptive information,"

The conclusion in regard to the above is that the fact the papers - °

attribute the exposure of POPOV to the KGB to surveillance on WINTE.
: when he. mailed the letter to POPOV in January 1959 is not incompatible
“with the distinct possibility taat the KGB had previously obtained infor- . ,
mation from an FCD agent or agents which actually led to suspicion in

ey . >

Ne regard to POPOV or actual identification of POPOV.

600125:

ae

Shoes
Nesta

ie BS
Rare tonitn

Sate
3 So

SURES SHE US NOG SEH


--- Page 259 ---
14-0000

amet eee cee ene

{ information was received from an important PCD agent

such as George BLAKE or inrougs another vaiuavle FCD agent waics

led to KGB suspicion of POPOV yriox to his return to Moscow in

November 1958, itis highly unlinel, suca inforraation would reccive

wide distribution within the KGu, eith CD or the SCD.

is also possible the limited grou within the ACB wio would be aware

_that the KGB had received inforsmction leading to

izvom a valuable agent would d¢ very interested in attzis

exposure of POPOV to the fortuitous mailing of the letter to POPOY
by WINTERS, The possivility scouid be consiceved that prior to the
retrieval by the KGB of the letter io POPOV there was only a dees
suspicion of POPOV but that the ictter compietely solidified the case.
against POPOV.

Consideration has been given to the posoibilicy what CHERDPANOV
was under KGS control when le passed the papers to the American

invoiving SL

Py

tourist and that it was done by the KGB with the hope o
in a KGB-control’ed operation withia the USSR. In that event, the
papers passed by CHEREPANOV would most likeiy be genuine since
this would have been the initial step in waat tae KGB hoped would become
a successful operation.

The above theory has beex rejected Since there are a number

of factors which militate against it, These factors include the fact that _

6001256

SECRET



--- Page 260 ---
14-0000

an - ,

rn: vest
im the
~\ < oa are CRE .
Was 10 indication CHER SPANCY woe
5

: ‘‘“
: }

newt .

:

:
t

— oer ee
©
[ony
- jes)

Lag ema PE eT

baa



--- Page 261 ---
14-0000

INDEX

ABIDIAN, Jobn - IV,E,5, 715,19, 20, 52

“ANDREY" (Dayle Wallis SMITH) - 1V,G,)-4

i

ARTAMONOV, Nikolay - III,A,2 . .
ARTEMOY, Vladimir Lvovich - 1V, F, 6, 12,13
BAKHVALOV, Mikhail - IV, E,3,4 ;
BALDIN, Boris Andreyevich - IV, F,2 |
[BarRET?, Robert]- U1, F, 14,15
“gb [BEGcs, Frank|- Iv, £, 36,37

_BEL‘TSKIY, Boris - IV, F, 6-12

BERIYA, Lavrentiy Ivanovich ~ 1V,B, 2,3, 5-7
O% (Buenstocx, Natalie]- IV, F,3,4 ;
OG Birse, Arthur}; IV, D,1,2

BLAKE, George - IV,D, 9; IV, F, 9: V,C, 6,7

BOBKOV, Filip Denisovich ~ 1V,F, 15,16; V,B,3

BOHLEN, Ambassador ~- Il, F,10

; BOWDEN, Lewis - IV, 5, 53,54 . oe - ne

ee [pRauns, Horst]- 1V,F, 3-6
OG [BRown, c. Stantey}- 1V, 5, 43 - 001258

~ SECREY

Fee Lape rer cate menceements ee Oe mem me tees termes vanes pemmenmarite omg eee a wee te ee ele i



--- Page 262 ---
14-0000

BUGAYEVA, Ludmila - IV, F,4
ab (Borat, Richard “IV,Dy1
0G [Bua sipe]{ IV, E, £9, 50 .
OG [purtm, wil IV, E, 49, 50 _ , . . ¢
CECCHI, Pietro - IV, E,39, 40, 42
CHELNOKOV, Viadimir Dmitriyevich - IV, >, 2,16

CHEREPANOV, Aleksandr N. - Dif, H,4; V,C,1-4, 6+8

CHERNETSEV, Y. E. ~ IV,E,49
CHURANOV, Vladimir A. - iL,B,4
66 [pay. Frank|- IV, F, 41, 42
> DEMKIN, Vladimir - IV, E, 20,45
" DERYABIN, Petr Sergeyevich - 1V,B,5,6 , : :
DOUGLAS, William 0. - IV,D,3 7 :
06 {prew, George\- IV,D,1
Ob Pwenty, Robert}- IV, E, 41, 44, 45 : :
FARMAKOVSKAYA, Olga A. - V,A,1 a
: FEDOROVICH, Tatyana - IV,E, 8,9 ;
‘  FEDOSEYEV, Sergey M. - IV,E, 49-51; IV, F,] Ss
Ob (Fisk, Norman\|- Iv, D, 5 ; _ Ce ;
‘06 [FRIPPEL, Arsene |- IV,D,2 oo 7 ae
4 ; 0604259 : a
“OG [GAFFEY, Joseph } IV, E, 41, 45, 46 . ee

2

SECRET

; wee en am Fe Copteenenen Wine Suen T eae me

oe



--- Page 263 ---
14-0000

ATOR

SLunes

~
GARBLER, Paul - IV, E,52
ot [Garcia, Anthony AY ~1V,E,39-
3 may LF, 17: 3V, E31, 33-36

ObfExssune, Michael]! Iv, D,5,6

GOLITSYN, Anatoliy Mikhayiovich - 1,B,3,4; IM,E,9-11; IU, F,5-13,15-19;
IV,8,5,6; IV,L,9,10; IV,E, 21,23, 31-34;
VAI

GRIBANOV, Oleg M. - DL, F,3,4; IV,6; IV, 6; 1V,E,4,5,21; IV,F,1,2
"GRIGORIY" - IN, F,13; 1V,3,3,6; IV,F.4
GROMAKOVSKIY, Yevgeniy - 01,B,4; IV,E,20

GRYAZNOV, Gennadiy I. - I,B,4; JI, F,8-13,15; IV, E,5,12,19-21, 26-28, t
. : 30,43-45; IV.G,3; V,B,3,4

- GUK, Yuriy I. -10,B,4

HAMILTON, Victor Norris - I,E,9.
{aka: HINDAL, Fouzi Mitri)

"HANNA" « IV,E, 27 .
OC [Harns, Giselia\- IV, D,1,7,8
HORBALY, William - IV, E,33
Ok [HOWARD, Herbert} 1, E,8; 10, F,20; 1V,G,1,3,4
IVANOVA, Svetlana - IV,E, 38, 39,45, 46
Gb (sennea, Paul IV, E, 28-31, 35-36
JOHNSON, Robert Lee - ILI, E,8; UWI,G,5
ne [ZoHNson, Wallace Everett) -1V,F, 3,4
6 [Fones. William Carroll|- Iv, F,3,4

5 | 6001269
eS 3

ete le cre ee

&/6A

#
E
‘i
i


--- Page 264 ---
14-0000

. okerateteare

/ Wine ome i

DVR 06

KADERA, Fred | IV, E, 45
KANTOR, Marvin - 1V,D,5,6

OL [KARLov, fnul- IV,D,5 : oo ‘

KASHPEROV, Mikhail - I,H,4
KEMMER, Myra -IV,E,9
‘Ob KEYSERS, James|- IV, E, 22-26, 55, 56
KLY PIN, Vladimir Azekseyevich - 1V,E,5,48-51
KOBULOV, Bogdan Zakharovich (General) - 1V,B,1-4,7

KOLOSSOV, Viktor - IV, E, 30, 34
(Alias used by KOSOLAPOV)

KOSOLAPOV, Vadim V. - I,B,4; Il,F,8,16,17; IV,E,5,19-21,28-32,
. . 34-39, 42-44

KOSYGINA, Madame - III,A,1]

KOVSHUK, Vladislav M. - IU,B,4; UI,F,5,11,12; IV,E,3,4,6, 12, 18,21,
23,49,52,53; IV,F,1,2; 1V,G,3; V,C,2

KOZLOV, Veniamin - IV,E, 12
KRUGLOV, Sergey Nixiforovich - IV,B,5
eee ee Fy
Obras, Aulen- Iv, D, 132
g|LANE, A

; LANGELLE, Russell - II, F,3; IV,E,8

"LILLIAN" - IV, E,26

- 06 (Eunr, Hovace\! 11, F,3
Ob (MAHONEY, Eugene|- IV, E, 53

cpl [Maua. Martin. IV,D,2

GOOL261

EE PRO IO ere nim ite Sate ee
ro

~”
ro
cD
mg
rm
me |

peuistobnem ne tee : cee tate te

are


--- Page 265 ---
14-0000

pe.
. O06
Pane. David|- IL, C, 4

bag me 1V,D,5

-IV,D,2

. MIXHAYLOV, A, A, - IV,E, 49
; MINTKENBAUGH, James Allen - Il, E, 8; 11,G,5
MORELL, William N. - IV, E,52
: fiorone? Joseph|- IV, E, 22, 27, 36, 37, 39, 40, 55
MULE, Walter (Capt.} - IV,C,4

JMC GOWAN, Eaward|- Iv, F,13

OG: PECHTER, Bet are} 1v,D,5,6

PENKOVSKIY, neg Vasilyevich - 1V,E,13

PETROV, Vladimir Ivanovich - IU, B, 4; IV, E, 48, 49

POPOV, Petr S. - IV,E,7, 10; V,C/4-7

0G [PREISFREUND, Soha

- 1, F, $12, 12
“Ok PRESSMAN, Patrick]-iv,D,5,7° -
"RAKETA" ~1V,C,5

(BASTVOROV, Yuriy > i

RHODES, Roy - i, Fiy4 , : _
64 (RuFE, Tonal IV,D,5,6

OL [ScHWARZENBACH, Collette) - 1, F,10

i
|
i

0001262

J)
m™m
lo)
=o]
ean
~

TAabe eae dws


--- Page 266 ---
14-0000
4 at Mes

fot oo Ringe pn rat BNL Emm! Ot NE ht ANNE TSE TOT
ceotemapeensicg ahi ote enhances LAA 8 OBOE eh tet PON tee BONN oi “

SERGEYEV (SERGEEV), FNU - IV,£, 32,33 :

(Very possibly Igor Alekseyevich ZENKIN, but is now considered also _
identical to Igor Alekseyevich SERGEYEV, Igor Alekseyevich SUKHOV
and very possibly Igor A. SMIRNOV.)

: i
4
4

Oé [SHAPIRO, Isaac Henry |- Li, F,6

OG [SHATTAUER,. sofia]- 1V,D, 5,7
SIIAZLY, Sarwat el - IV, 5, 40
SHELEPIN, Aleksandr Nikolayevich - - Ul, F,13
"SHMELEV" - iI, £,13; IV,D,3, 6; IV,F, 4

Ob [SHuBIN, Jobn|- IV, D, lL

SHULGINA, Nataliya - IV,F,l, 12
SMITH, Dayle Wallis - Iu, F, 4,26; IV,G,!
SMITH, Edward Elis: -I,F,4 :
OL FE Gonos John Discos) - IL, 5, 9; IV, E, 49, 50
STALIN - IV,B,5
OG [StEvENS, Edmund|} uy, F, 4,6
O6[SrorsBeRa, James - i, F, 3,5, 1-13; IV, E, 21-24, 26, 43, 55, 56

06 (anes aad IV,D, 5,6

OL Gareon John}. IV, E, 42, 43

UMANETS, Ella -"IV,E, 38 , 6001262
oy oy Ted

SECREF

wee aag etasagase remem

IRR



--- Page 267 ---
1400000)
_ |
- y

+ Bo ceenmener een ee ne et AN | ceri ES, es tanee rae, syste ge ae A
STEIN goo = ma eta oD emer Me Oat a, em enna ann mite ue appre mmint nt me Ret EM |S itn zeman cae mm Tim ine om wi atte cane ef apt at

peyaereee

OG [/uRBAN, (Colonel)} Iv, E, 24,25
VASSALL, William - Il, E, 9; Ul, G, 5; IV,D,9
06 [(wasHExxe, Steve} IV, E, 53

OG it WILBY, William Staley] iV,D,2

WINTERS, George Payne, Jr. - IV,£,53; V,C,4-7

ZENKIN, FNU - IV,E,32-34

{Very possibly Igor Alexseyevicah ZENKIN, but is now considered also
identical to Igor Alekseyevich SERGEYEV, Igor Alexseyevich SUKHOV
Nee : and very possibly Igor A. SMIRNOV.)

of EC ZUIUS, Matthew) IV, E, 26-28
7} ZWAKG, Maurice\} IV, E, 40-42

7 Guoieré

| SECRET

