
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10215-10215| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 we Of

qj ' :
gis hf : ee : ot
ff . ! : :
a a ty ; :
: - ‘aa
re. Argentina C, Crozier A-11 937 507

Admitted to the US. as an immigrant: March 12, 1960

Typer O-1 Ports SNA (San Ontanio, Tex.)
Date of Birth: March 15, 1915

Received FOREIGN .ADDRESS AND QCCUPATION INDEX CARD..{Budget Bureau, Yo, 43-2390)

and Dept of Justice ID card Form No. 1-151 - thru my home address at Longmont
Colorado about MaxeH 12 April 1960.

Index Card filled and mailed on 19 April 1960,

sone eee ee ane cnet ie en age pots wt oe ee nnn nN TTA EAT



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

7 etme retctr ter mT NER NED Le Lene Seamer EO WES LESNN EE AOD

Te ig Densmore soma Nan ee einige ne 8B oneteunimemee cone ee

Bide. January— de 19. r

Ege | Oo oe =e — BG
i 3: la suma de ‘Seven_hundred fifty andno/100 colones =} i i
: El a o :
; Ri por Services_rendered, month. of.danuary n i

t. é

i i

i :

; :

j i

; f

or i aa

tess eaten


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

ABR...

RECIBI de

1.eht..hundred colones 00/100

fa suma de ....

TE tee erm

mea vance——

2
Oo
vi
.0:
a
J
Bi
CH
AH
oH
9:
o:
er
o
a

ee

ey ny

os /6 OFF}

fo Sa PS SES ge nn nee

+e rcenay:

Se

TPE GE AL

net

oT tig Z



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

Me a

BIOGRAPHICAL: Consuelo Felicia CORDERO Calderon
mentee VU VERO Calderon

From To Place : Employment Enployer Address ’
. Kanicurist

Le mene eerie te it HLA IBY ATONE

1 Jan 57 20 May 57 San Jose, C.R. Salon BORDALLO Juan BORDALLO = 62 entre Av 3 = 5
20 May 1 July 57 Havana, Cuba Unemployed.

2 July 13 April 58 San Jose, C.R. Salon BORDALLO Juan BORDALLO 62 entre Av 3-5
14 Apr 58 July 58 160 Main St. Unemvioyed.

Quincy 69, Mass. : : .
July 58 27 Dec 58 Mexico City Salon Moderno Esperanza HERRERA Br Abyare, 174 5
27 Deo 58 Mar 59 180 Main St. Unemployed, :
: ' . Quincy 69, Mass,

Har 59 17 Mar 60 550 Riverside Dr.Student at Wilfred Acadeny - 1657 Broadway 5let
. . New York 27, N.Y. .

- also employed at Glamour Cut, 353 E. 204,St., 9 ©
Bronx, N.Y,

also employed at Ciro's Coffiurg , Lexineton av
‘ 9let and J2nda,

also employed at Jacques Beauty Salon, Ino,
160 West 55th Street, W.7.

21 Mar 60 to date 226 Burgess Ave

Ten: orarily unempl oged,
Alexandria, Va. .



--- Page 5 ---
SS aa ane ee
; i
2 | |
- | {
So |
3. | yf |
4 1 t
’ i j
i i 3 i
: : Lo
: g i 3 of.
: ; j 3 i
| oo oy
7 a
Qi rl. H
j a | a gd | H
: 8 > Oo: a
. / ff toe aes
Do Sg & j
. Hi rn a q) !
, : Zo :
! gi fi 3) i
Z| hy i
. ai 8 si |
a 3 i
: | 3| | i :
A a, al i
u | | At : i
gO 8S 5 |
qo . 2 8 :
a eS gs = F i
: a, x Ss 1 :
°: G& 4 i !
% 8 os
e 8 &
2 Seanad! ff
- . j OUSNIG HOd OB1D3y J iy
————— To gaa fo ‘oa
RE aTEEs gEnaSeEe EEC CE ESET COCCEOCLEOOOOOR OULU Cove SPERTORT COSTE
!

1400000
3


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

sure

TASER IEAB IAA gr .naih et sence Ran a Aina intL a eae, yeeaeeig oot pee

ROSS L. CROZIER

Representative

Lire Bus.

Saat
Tous

1511 Bayax
Daas,

322 Prmort Union

all-Jle8 88)



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

Stan:

SEG.ET

Security laformation

HEMMRAEDUM 703: PLAES
PRON: . WED
SUBJECT: Project HUMANOID

} Project HUVANOID {6 the most important single project of the San Jose

‘ Station, and the baais for ail existing ami coatenplated 0S0 activities

: in the area. It is re juested that the restrictions imposed uson project

mo HUVASOID, as contained In TRS-"-635, copy attached, be lifted at this time,
ana the Chief of Station be authorized to direct the activities of HUMANOID
into the following channels.

: (a) Direct and close supervision of HUMAHOID-3, the Station's.
} penetration of the Vanzuardia Popular, Costa Rican Communist Party,
. in order to utilize fully the agente potentialities. HUMANOID}
: ig intelligent, has a wide knowledze of Commist activities, plaas
° i api personalities and is desirous of cooperatin: to the extent ov his
fo ability. After a thorough de-briefing of WU:AHOIL-3 by HUMANOID,
in order to ac uaint hin, HUMANOID~3 with the Station's apecific |
‘mterests and requirements, plus the subse yent close gupervision waich
o . Mill be exercised by HUMAHOID, and the continuing close cupervision of Mee,
: BUMAHOID-3 by EUMAHOID, it is felt that the etation will then bo in poo
y a & position to provide intensive and ada:uate coverase of tha objectives { f
i @58igmed to it in the San Jose SOL. - . . . foo

Ro (b). Direct and close supervision of HUMAHOID-k, the Steticats
m . _ ‘penetration of the Yonen's Pronts affiliated vith the Ven:cardia

: Popular. It is felt that the former cut-out HUCKLSBORS, who handled
BUYANOID-4 until 1 June 1949, was sonevhat inept in his operational
dealings, which possibly may account for what seers to be @ lack of
Productivity in the HUHANOID-4 Project. HUNAHCID-4 hes an intinate
relationship with active CP members’ in Costa Rica, both on a low ani
digh leval, and possesses a definite potential for both ‘nijepenicnt
reporting, and for spottins a likely individual to be used.as a
Parallel to the HUPANOID-3 project. HUMANOID, who vill nov handle
‘BUXANOID-4, is capable of directing this agents efforts inte the
Proper channels, and ‘capitalizing fully on’ the talents possessed by
the individual. It te felt that this is enother instance vhereby
EUFAHOID, by vorking closely end directly with the inifyidvai can sake
& substantial contribution to the efforts of the San Jose Station.

: (c) Direct and close supervision af HUMANOID-1 and BUMANOID~2,
the mail intercept operations presently coverin: the General Post
Office in San Jose. Thy information that HUFAFOID-1 has access to
ie important end is of documentary reliability. His position is
izportant to the. operational structupe of the station, Bmarcro_s ts

. Dole (6 FFA

rgessenw


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000 .

:

ceamarpey

@ very satisfactory type of azent. He displays a certain acount

of initiative in volunterily performin: tasks not specifically
Tewuested by the Chief of Station through the cut-out EUKMMIOID.
BUMAHOID-2 hes deronstrated the qualities of villincmess, discretion, .
and cooperatian.

(4) As to the principal avent of Project HUMANOID, the
following observations ere subnitted, vhich will ‘indicate
unmistaxecably the value of this project, end its contribution
to the successful activities of tho San Jose Station.

» Evaluation of services - As the principal azent
and station cut-out, HUMAHOID ts cherged with the direction
end cuidance of HUMAROID-l1; HUMAKOID-2; HUMAROID-33
BUMAHOID-h, Hic handling of these agents is carried out in
@ professional an¢ efficient canner, and his personal comssnts

end corrections on their reports, based on hie long acquaintance ©

with local percumal!tica and conditions, are of considerable
value. Hia attitude remains enthusiastic and willing.

Evaluation of information - The information produced
by the apents being handled by HUMANOID is of great value
to the station. In addition to his own production, this
agents operations are vell suited to checking on information
received from other sources,

y COMMENTS - Despite the fect that HUVANOID has becn working umer
certain operational restrictions far a mmber of months, his value to the
tation cont:mvues to be of major importance. In addition to the tangible
and measureeble information produced by and through hin, EUMABOID has
Proved to be the single nost valuable source of background and orientation
data for the Chief of Station. His knowledge of the history of Cesta
Rican commmist activities and personalities, and hie grasp of the various
revolutionary movements and-fizures has been freely shared vith the

Chief of Station. These “briefing meetings” represent an intangidle |
contribution to the over-all porformance of the Station. HUMANOID ts.
eager to expand his operations and upon the removal of present operational
restrictions it is believed that he can be given further responsibilities,
particularly in the recruiting of adiitional sub-azents. The station is
presently interested ‘n accomplishing a parallel penetration of the .
Coceamist Party of Costa Rica, in expanding routine investigative coverage
end in developing additional sources on political movements. It ‘s

‘believed thst HUMANOID can insure the success of these new ventures.

“SEGRET



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

a

; le RaMOD
Sn pos tet Ret Identifying datas a
: ‘3 Nationality: VeSe citisen, bor 22 June 1922
°

i : Eduortions itigh sohool and attending exlisze in Costa Tere
i Oocupaiions Sergeant in VeSe Air Forco during Vorld ier IT,
: : : and an arent of ths Panaan Station until early 1049
d) Lektel statuss iuried od a
0) Time devoted to our rorks Appracimately 40% : a i
Now oontsoted: By Chief of Station ma L

Be Treanodd ig a outout far projects liugzer, Husantdind’ 2 sot 3, ond
: ——. Musentst-2, S00 otteriamtas

: ee a

Be Frets wetions

-@ Deroription of info rrediseds Carumiet psmetention of Jaber
Groups ant stulont proupse ,

©) Statisties on reper te vraceived and dissominateds
duly thru Lesanbor 3 received 3

4
a
ah
4
G
I

(oc) Eeadquarters evaluation of info received: Ba

. Se Cost of Projoctt £89005 rar ronthe 2D shows follaving paynanta
i ‘ uy {Bhet2 Cotober 550032
Bs .
j

August . Bhel2 Rovenbes> 52063
Soptaenbar = Bheh2 Decenber 5163

fo Adndninteation by hoxiquaterss

5 (a) Operational clearana grantode
(>) AAlotzont aheot up to date.

$e Osnere. Evaluations

_ - maimed 12 considered on exscLlant agent in sll reapootes fio vatue $0
“Ynare than commensurate with Mts oalarye .

Qor-/6 FxXF?

senesced ety 1S TA



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

—~ SECRET an
_ PERSONAL RECORD QUEST IONHATRE

PART Te - UPERATIONAL importation

5 INSTRUCT SO8S TO CASE OFFICER: | . oe es cote

; ‘ (1s Uf feasible, subject should FILE In Pare tof PRO In Als o4n hand,

f .

i 2. Part tl of PRO Is classified, aust be fitted In by the Case Offleer and Is not to be
i ‘“guoen to subject. : .

: . ‘

Je Meadquarters wlll not bo adle to provide.an Operations’ Cleacance uniess it recelves
anseers to sil questions on page] of Part § (items 1 to12), and to all questions of

Part It Cttems: 36 to sar.

tn emergency these answers, keyed to Iteos] tol? by number, and wlth sucmary of Part
‘

ay do cabled to Headquarters, follosed proaptiy by pouch with couplete data. .—

ully completed PRO aust te sent to Neadquarters a6 soon as possible, tao coples of
tI Cincluding copy In subject's handeriting, If possible! and ane copy of Part tt.

Data acquired later must be sent to Headquarters In PRO format ona continuing barls.

AL pages of both parts will bear the FRO number, composed of (a Station symbol
tb? PRO (cd number assignad consecutively by the fletd station; e.g. PGASPRO/IO.
eiokil tera aig. va th. Foto nr

cryptonyn Arthur G. VAIVADA

How, when and where was subject first contacted or developed? :

Subject was first recruited in Panama as HYDROPATHIC in November 1948"
and transferred to Costa Rica in approved HUMANOID project. Subse-
quently was transferred to BIRADIAL project, PESUCCESS and in 1954 to
ANPHODARCH project (Cuba) with which he is currently identified.

Could subject be turned over quickly end in a secure manner to

_ someone else for handlingr Yes To whom? Record over the
past nine years shows that subject has easily been turned over to
different projects and case officers.

Best estimte of subject's motivation

’ Subject is motivated by his interest in intelligence work, desire to-
~ advance in the organization as a B career, its remuneration and as Stoel
_U. S. citizen.

+ bsrrenen woltamigial to antsanfeias



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

eve een vet ean

er? Pg

ha.”

ane “-h3 .

3 What pe of ¢ tnformstton has subject furntenea? What ‘type ia he
best qualified by education ‘and experience to furnteht Gtve.

With what agencies: and files has subject's name been checked? When?
Result? What else has been done to verify biographical information
furnished by subject?

Checked upon recruitment in Panama in 1949 and subsequently upon
transfer to other Projects. :

What control ‘exiote over subject at present? How can it be increased? _
‘Subject is controlled through “aependence on ‘salary, loyalty because of
* American her!‘ wage, past Army and Agency Service, and a desire for a
career in intelligence work,

For what service does he think he ig working? What does he think
becomes of his information? _

Subject {s cognizant of the entity c of this organization,

Explain fully subject's past or present connection with any ; J
intelligence service, 7°". {815° 8) a 8
Subject Previously in U.

S. Army and Air Force Inteliigenc.

7 Shge puear

evaluation of information received.

Zents on Comminist
American—Caribbean
ry objectives.
Has been particularly valuable in
gents,

pepe:



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

_ _. ... SECREP, a“
: 45. If subject's duties are to be other than intelligence gathering,

- explain.

aeeD Pool y a

f : , : ie aad functions Gantinistrative-Operational) normally exercised
: au; by P/AL foe te . - : :

-k6. Has he been @iven special training ag an agent? Explain.

U. S. Arny Intellizence Training and Agency covert training fron
pO nO 5 October through 25 November 1953. Additional covert training at
: . + Headquarters planned for April-May 1957,

- ve Lane eget :

How and from whom does he obtain information? :

Aa

From indigenous student—youth elenents, with whom he maintains

contact end who in turn have entree to Cucan Communist and revolu-
tionary circles, ,

Is it proposed to pay subject a reguiar salary? If 50, ‘amount per

“ woek, ‘nonth, ete. Explain any other methoda of paynent, such aa .d
exchange commodities. . : : aun . “ye

ft
i
L
i

Subject is to receive $6,390 annually, pluz allowances, with provisions
: for normal step increases, and promotion when justified, Loe c

2 rger

Have any promises or comm tzents vhateoever (not covercd elsewhere

in this form) been made to subject? Explain.
+ Ho. 03

zai. fin =}

Are subject

language abilities and other characteristice such”
that he could pase as a native of a country or region other’ than his

“own? Explain.

| Hes netive Musncy tn Jauyuage and would at least pass as long-time , :
resident and possibly even national of certain Central American- a “

: Ganibbean countries, although has obviously foreign physical
. characteristics, . ,

-9-



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

Sl. What iz subject's social stending? Aristocracy, upper middle class,

lover middle cleas, peasantry, etc.?
Upper Middle (Class

52. What are > aubject's personal habits? ‘Liquor, arvgs, genbling, mistresses

or lovers? -:~" ome

_ Believed to be normal in A all respects, .

Sob ree

Be with what other foreign Power would subject be most likely t to-

collaborate Dectiuse of fle sdeoloay, obligation, ¢ ote

What special ‘abilities, talents, or qualifications are Possessed by

: ubyect which ‘would Conceivably be of value for other F operations in’?

° “Attach Samples of Subject's signature, and handwriting in all Janguages
known, to pin, also a a recent, dated Photograph, and Fingerprint.

" Previously submitted.



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

57. How was information in Part I obtained?

; From Subject personally.

%

58. Other miscellaneous operational data and comments.

Outstanding record led first to recommendation that subject be
converted to staff status; following which it was determined that a

career agent designation would be more appropriate in his case.

sae

Case officer



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

pres

my a aay _ worse a 2 :
oro SBORE, H ~— ROSS L. CROZIER

Ross L. CROZIER was born on 20 June 1922 in De Kelb, Dlinois end is the
eldest of five children of a respectable :siddle-class faaily, His parents and nis
two brothers and two sisters now reside in terling, Illinois. Crozier received

“his primary and hizh school education in De Kalb and entered the U.S. Arar in:
19,0, later transferring to the Aray Air Corps. He served es an operations and
intellizence specialist, first in the China-India—Borma Theatre and later in
Penama. ‘Crozier was discharged from the service in August 1945, leaving witl
the grede of Technical Serpeart, After his discharze, Crozier worked about
three months as a laboratory technicivn. in the Sterling (Iltinois) Silicate)
Corporation and then returned to the Canal Zone to marry Argentina COtDHt0 C.,
a Costa Rican rirl in December 1945, He then worked about four months
a3 a stevedore, and labor forenan in the Canal Zone. In April 19146 he
re-enlisted in the Air Force in the Canal Zore, irom which he ves discharged

_three years later in 1949 at his previous grade of Technical Sergeant.

scheduled to be used in Parana but was essirned to the ANOID Project in Costa
Rica instezd. While there he successfully handled a high level pemtration of the
Coste Rican Commnist Party. In 1953 he was sent to Feadquarters for treining,
&_Jand in 1954 he was assigned to .PBSNNCCESS. for a brief Period. In July 1954
mo, he signed a new centract in Washington wherety he became the new principal

Crozier became an Azency contract agent on 1 June 194 He wes origi rally

Seo!

Def 168 TT

a a ae ten Nm Pe eet

Spusiieriscee ren



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

DY

TSAR SATU. erties + ree ners

SECRET

_ agent of Project ANPHODARCH. He is under student cover and is actually —
working for his BA derrce at the University of Habana, for which he has
apor-ximately 1 more year of acadenic work to complete. ?

: of 32 years of ace. He is athleticslly inclined and has been, and is at |
Present, interested in organizing and participating in intra-mural
athletics. He is happily married and the father of two children, He
" possesses a great deal of intesrity, honesty, intelligence, and .
“resourcefulness, His chief hobby, zside from sports, is photoeraphy. He
° has mde quite a study of picture-taking and has developed a portrait

" photo technique which he has found useful in his work and as an aid to
obtaining extra spending money while gcing to school.: The Chief of Habana
‘Mission and WHD have a strong feeling thet this man will perfora his duties -
in a superior monser and will make *HPHODARCH a valuable and worthwhile
‘project.

Crozier has a healthy a»pearance and appears to be ebout (5) instead e



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

TRANSFERRED To 2
we FELE wo. ; |
Po
: : SER ON THE SUB - j j
TRERE IS A RESTRICTAD CI/CA FOLDER ON THE SUP: :
pails * ate oh 2

GF TEIS 201 EZLD U

EW7AS2 0

7-46)

Form no.
t way 56

BE7 Tertaces rote

7 1 awe 54 _ SECRET
foam 4137 cm e268 ceso.)e te,

8 OO OLIS RE AL Ae te Re Od i Ares aA TY Ae a LR TCE Ey



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

TEL EPMONE

v7,

VHSTRUCTIONS:
SECTION I: bi

Pore must be typed of printed in block letters.

i keowa sliates ra
with the alias.

201 number, neme and ideatifying date io the spaces provide

SECTION 112 List eryptonye of peecdonyn, if aseigaed. If true nase is sensitive, obtein 11 avaber froa 21 Coast
trol Desh cod complete Section I end Section FEE. On a aeporete form, enter the Dl nusber end complete. Section If
and Section 111. Subeit cach fora separately.

SECTION LI1: To be completed in aff cases.

SECTION L

oc a LE 66E 1
. F Re Pisat) Ros s Es rh Cie” [sex]

NAME VARIANT

(Firaty (Title)

(Widdie)

ea een Ca T aaa a
Pte Le eT CO” a LLINES'S ioe oe co

Fokcur aTionsPose tion oce/Pos. cooE

PSEUOONYE

T

PERMANENT CHARGE

For nO. 831 USE PREVIOUS
1 ocr se conticas.

SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY

nee ean eet iS eaiee Teme Ree oe EE Tee re a a ate HE be eee ene gE ee TT tee

‘
‘
semen nn na eae nn enna ee tre RARE SPREE APY ak tna

eseey

8


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

=~ CUCINTERVAL USE ONLY
SECRET

(When tified tn)

air

rae

a

TO _RI/ANALYSIS SECTION
FROM ;

INSTRUCTIONS: Form.must-he-typed-or printed iii KlScK baie
VStenon List 29) Auinber, name and identilyin
applicable) must be listed. IH the identifying data varies wah the alias
are unable tw complete. ;
SECTION Ut List cryptonym or pseudonym, if assigned. I erue fame is wensitive, obtain 201 number from 201 Control Desk aad compActe
Section I and Section IIL, On a separate form, enter the 201 Sumber and complete Section Wand Section II. Submit each form teparatety.
SECTION Ith To be completed in all cases, ete :

nek d aber tall eile then, mene at

$tctie > SDN

~ -
we NA



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

an INTEPNAt’USE ONLY ©
SECRET

(When Filled tn}

— 1 OATE H
gE RI/ANALYSIS SECTION __ . ee
|S wn “9 ay "1957-- ST
[FROM Rous. :
§
a RI/CO Amalia ouparfiaky : : 2301 L
: INSTRUCTIONS: Form must be typed or ‘avihited in block letters. .
2 SECTION E List 201 number, name and identifving data in the spaces provided. All known aliases and variants (including maiden name, if
is applicable} must be listed. If the identifying data varies with the alias uted, a separate form must be ued. Write NOWN for items you .
i are unable to complete. .
: SECTION IE List cyptonym or pseudonym. if assigned. true name is sensitive, obtain 201 number from 201 Control Desk and complete : }
Fa Section | and Section HH. On a separate forin? enter the 201 number and complete Section HH and Secties Hi, Submit each form separately. : H
: SECTION It To be complcted in all cases. * 2 |
an
i
“2 5
; i
4 {
i
i
i '
i i
} i
| i
i 1
i i
I.
| i
i i oo
}
L. Fo
1 ; oe
' |
ih i.
i

form Ho. 83] Ue pein elton.

. SECRET oT
wee aa wek'lse omy = PUNC

| ci aad



--- Page 21 ---
0

iH
cy

a

bs a” noe ” TO RT oy RAT
ENE ay err y 7 dyretagtert oR anbines ; ay
: é 4 A
¥

ae
bode



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

sweat

2 ote eee

~ CONPEDENTLAL —~
, SECRET : oe
So ee te (Whe Pilled In) 907 7 7 =

(date)

Review of 2.1 File on U.S. Citizen _. . oe

i

i ae

i ae ee - :
In accordance with the DDO's notice of 9 December 1974, I have reviewed . !

the 201 file on WAL (surname) (201 number indicated below), :

and have determined that it can most accurately be categorized as indicated below:

Should be closed. (If this category applies,
affix Records Officer -stamp.) , , 7: 4

Unwitting collaborator. OI Code A7. : i
Explanation: . -

[ : Witting collaborator. OI Code Al.

Potential witting collaborator; date opened: i
OL Code A2. cot

Foruer witting collaborator (relationship terminated).
OI Code A3.

[ | Potential witting collaborator never contacted. OI Code A4. ne i

Counterintelligence case (i.e., involving a foreign intelligence or
security service). Of Code A5.

! ba) All others. OT Code A6.
i

Signed

t . ) Lp ai)
. (citse) ompgni
This assignment of category\ las been entered into .

ent,
Signed NR 12 Pek 96
(initials)

(date) :

This document {s a permanent part of this file. 201- /b g isd Xx ! =

CONFIDENTIAL
SECRET ’ B2 IMPDET CL BY 061475
. (When Filled In)

can ed eRe or een nen ew ee



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

RE oe amare Le
wviwuvniiwe aed

? ‘ z
Siomarcentenutec ' =
con pe

100 we. ano

Qo 0 o oc Oo Wo, ok

/ pavennaenous  _ - re meneaage harERENCe SESE.

3020842 DIRECTOR _ . £50653 a:
moan CISSEM ary 3 :

lg ait "EIS Ppl ng OE
YYfobe x 70a vw

D omnes #
: IMA, QUITO, GUAYAQUILs SANTIAGO. BUENOS: AIRES. MEXICO CiTY
INFO PANTECH» DIRTECHs BANGTECHs TOKYTECH y .
TAPPER/CO STARROYO TECHS ¥ : O

REF: DIRECTOR biases {BEING RELAYED NEXICO CIty} jal y
}-_IN_REFINENENT-OF_REF_REQUIRENENT-QUERY-UHETHER-ADDRESSCES

meeaseed COMtee . Coctonated Comcens
-2 i Gaseetetom - REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE }S PRONIBHED ! POE”
- me SECRET . oO Cl BY: 939598
Seance nn nmr 2TH a ee ee Sa

pee Y

_ ORIGIN WHO ARE NATIVE OR NATURALIZED LA CITIZENS WHO HAVE NO RELA--

“WOULD CONSIDER REQUESTING STATION CONCERNED TO LAUNCH HIM ON A SIMPLE:
"OPS SUPPORT MISSTON TO PRC: I-E+. TO COLLECT INFO ON PRC DOCUMEN-
~ “TATION CONTROL BASED ON SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS T0 THE ASSET SEFORE
"LAUNCH. ¥

“ORIG: JACK/ KOUINOTO/YET
UNIT: CHAGCEA

HAVE AN ASSET-UHO IS ETHNIC CHINESE WITH LATIN AMERICA ORDINARY
PASSPORT WHO COULD APPLY FOR-A PRC TOURIST VISA. IF YESs PLEASE
HAVE ASSET CONTACT PRC EMBASSY AND ASK IF THEY YOULD ISSUE TOURIST
VISA AWD HOU LONG IT WOULD TAKE BEFORE ASSET COULD OBTAIN VISA. ¥
2. WE ABE TRYING TO DETERMINE WHETHER PRC EMBASSY WILL ISSUE
VISA FOR TOURIST PURPOSES TO SINGLETON TRAVELERS OF ETHNIC CHINESE

TIVES IN CHINA. ¥ . .
3- IF PER ABOVE AN APPROPRIATE. ASSET CAN BE IDENTIFIED. uE 6

OATE: BACYANUARY 75



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000 . . . oa t

, OuTse GOIN? MESSAGE _

GiGNAL CENTER USE OMY

. 4. PLEASE ADVISE BY 14 FEBRUARY - £2, meat d

*REQUEST ADDRESSEE STATIONS NOTIFY H@S IN ADVANCE OF ANY UPCOMING

TRIPS TO THE PRC BY ITS OVERSEAS CHINESE ASSETS.

i COORD: OTS/AB - THOMAS KLINE {DRAFT}
: oo AC/LA/M --R. U. STONE {DRAFTF oF.
: : - DC/LA/NU - Je xepet CDRAFTF . 2
. 4FOR} C/LA/SB - BERT TREDGE CDRAFTF -

* AD

A WE ala .
eeveasna ores coceomares crease
ee REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAR THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PROHIBITED

ee nen bat ak ananassae 2 eee ee eee



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

: rueenien ried! i

|

ets ae
i
|
it
i
|

a

TSA YJ. PWD AY YFoon L la /bBBRP |

perenne a aE Tene:



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

el RR fete. an

_ B fon 44 771.57
te sw_. 41S oT Bae AS no?

[ease ASM Mag 5) — — 7
ToL ERSw 643 2k. Meta Son ee

i
4
i
t

ope i ce

LTRo4 974 1 july Sh — +
; T2 PA Besfoy Jae 4%. = orp nite
fo

ee a


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

~ Chief ef Atation, San Joas ren

mo. heting Chief, Wi
- Fezom
: PIPS1__t¢_TESate Oh . : ee
de The tehOS : / ' . ibe,

«0, Raageoarters file have fort tesn'adelm ly evgmonted threngh the
recolvt of refereres o,, wiich to my the leact, shade consiiereble, muth= “|
ronted Tipht on this eraration, Chie ws @ sost wleore alerifleaticn Cy coed.
nary of our questions conserning HUVAUOTE, . H

- '

®, Gnon hie return to Headcuertera, Dennie E,. COPELAND yemortet your i

desire to heve HUMANOID sien G new eentrect, Tt ig gsoprasted in-thie resent :

thet yes furnich aa ceon ne “nasible eny provisions uiich you wish to reacment

. for irelention in the econtreet, Such recerientoations will of courses te in ecne

‘A Soreity uith Sea. 22 of the Teplations govsrning eantreet arentc, not

eereer arents, It would be moct ndvardecsous to suimit such & contecet for

eengiderstion alaitencosaly vith a requcst fer rennal of the everetien = .

the ond of Febrnsry 195°, . :

3. Twletive to your mestion in peragresh 7 ef reference o., ct the
: cont tina, TRave6S$ 4g the current scroved version of the extent of
vee nID's ororetional setivities. Tt fe fircly believed thst thers restrite ">
Stone vill be removed when, fn Tetrasry 19£2, this oneration will te eonsidored
- Sar rensnl by the Staff witch f=resed the curtalloert, It is urge! thet is.
. your cuarterly review for the ceriod ending 21 Seeenber 1951 you clive Hende
.’ qusxtera the benefit ef exnthor s-ecifie deta{ied resort, ft thet tins, wo
> qld also cotett 6 recucct for increased sslery for UMLROID.

Wt, M, EIR, aR,
By 3. C, Bomnet .
. OR, Wy RASTENTER
7 De st
“Dof- 10 FE

SEGRE!

PEL.



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

pte

|| SECURITY INFORMATION.“ pisvafCH:NO._—

—yGuket,—WHD-
“-. ofROM ; Chief of Station, San José

=9-_T9

_- ---SUBJECT:-ceners=: Operational~~ pee a,
seeartc— HUMANOID Project
Ref: TRSW-685, TESA-1056, WASH 14671

a 1. TaSW-685, which advises thet the expiration date of. a
this_project—has—been-cetermined-to-be 29 February 1952, was :
received several days after the forwarding of TRSA-1056, which- | 5
recommended that subject be considered for czureer agent’ stctus. Al-
though TRSA-1056 furnished certain of the data requested by head-
quarters, the following additional information, queries and comments
predect forth with a view so facilitating a final evaluation of the
projecte , . : a

a 2. Pursuant to the approval contained in TRSW-655,
dated June 29, 1951, HUMARCID has been and is currently acting as a
cutout for HUMANIST-2, as well as for HUMANKIND-1 and HUKANKIND-3. 9 _ oan
It 4a therefore not clear whether pararraph 2.b. of TRSA-485 is to be if .
interpreted as a new restriction on his activities which is to be placed . ,
into effect at this time. In other words, is headquarters’ approval :
of the suggestions contained in TRSA-950 now withdrawn? Se,

3. As discussed in TRSA-950, assistance was extended

HUMANOID in setting up a photography and photocopy shop on the fringe
of the downtown area. Funds formerly used for rental of a safehouse
were applied instead as rental for his photo shop, with the purpose we
of providing a safe meeting place between HUMANOID and HUMANIST-2 and.
to provide a more accessible spot for the processing of KUMAI!KIND a
material. Farly in July 1951, after two or three weeks experience
with photostating HUMANKIND material at the. studio demonstrated the
unsuitability of the arrangement, HUMANOID resumed his plotostatic
work in his own home. Tre studio has continued to serve as a meeting
-. Place for HUMANIST-2. fie following considerations entered into the

. decision to discontinue processing HUMANKIND-1 and 3 material at the
photo studio: 1). The conspicuous nature of the equipment in'a scall
shop; 2) the security risks caused by the prezence in the studio of ~
HUMANOID’s local employee; and 3) the lack of any secure storage ;
“space for comprozising material Oo
ppaces 400-168 FST

. 4. Since the dispatch of TRSA-1056, HUMANOID has been
- notified by hia photogranhic assistant that the letter is resigning:

M4NoK

eo] : = 4 _

RPMS, 51-2BA


--- Page 29 ---
14-0000

to-seek nore rerunerative employment—at—the end_of-t!
it

~that-he- is-unable-to “devote suffictéent -¢

e- bo Ame to-the ~~
ep. it -going-without _an_assistunt-and-that—te would be.
tb 5@ @ Cotnet.

“. recent financial enalysis of hi

safehouses have been utilized to date:

—to-locate a Competent workman at the Salary level he
Can afford to pay. The above facts, plus unfavorable findings of g

8 business, -have convinced HU
to close the photograph shop at the end of Novezter, ~

5. In connection with Pararraph 2.d. of TRSW-685, which
States that HUMANOID must discontinue using his home to reproduce
the material obtuined fro: HUMANZIND-1 and HUMANKIND=3, the follo
brief history of safehouse experience at this gtetion is set forth.

A review of the files and discussion with KUFARCID reveals that, seven

—}-

wing - <-

ar me

4
5
i
f
q

a@.—An-office room in the Panena fompeny building in San
José fron June, 1959, to Movember, 1949, used to process
HUMANKIND material. Abandoned when it wes learned -the

room was called the "FRT office upstairs" by other resi-
dents of the building, : iN

t
b. An apartment in Bella Vista from Hovember, 1949; to
January, 1950, used to process HUFANKIND material.
Abendoned because landlord lived next door and used
Noderran COMMON entrance, Leen gee
. _€e° One-half of a house in Sen Pedro, which had private
a entrance. Abandoned because
wes neiploor. MARSHALL is enexy of the Comcunist Party
and knew HUMANIST-2 by sight.

d. An apartzent in Parque Lorazdn. After two. nenths this
wes abundoned as neiphbers began taking inquiries con-
cerning infrequency of visits to the house. : :

Apartaent in Barrio Lujéa, for four sonths. This was |
abandoned as zany Party uexbers lived nearby and knew
HUMANIST-2 by sight. . :

- A house near the Sabuna airport for seven months, used
to process KUMANKIND materi ¢ Frequent vecancy of. the
prezises caused speculation by neighbors and landlord,

Photographic studio. as Giscussed above. In addition to
stated rezsons for Closing ebove safehouses, two house
breakings were suffered, and it was frequently feared

thet the reproduction equipaent might be stolen when it
beceme apparent thet persons were seldom in.the houses.

the notorious Frank ARSHALL

|

i
|
[.
im
!



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

AerE

--—Ih-view of. -hendquarters inteition to terminate this.

ect, t—is not deened advis:ble at this time to_install. HUFANCID-—

ro 4 el
in-s—new—sefehouse to process HUMANKIND. raterial. Accordingly,

~ > - =" =——-gutout has been located to date.

~ headquarters auvice is requested as to whether EUMANOID may continue

using his house for the next few ronths, or whether this Operation
Should be suspended immediately, inasmuch as no suitable alternate

7. In reply to your request for comment on the salary
increase for HIMANOID recommended by the forter. Chief of Stition,
please be advised thst the writer concurs in the recommendstion. As : {

“indicated in T2SA-1956 end. TRSA-999, this arent hae been living one
very close finencial marpin and hzs been ewore of the recomsended
raise for sore months. It is conceivable that he_has_taken_the_ratse

m

prem eneeeensrien ao

: abeolutely no commitments. have been made to subject, and, on the’.

possibicity into consideration in his personal financial arrangements.
In any event, should headovarters decide to terminate subject, it is
recommended that several montis salary te autnorized as ew tercination
bonus in order that there will he no liketihood of security consider-
ations erising from subject's nossibiy over-extenned financial position.

This bonus paynent is believed justified by subject's lonz tenure of
service. mo.

8. With repard to parsrreph 3 of TiSw-S85, there have
been no chenres in subject's cover und current codes of: contact and
comnnication from those set out in TRSA-950. HUhANIST-2 makes a
weekly door-slot drop at nicht at the photocraphic studio, and a live
Geeting takes place at the studio approximately three nights a ‘conth,
with safety-danrer sipnals being utiitized. In addition, HUMABOID
Meets once or so & month with HUGCER, either at her howe or at the a
studio. HUMANKIFD contacts remain the seme. My contacts with HUMANCID
have taken place at iis hone, in amrk, in a local pension, 2t ay
home, and in coffee bers on a stcezeret schedule of about once a week.

9- With reference to ASH 14671, zlease be advised that,

contrary, hints have been cropped t> zim of a ocssible curtailment -
of funds which might require discontinuing certcirn operations here.
No difficulty is anticinated in terminating subfsect upon receipt of
final instructions from headquarters. , . 7
: _10.. With further reference to WASH 14671, your attention
is respectfully invited to the following headquarters files which :
reflect opinions and evaluations of subject by other staff personnel:

 T2PA-365 Part II "Subject's superiors regerd this man as
highly dependable.? _ -

TZPA-365 Part I “Subject's immediate superior is Lt. Col.
. _ Wm. Re PORES, Director of intelligence,
CAIRC, who recommends subject hiphly.” ;

ana)

GLCRER


--- Page 31 ---
14-0000"

SECUBITY INFO: Lay a :
NY A ereee: ; _TRSA=1084

_—TRSA- -L03—"Subject-is-considered-to-t be extremely reliable

— and-intelligent, which, combined with his. past—
expertence, quality him for a wide range of- -- ~~ -*——j-—~
~~~" assignnents.®

REA-582 *,..services have been of considerable value to | . pon
operations. The greats which he handles are the q .
most productive of those now heing used by this |
station, and his manorenent of these informants

: hes been excellent from both an information and

: \ : security viewpoint."

\ TRSA-SL6 "...bis interrity, Hecretion, and industry

po? cannot be too highly commenced, and. we feel that

: f he is erinently enited fer stcff or cover employ- ----
ee OTE me ment in any capacity deered com:ensurete with :
hic intellectual and other abiiities.*

|

poe TRSA-860 %...the services of this arent are extremely.
a valuable to this station."

TRSA-999 °...the services of this arent continue to be
extrezely valusble..... In view of iis inportince
to this station, his ability anc his willingness
ts devote tire to. the work when needed’ it is
recomended that he te considered for a raise in |

Payee.”

‘ TRSA-641 "...his experience end ability is such that he : .
: could probably be of use te the organization : Tong,
anywhere in latin -Anerice

4

sp epenmasy

s ll. The above file history, plus epproximetely three
montis observation and circction of HUMANOID served as the basis for wy
reconmendstivn of career sgent ‘stutus. :

a 12. At the ris of laboring the point, and solely on the .

basis of information available here, it appears that EUFANOCID has pro-
vided valuable service in the past, "that | he is currently en important
factor in the operstional structure of this station, and that he
possesses certain potential for future use by the orrenization. In
this connection, it is noted that headquarters inquired some time ago
(TRSW-641) whether subject would be interested in woriing for the .
organization in another country. Altiough it is realized your interest
in this possibility may no longer exist, for your inforzation HUMANUID
has stated that he would go to any other Latin American country, in
any capacity, on short notice.

. 13. The instant di spate: is respectfully subsitted for your
: information and in resvonse to your queries. It is to’ be emphasized
_ that headcuarters desires with regard to rodifying or terminating this

» Project will be followed implicitly.
2O0-1O GE F y 7

dames K. Russo

sgt a

we



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

OUTGOING CLASsres-mcssaGe-—————_ =>

——CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

_ nsccush ORE Foauatione Pact No,

SAN JOSE - ROUTINE -
To: "POLICY COORDINATION SG
From: SPECIAL OPLRATIONS B NOV 51 :
f wun 422) OUT 87220

i, Conrinmation:

IR A3-4), AD/SO (5), OPS (6}, PLaNS (7
: Teronmarton: s/ aE B64 9? ( dy tf (3 ),

7 ;: : :
Paraphrase Not Required. Handle as SECRET Correspondence per Pave. SEC) 0A AR-380-5 a

!
i /.- WASH. 14671

| ‘TO: SANUFG - «CITES WASHFG
| . RES TRSA=1056

|

i

an VAKE RO COMMITMENTS RE FUTURE STATUS SUBJECT.AT PRESENT _
- HAVE NO PLANS CONTACT HIM HERE.HGS FILES DO HOT REFLECT BASIS

. YOUR ENTHUSIASM SUBJECT'S USEFULNESS THIS AGENCY. HQS FAVORS
CONTINUING PRESENT STATUS. |

ee - S Ser-/orery
“sere V.L.GRESHAM . JCB
. TOD: 2351Z & NOV St SECRET Corr No. 4 oe

ET IS FORBIDDEN TO MAKE A COPY OF THIS MESSAGE

ane


--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

SECRE:

~-, SECURITY INFORMATION. ~

2 November 1951

MEMORANDUM FOR: MR, RASTETTER AND MR. BONNET /
FROM “Paul P. Paxton
SUBJECT: HUMANOID; Career Status

1. I do not feel that this man's position in the political
and social life in Costa Rica lends itself to our need for a
career agent in that area, His financial position negates hia -
accessibility to high-level information, and our reazirements
for Costa Rica should not be satisfied through outright subsidi- '
zation of an agent in order to place him in a position of influ-
ence. His wife's knowledize of his work for us is lamentable and
her Costa Rican background with substantial local political ties

our part for increasing his knowledge of our operations, Admit-
tedly, he has performed a Satisfactory service for the San Jose
station, tut his efforts are not so vital that his termination, in
the event he decides to sever connecticns with us because of -his
failure to achieve more pran&ent status, wold be a permanent blow
to our effectiveness there, * With respect to his knowledge of
future possibilities with Sy we cannot be held responsible for
‘,-, UMauthorized commitments that may have been made by the previous
': Chief of Station, . .

~_*- 2, The current status of HUMANOID should be established in.
. line with TRS ~ 685. / Lo :

2 November 1951

SECRE:

Cocoa ee

dof 160 ET

should be sufficient reason to belay any further consideration on . ,

!
!
t
i
H
4
oi
i
}



--- Page 34 ---
14-00009

3 Ny Air oe! _— a _ (ee pose : ; — oe

zi aaa ——— Din aTCH KO.

. TRSA-1056

Loe pate: _22 October 19521
: Chief of Stution, San José oo , -

chief, wiD

Ce
¢) SUBJECT: cenern— Operational — of
; seccmic— Humanoid .

“Ref: “Field Memo 218

wees -le Serious considerztion hes been piven to the -
suitability of Huzanoid for career Sgent status, and in this connec-
: tion, it is to. be noted subject is partially aware of the possibilities
by of career agent stetus by virtue ofa discussion with the former :
Chief of Station. ° . oo ot _ ;

i 2. It appears that Humanoid fills the requirements set
H out in reference meuorandum, as follows: _

i
}
iE . @ Iumancid.
!

i .. be His existing cover is well established and believed to be
- } dureble. He has been attending tke local university for
Li - . Over two years; he tuilt and owns hig own home in Costa Rica;
i : he is married to a Cost Ricen end has two children torn here;
: and he kas a goinz business in the form of a photographic . !
shop wnich provides an excuse for additicnal income. a

SOI objectives assigned to Eumanoid include supervised
direction of Communist Party penetration (Humanist-2); super-
vised direction of Postal Intercept Project (Humankind);
direct provision of information emanating fro local university : .
and intellectual circles cf which subject is a meaber. Aiso,

- subject forrerly cirected attempted penetration of: the Comuu- .
nist Party women's"front" group (Hugger). .

|
It has been noted that subject's efficiency and productivity :
have been hampered by financial considerations in the past. i. bee
He has had unusually heevy nedical bills, anc the rising cost
of living in Costa Rica has. presented economic problems in
view of his modest income. It is felt that subject has
’ valuable potential for expanding his operaticns uncer the status
of career agent. With the recoval or partial rewoval of
“economic pressure, subject would be able to devote edditional
time to the exploitation of nuwerous personal contacts in
labor, government, religious, and political circles. He is a
ae : vo et-/6Tre/ vet
'

Des J655¢]

BP, 51-28



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

:chni que.,—hi
¥ rainst value of infor
be-obtained,and is thorougiily familiar. with the geopraphy-
“~and political trends in Costa Rica. To date, subject has - . £
confinee his activities mostly to cutout and cirection; . {
|
i)

however, it is believed that with additional freedom he could
successfully encape in spottine, recruitnent, ceneral inves
tigation, and independent recorting.

e. Subject has discussed his desire to send his: wife and two
children to his family in the United States late in October H
for a 6C-day wisit. He would then like to travel to the
United Stztes hirself in late December for a trief visit

. with his parents in Illinois. This would be his firet visit
home in several years and would -rovide an excellent cpper-
tunity end cover for headquarters contact, either in liiinots
or Washinzton, at which time for-alities and necessary

tos . training could be accomplished. (NOTE: ° This’ planned trip

- of subject cay temperarily interrunt contact vith Humanist-2

and Humankind, as a suitetle interit cutout hes not yet been
developed; but experience has shown tht procuction fren
both sources practically dies out over the Christwas ond Hew
Year holidays in this country. ° :

we 3. In connection vith Parapreph e. above, it is to be
os noted that the travel plans of subject's wife heve been complicated
‘ by advice fror. the Exbessy Consular Section. that the Immigration
authorities at the cert of entry into the United Stetes May cenand a
$500.CO U.S. bond in substantiation of her intent to return to Costa
Rica after the 6¢ days. This station 1s therefore consicering
advancing subject U.S. $500.00 in orter to enable him to present the
bond if it is demanded and to obviate the possibility of tis spending
. everal hundred collars in travel money for his wife to a port of :
' entry end return to Costa Rica if entry were denied. This money -
would not be used by subject for any other purpose anc would be re-
turned to staticn funds after successful entry of his wife into the. .
United Stetes. |

&. In view of the fact that this Station has no basis
for comparison with regard to possible salary firures which might be
offered subject if ccreer arent status is approved, no recommendation
in this rerard is beinr made. However, it is pointed cut that subject
has worked for the orranization for almost four years, thet his
efficiency has been excellent, his rrasp of intelligence requirezents |
above average, his potential attractive, and that his nresent position
in the operational structure of this Station is of. major importance.

5. It is requested that this Station be advised if you
are interested in considering subject for czreer agent stctus. . ot
If so, please advise whether contact will be had with subject while .

na.

Bo | SECK2



--- Page 36 ---
14-0700

Atay

~*~ os “aN -
Page 3 . “SECRES _— TRSA-1056

he is ia h the United. States. Also, \—will-the- ‘povernment ‘reinbareé
—gub ject for travel expe-ditures for his trip. In view of the-  -
pelativety short | time: rezaining before & rip

=per =f
“Dining, -etc.. yin orcer-thet ‘Huranokd==~

ay “be “worked © out. |

: 6 It would be appreciated if a reply to the recommended i
salary incresee of subject could be mace available. (See TRSA-999 :
of July 1 end T2SA- 1037 Gated Septerber 28, 1951.) .

and Pe eet ada ie

ee tet Ete

J . . So James K. Russo

settee at Sects



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

- -
Air - ~ _
Ss TR RoR

= TRSA-1037.

Chief, wip.

Chief-of-Sstation, San José

SUBJECT: GexzRac— Operational

: 2 sp eciFIC Hunaroid Project.

1. In connection with a re-examinati{on- of the’ security
factors of this Project, @ pre-arranged visit to the home of ,
Humanoid was mode by the writer. As previously reported, subject
has constructed a secret dark room. under the. floor of his house .
- and processes the production from the Humankind Project ix thig

bility of an unexpected house search or a pure case of house-
breaking with theft as a motive cannot be overlooked, with resultant
. Serious security considerations, _

/ 2, %It 4s therefore requested that heedcuarters
consider furnishing a small wall safe with a combination lock for
installation in the above-mentioned dark room. It. would be possible
to sink the safe into the concrete wall, and even if complete con-
cealment were not possible, the safety of the material would be

| greatly enhanced. Suitable safes are not available locally, but
it isinow that Remington Rand markets a small strong box with a
ombination lock (price about $20.00) which would be ideal, , :

: 3. I would appreciate receiving your opinion in this Jd
. Matter inasmuch as other measures must be taken in the event a safe . ;
_ Cannot be made available. sn cs : .

. ’ “be | Inasmuch as Humanoid is aware of the prorosed sala
| Palge recommended by the former Chief of Station in the Cuarterly
’ Report dated Aurust 17, 1951, information as to the status of this

recommendation-is requested.
sof’ 1 Russo
: i

sorter eri’
Dor-/b EFF.

DATE: _ _28 September 195). 2



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

Ciiief of Station, San José

t
i

e

_.. Dora Calderon_de :CCRDERO, -has-no-relationship with the family of

BES, 51-280

SUBJECT: comma— Operations

srearc— Humanoid

Ref: Memorandum given writer by Zachary T. Cady in Panama

1. Humanoid advised that his nother-in-law, Sra.

former President Rafael Angel CALDERON Guardia. Humanoid advised
that his mother-in-law was friendly with the CALDERON family years
ago, but has had no contact with any of the family or the Calceronista
Party since the revolution. ‘This woman immigrated to Costa Rica

as Dora INIKEN from Europe, and as it is customary for immigrants

and illegitimate children to take upon themselves the name of the .
President, Dora INIKEN changed her name to CALDERON. Humanoid stated
that she has no political connections whatsoever ana is sympathetic
_to whatever administration is in power at the time. The information
in the referenced mecorandum was originally written by Humanoid
three years ago and has no application to the ‘present.

2. Regarding Humanoid's associates, Sr. and Sra. .
Miguel CORRALES, Humanoid stated that he has not seen CORRALES for
over a year since CORRALES is in Guanacaste Province. It is true’
that CORRALES was a Fipuerista curing the revolution, but he is no
longer sympathetic with’ FIGUERES. . ee

- 3. Humanoid's intelligence activities are known to

his wife, who has been of assistance to him in said activities‘ on
- various occasions. However, Humanoid stated that his mother-in-law.--
:has no knowledge of these activities. , :

SECRET
CLASSIFICATION

ee


--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

=MEMO

RANDUM FOR MR. THARP:

SUBJECT:~a>"“HUMANOID—

b&. Technical Surveillance in Costa Rica

HUMANOID is an American agent used as a cut-out in several
San Jose operations. He was employed in the technical surveillance on
the home of Juan Bosch, as one of the two monitors. He also handles
the photography incident to the HUMANKIND project, which work. he _
_ __.... performs-_in his own quarters. “(This may now be pérformed away from
: his home, bet until very recently it was done at home. )

‘HUMANOID's PHS shows the following points which Dave Wright

(see TZP-A-365, Part I)

1. His wife is related, through her mother, to the family of
CALDERON. This might be a connection with the "Calederonistas" who
are alleged to be the group of Costa Ricans responsible for mysterious
bombings early this year.

setemttesens eee nee es

2. Subject's mother-in-law,

who resides with him, is described

_as follows; “strongly inclined to Sr.

Calderon GUARDIA and Leo CORTES

during their respective regimes in Costa Rica, and she is now (Oct 1948)
enthusiastic about the Junta Government of Jose FIGUERES. However,
she takes no active Part in politics."

i
i
4
;
i
H
t
1
{
t
if
i
t
a "may be able to clarify:
i
!
1
j
i
i
t
:
i
i
[

3. Other friends and associates of his wife are: Sr. and Sra. -
Miguel Corrales (San Juan Tibas Costa Rica). Miguel Corrales was a
radio operator and intelligence operative for Jose. FIGUERES during the
Costa Rican Civil War in the spring of 1948. .
Jose FIGUERES and Juan BOSCH were the target personalities
- of the technical surveillance. FIGUERES made the statement that "one of
his boys told him all about the surveillance."

From the above circumstances, it appears possible that HUMANOID’s
intelligence activities are probably known to either his wife, his mother-in-
law, or his friend, CORRALES, and that one of the three could have been
the source through which ‘the surveillance was blown. Would you discuss
this informally with Dave Wright, please? . :
J. C. BONNET!

Sol OCery

SECRET



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

=—_ = — ns =SECRER.

Chief,. Foreign. Division T.- -

FROM-Chief“of-StBtion, San José
SUBJECT: coarua— Operations
seeamc— Project Humanoid

i Ref: TRSA-925

i
7 - eo ---Enclosed: herewith {s Part-II Operational Information - .
po of the Personal Record Questionnaire for Project Humanoid. - a
:

os , nent sty
: Encl; 1.in dupl - oo Lo ae

BU OS 33.35

SECRET

CLASSIFICATION



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

*\ERSONAL RECORD QUESTIONNAIRE 542) CO
; _ . TRS_/pref 26...

- Part II = OPERATIONAL INFORMATTON

at feasipie, su

Part tt of PRQ is classified, must pe filled in by the Case Officer and is nst to
be shown to Subject.

Headquarters will not pe adle to provide an Operational Clearance unless it receives
answers to all questions on page 1 of Part | (Items $ to 12), ant to all questions of
Part it (items 36 to $8).

Hh Summary of Part_.._
complete G3ta.

n emergency these anseers, keyed to Item 1 to 12 by number, ard
1,-may-be-cabled to Headquarters, followed promptly 5y pouch w

5. Fully completed PRO must be sent to Headquarters as Soon as possible, two Copies of ‘
Part 1 .(including copy in Supject*s “handsriting, if Possible) ard one copy of Part 41.

: : ; :
6. data acquired later must be sent to Headquarters in PRQ format on a continuing tasis. i .
. a

7. all pages of doth parts will bear the PRO number, Composed of (a} station synpct
(b) PRQ (c}) number assigned consecutively by the field station; e.g. PGA/PRO/13.

_ 36. Cryptonya __ Humanoid : . 4
37. How, when and where was subject first contacted or developed? ot

Subject was first recruited in Panama as Hydropathic in Novenber 1948 i
and transferred to San José as approved Humanoid project, July 1949. :

38. Could subject be turned over quickly and in a secure manner to

‘someone else for handling? To vhom?

Subject could be turned over quickly to any approved cutout, though
at present he is himself acting as a cutout between Chief of Station
and Zosubegentegemate of subject's notivation

Subject motivated by his interest in intelligence work, desire to
advance in the organization as a career, and its remuneration.

-T-



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

iil nine ee

TRS _/vna/ 26.

With"vhat dgehcles and files has subject's. nane.-been.checked?—-wWhen?---—=--~

—=Result?=What- else has been “done © verify biographica! information.

furnished by subject? ne eee ee

~~ hl. —What control exists over subject at present? How can it be increased?
Subject can be controlled through. dependence on salary, loyalty due to
Americen heritage, past U.S. Army service, and desire for a career in
this work--all are controlling factors, as well as his receipt of G.I.
school benefits. -
42. For what service does he think he is working? What does he think

becomes of his information?
Subject is cognizant of identity of this organization.

43. Explain fully subject's past or present connection with any
‘intelligence service.

Roe ss} previously in U.S. Army Intelligence (see Part I, PRQ 26,
No. 25 . -

Cs What type of information has subject furnished? What type is he

. best qualified by education and experience to furnish? Give

_ evaliiation of information received.

Subject furnishes only information received as a cutout: from subagents,
Communist Party activities and Caribbean revolutionary matters.

ESSE

SECRET __ jor C82 43-25
8.

PEN ria a LON ey ee SA A REI a a RS NENT ae men pe A Soe DL

eat



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

otal fated fe

46. Ras he been Given special training as an agent? Explain,

{

|

U.S. Army Intelligence training. . ao,

. oo ee “pe woth ne
. ve ee ee em ms boots
ae oe ee a

oo

pe}

47. How and fron whom does he obtain information? eo

. Subject ‘acts as ‘cutout for Rumanist-2, Humankind-1, Humankind-3 ,
and Hugger, ,

48. Is it proposed to pay subject a regular salary? If 80, amount per

a

week, month, etc. Explain any other methods of Payment, such ag
7 exchange commodities,

{
r

-t
1
a
|
i

Subject receives $,000 per month (approved TRSW-627)

) Have any promises or commitments vhatsoever (not covered elsevhere |
"4m this form) been made to subject? Explain,

Are subject's language abilities ana other characteristics such ‘that he

could pass es a native of a country or region other than his own? Explain,

3

i, upper: haate “class,

: : “lower middle class, peasantry, etc.?
. : SECRET
Ge

Upper middle~etig's,

BARRE Sie hehe be pci te ANE St a BINA Rtn ers flan ta enema. SEE RAL Asan at Net


--- Page 44 ---
14-00080

subject's personal_babits7__Liquor,,-drugs- ganbl ihgs=ntatresses:

—"

No gambling or mistresses.

23- Evaluation of subject's character, reliability, security.

All noted excellent.

54. With what other foreign pover vould subject be most likely to

collaborate because of his ideology, obligation, etc.? Explain,

bey

None.

55. What special abilities , talents, or qualifications are possessed by

subject which would conceivably be of value for other operations in
the future?

Tt

a
i

al.
tan

a

‘Subject knows Morse code and can send and receive 16 words per
minute at present, which rate can be quickly increased.

56. Attach samples of subject's signature and handvriting in all languages
" known to him, also a recent, dated photograph, and fingerprints.

- Photos forwarded with Part I. Handwriting and fingerprints being
pouched separately. :

~ 57. How was information in Part I obtained?

-_ Subject submitted information personally.

bo

Noreondisfeiais nasnindtaiiag dit gree chat noni ait:

PORE Dies

er


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

TRS /PRO/ 26

Cese officer

4
4

pera een aio naeerntel,



--- Page 46 ---
14-80000

Sad Co ~~
SECKET
_ _ TRSA-999
“OPERATICHAL REVIEW — . : —

7 “- GRYPTONYH: Humanoid
fc - COURTRY: Costa Rica PERIOD: 31 March-1' July 1951. ; a

OBJECTIVES AND TASES: Wo change.

: SALARY: . Subject was raised from 750 colones per month to .
: 2,000 colones per conth, effective 1 Karch 1951.

, valuable as the principal cutout for three

oe -s.gubagents. Subject also processes the
information received, adding to it his own
coments drawn from long personel acquaintence
with local conditions. Subject maintains a
good working relationship with subapents
necessery for their continued trusted and
unworried cooperation. . :

- BVALUATIOW OF SERVICTS: Services of thie agent continiie to beextrezely -

EVALUATION OF — a The information procured by subject is valuable
IR FORMATICH: . though very little is ris own, but rether that
oo . of his subagents.

Reference is made to TRSA95O and Tisw-655
wherein subject's operations,as planned by this
station and approved by headquarters, were set
out. These operations have continued as
outlined without incident or danger to the
security of this agent or this station.

nee

" QTHFR FACTORS:

- Subject is devoting increasingly more time to-
the coverage of mail intercepts, their photo--
stating, and enlarging coverage of seme. The
intelligence conscicusness as well as the trust
he has built up in Kumanist-2 in reporting on
top level Communist ectivities hes teken tire
and has produced food results in effective .
coverage. In view of his importance to this
station, his ability and his willingness to
devote time to the work when needed, it is _

“. recommended. that. subject be considered fora

“parse-in- pay from=},°00-colones-to-l; 500.—-=
Subject is living frugally on his present -salary
and his G.1. subsistance. his wife has recently
had another child which was followed by com-
plications necessitating considerable hospital-

POT Py ot
SECRET ae rl



--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

TRSA-F9O

ization. Tis raise is recormended since it
will enable subject to devote a sufficient
anount of time to this work without being
harried over expenses which force him to look
for additional outside work. At the present |
exchange rete 31,500, amounts to 2200 per month. |



--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

Chol of Stabtony San Joa boot!
i Cital, Praia Divicton 7 fo
: TERIDD © EMCI? : i

fae casee cf cotion oa tugcamad oni Eocusse4 ty sou under paroqasy 2
Of TRiete xD ig conwanrod ia by imukuartargs

" _ : _ Qe Tie recozamintions esntained in Titetely, » under paracophs 2 3
: end & aso hereby withdrm, 26 3 :

- 4
mo ~ de Yoar hendqmrters hes 0 continain: intaxst in thie eatize 4
pos eatior ani maul be A cltier aharbuly oF Oeinday ta nea a
po _ Maiich would affoot oitnar aloredly er otheawies the inpleumtetion of ‘

o

Lace

:
te mes

eatin


--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

j
4

7 FROM : Chief of Station, San José

r tos ; i
, wt a: . a a
eo Air a eS j
WIAs : : <sSPATCH NO. :

' ° TT aeneer TRSA-950 F

. SEs ry 95 ‘

CLASSIFICATION i

To : Chief, Foreign Division T

f

i

j

SUBJECT: cexeru— Operetions
secnc— Humanoid - Humanist

Ref: TRSW-64,3 ©

|
t
|
: 1. Inquiry made of Humanist regarding the statements Sot |
. he made before the police during his interrogation reflects that ™ ;
he reportedly refused to testify before the police but made his
i. deposition before the Procurador as to his part in the technical % i
{' installation which implicated only the writer, and this only after
Boo he wes told that Roddy had been identified. Humanist's testimony, as : :
well as the line of questioning to which he was submitted, revealed . |,
é the authorities! concern and their efforts to ascertain whether he
f had been engaged in or knew of any other similar installations on : |
: any other people. This he denied and maintained that the only !
instzllation was on Juan BOSCH. Humanist claims he made no mention
‘of Humanoid, and he believes the police know nothing about hin.

7 : 2.. Humanist's claims also tally with the account of
ho his confession as given writer by Manuel VENTURA, Presidential aide.
bo Humanoid has been on the alert and has noted nothing of a suspicious : i
4 nature which. would indicate his activities being under observation : !
or investigation. This matter of suspending his operations, as. i
suggested by headquarters, was discussed by writer with Elio R.
‘Langtry during his recent visit in San José and the following”
‘suggestions are made for headquarters’ consideration:

. a. Humanoid at the present time is acting as cutout and
ehief agent for Humanist-2, Humankind-1, and Humankind-}3. There
is no other agent at the present time to whom these contacts can
‘be given. It is believed that if these subagents ere allowed a
.. G6=months vacation, they will become practically worthless when i
’ picked up again and have to work for the money they have been i
receiving, aside from losing interim information and developments.

.b. In an effort to establish a more secure, as well as a
‘2* comercial, cover for Humanoid, tunis office has acceded to

’ Humanoid's desire to set up a photography ana photocopy shop in
the downtown area, and has encouraged him in it by allowing funds

paid-for-—reéntal-ofa~safehouse_to—be=apo: ed -instead—as rental -
_for his photo shop. This provides Humanoid with a good cover in

CLASSIFICATION


--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

eee oN. ers a 6%
* so SECKET .
“Page 2 . TRSA-950

FAPOK

biscnai TEE.

i

i

i . a business which he iz enthusiastic about and is a more natural
Place for Humanist-2 to make unobserved contacts. It also | i
supplies Humanoid with a more accessible Spot and efficient means 5
to photostat mail intercepts and return them to the post office. i
in tine instead of com.uting back and forth from his home in :
the suburbs of San José.

|

I

'C. Therefore, it is sugzested that Humanoid's semi-weekly
| contacts with Humanist-2, instead of being cancelled, be changed
| to a weekly letterdrop, and a live contact once a month to take
| care of salary payments and briefing: This letterdrop can be

! effected by Humanist-2 passing by the photo shop at night and

1 “t dropping his messages through the slot in the door usually used
I . for after-hours delivery of films to be developed. The film
I

|

i

drop will be into a padlocked box, accessible only to Humanoid.

d. Regarding Humanoid's contacts with Humankind-1 and
Humankind-3, these are conducted in a thoroughly safe manner.
Mail extracted from postal channels by them is deposited in an
envelope and placed in a post office box. It is checked daily
by Humanoid, and if anything is there, it is removed, photostated,
and returned by him the same day. If anyone is noticed hanging
around the post office boxes, Humanoid does not go near the box
and returns later when the way is clear.

e. Another factor has erisen since the last dispatch which
has made this post office overation more secure in that the
Director of the Post Office is now beholden to Humanoid. Ina
recent legal squabble noted in the press which was raised by a

‘local Comunist complaining about the government confiscating
his mail from abroad, the government cesired to prove that this

*. mail was Comcunist propaganda which they had a right to confiscate, |
and the President therefore requested the Director of the Post™ .
Office to furnish samples to prove this point. ‘With this "heat"?
on him,,the Director made a frantic appeal to Humanoid, who was
able to procure these samples for him, which satisfied the
President, and for which the ‘Director was truly frateful.
Therefore, no trouble is expected. from this intercept operation

. 48 long as the present personnel are being used, and ample warning

+ will be given Humanoid in advance of any change in the present

attitude.

L
|
i.
1
L.

eer a

Se, 3. Since it is believed that there is more to be lost
than gained by dropping contact with these agents, the above modifi-
cations of these contacts are respectfully submitted for headquarters! _-

fin ceeinenminas mance tn sehen eh state enone

= consideration-and-decisions="=

Fake Rie artaetat bo ete i Se eek el tee tte aE ae este Soave toeternnerarts conte BE
ae Data



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

ee, —_

a aan ,
~ kee OMe

Chief, STB - 21 May 1952
: i

Chief, FOT . 2 de. 7 - F .
HUVANOID Project mS - ee |
. |

1. In’accordance with conversations held betwen Chief, STC and
FDP and with ur. Johnston of your office, the following nodi fications
and additional data concerning. this project are set forth, - ~~

2. On 8 Mareh 1951 a technical surveillance was installed on the
residence of Juan 3OSCH, a Caribbean revolutionary leader, utilizing the
services of a telephones company employee, Yarcos Aurelius Salazar,
throush HUMANIST. HUMANOID and ITUMANIST. carried on the nonitoring in
shifts, but at separated intervals. ‘Shortly thereafter, 1it-wags noticed
that sone natives living nearby wore unduly interested in th: activities a |
of ‘the nonitorin: house, and; at the same tine, aysterious bocb exulesions . a

i

were occurring in San Jove, HUMANISI learned that the police had received

‘ "a report that unimow persons were spying on the airfield, which adjoined

~ . : . the monitoring post, and periaps were manufacturing the bombs. The sure |
3 veillance was discontimed and the equipment moved on 20 March. !

-. ~ 3. It was deemed necessary to brief Salesar on a possible investi- |

gation and provide him with a suitable cover story, It is believed that oy re

Salazar becane frishtened, went to the police, and implicated HUJANIST, ,

\ who was subsequently arrested. After three days, HUMANIST confessed and
implicated the chief of station.

. 4. Tha chief of station, through his strong personal comsctions. ©
‘with the Viee President and other high officials, was able to convince
the President this activity was not detrimental to the interests of
--.° + Cesta Rica and the whole affair was quashed. HUMANIST was released fron
“... "Jail and the ehief of station contimes to enjoy cordial and amicable ~
Felations with the Costa Rican officials concerned. :

S. It is planned that the chief of station will be transferred in
'. the near future, at which tine UYAIST will be terainated on the pretext
that all operations are baing discontimed. The only other current.
operation which HMANIST knows anything about is HUMANTST <2, whom he was
dnstrunental in reeruiting in July 1919. He has had nothin: to do with
HUAANIST~-2 since then and has never knom who handles hin or even if he
is in contact with our station at the present tine. it is believed that
HUMANOID's true identity is unimown to hin, and so far ag he knows,
HUUAKOID was only halping on the one job, the technical surveillance,

cher a LOSE HP MEAT eta Rams AE eer ee te see



--- Page 52 ---
14-00000

+
i
)
1

Sus Fate

with tho understandin:; thut itc roactivation will bs depenient upon

-—.

* 6 Althozgh no cvidence hae been resolved fron aqy source which
would indicate HUZANOID han bean conprondcidy tne chief & station has
Deas iisiiisled, ac A precautiomry moacae, to placu HTAUOID on an
imctive status for snproxinataly gix momthSe a ADNa salary will
contimas curin: this period, which is desigasd to permit further study
and obga:vation of all raciMcations of tts ‘command 20 a3 woll og

SP une

‘ eSditioml) ctrencthentn: of HIVANCID's local cower. MEAD a

responsibilities with regerd te IVGGIN, HUUNTCial, and IMUNLGID will
ve transferred to another Americen cutout (possibly LUG) or tenporurily
suspendal, et the discrution af th: station citafs

7. Por discuszion with the Chief, SiC aml fr. Joimsten, it ie
Yrecommuzviod that the ifiiAu0iD project be arrroved as attached hereto,

favorable ramulte af the ai. semnth period of chosrvablan.

_ ais,

sedge

sy nieve niseneataeuesy (d+



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000 . . 7 a :

i

t
‘ ma a 2
1 - ~

STC/oco 23 February 1951

; Chief, FOr
So maayona
. : The following asgwers aro keyed to your questionnaire dated
bos 5 February 1951 concerning HUSASOID: Co : ; i
in . Q. Subject is an setive agent.
.. be He is used mabstentially the sanz as when clearance 4
i Ce Subject has not been used in comection with projects
i other than originally contexplated, :
i d; ALL information on subject's pergonal and operational
L security has been subaiticd,
t @e The operation has been considered excollent. The only : . ;
i test of INMANOID's security has been the test of : '

evaluating his inforsation, and the ovaluation of his
reliability by the Chief of Station,

\ f. There have been no operational or other changes in
a tha status of this agent which have effected our
evaloation of this agent.

FF earner aCe het mera ence ethene nag teary eis ihe a



--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

SECR!

TRSA-860
OPESATIONAL REVIEW

de
: CRYPTONYM: Humanoid
COUNTRY: Costa Rica PERIOD: 1: October-31 December 1950.

OBJECTIVES AND TASKS: Yo Chanre. i.
"SALARY: , $750 per month. / a
-EVALGATION OF SERVICES: Services of this agent are extrerely —- 7 |

valuable to this station. Aside from cutout - .
services in contacting subarente, he has been- P
used on other miscellaneous investipations .
suitable to his capacity and has riven freel
-of his time and effort :

EVALUATION OF ; The information furnished continues to be of -- 7 ae
-. IW] ORBTION: Breat value to this station. ho 2 2
(i, ° OTHER FACTORS: No change?
. : -" COMEENTS: "  *"." """ As previously reported subject's plans to .*~ a
a . : transfer to Panama have changed, and he is ¢ ope ye
“a \ staying in Costa Rica to finish his schooling; ;
. en Due to subject's services and the time he
Bo, . devotes in performing them, as well as .7 —

* 7 : ‘ . plans at this station for making rreater
ot : Te : _ demands on his time, it is planned to. ;
. Yrecomrend that subject's salary be increased
-. from: 3750 to. $2,000 per month.

23 Fé. cw i
“Dos-ferer)

2

pent inte eB ET la a



--- Page 55 ---
14.0000

ee ee ee ke et care

CHIEF, STAPF 9p" 19 February 1951

GHIEr, FOr
Project Ontline~—1RUANOID

1. To comnlete the attached field project outline, the following
blopraphical information is subxitted as required by paragrarh hs

HUSANCID was born in 1922 tn Dekalb, Tllinois, USA, where
he attended high school froa which he graduated in 1940.
Subject joined tho United States Air Fores in which he had
five years! experionce in ceneral Air Force intelligence.
work, Subject is presently living in San Joga, Costa Rica,
where he has been attendinz school.

a “2, ‘This project dates fron June 19h) in Costa Rea but subject was
: an agent of our ranara station for about six months jwior to his departure
for Costa Rica. ao

" 3e Sabject's reliability 1s considered excellent and his operational
services are also considéred excellent. ‘Tho valie of this project,
, including ths sub-agents, is considered to be of creat value to our
' Costa Rican mission,

Nevis. |

: ‘ 4. RUYANDID, in addition to being a principal agent, is

B : as a cut-out for HULAUTST=2, CGE, and ILLKIND, Attached are field

f prose outlines for NUMANIST<2 and IMMA. LD, which includes MAMINDel

: : - and <3, Tochnically, HUAANIST=2,° HUANKDDel and «3 are sub-acents and
“therefore not required to havo ficld project outlines subiitted, . The

original develomont, however, of these agents was on an individzal

projoct basis, and the cut-out IEMANOID was later developed. .

Se In Men of a field outline for HUGIR the folloning _
4s eubtitteds Project ve

HUGGSR is a Costa Rican by birth. She is private secretary
in the nain office of the ‘uited Fruit Cozpany in San Josey
and is a secret agent of Guardia Civil of Costa 2icas

HUGGER has the objective and task of developing contacts
poor Vanguardia Popular members, particularly in the wocea's
fron! e

5
ry
i

While HUGGER's production is not creat, it 19 valuable. Her
_ PAY_18. approxizatoly $11.00 a months _

SECRET!

Dor-ser rT)



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

6. ‘dnce the Chief of Station has only direct contact with
HULANOID and not with the Sub-azents, ths project 45 considered as”
to _ 078 project, the HEANOID Troject. For accountin; purposag, however,
B ‘the mub-agents are boing handled as-infvidual agents althouch under
— the control of the cut-out HEUNOID. -

: 7e HUMANOID's salary if 328.00 a month and operating. expenses
are about 366,00 a month, : So, .



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

s Cy ay
SECRET |

90: chicf, FDr_

5 February 191
FROM: STc/GCO ”. .

1, SiC reeords reflect thet subject vas epproved for
operational use under Operetionsl Clearance: # 68 dated __

19. July 1949 pviv'e.g

2. The clearenec ras tascd upen infermeticn available et
“that tice, It is desired to raintein a continuing or periodic
revier cf the security status of this pcrson and the projects
vith rhich he has teen or may be associated.

3. Yeur cerrents on the folloying points vould te appreciated.
In the event field correspendence is necessery to obtain this
information please coordinets rith STC/OCO,

 @e Is subject still £ in an operational status? If not
‘please indicate dispesition, .

t. Is subject being used in substerntielly the sane manner
as vhen clearance ras issued? If not please explain.

. e, Ess subject been used in connect! on vith projects
other than origirally centerplated?

-@. Fas any inforrati on been reported affecting subject's
personal or operatiors! security status?

e. Has the creration, including security tests of the
“ agent, teen satisfactory?

f,. Fas any inforration been developed in connection vith
a this or ether operaticns or have changes in existing ecnditions
*. occurred which rcul? affect your criginel evaluation of this agent?

Dofe /érsr)

SECRET

inated ate nti rab :
ce EEE me hte Es SHEN tee Gh ete



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

. fe a

eg ENO

+ “5

Foaw wo. INCOMING CLASSIFIED MESSAGE
pec. r9ay 35-5 : a

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

SECRET 7 - Pace No.
Foo; SAN JOSE ROUTINE
. SPEGIAL OPERATIONS - 7 DEC. 50°
To: oe os —_—— ;
Aenon: - FDOT (te2-3) . . {N 12657 | -
“trromuarieS° (4-5) , STA (6G), STB (7), STC (8), 11D (9), S/G (10-11-12) |
Fs 4
t
Parophrase Not Required. Handle as SECRET Correspondence per Pars, $1 (2) COA AR-380-5 |
a . - eae’ fey
SANS 678 .o t a
. . . hb ie
TO3 WASHF CITE: SAN ( &
. : / 3 oo” /}
RE; TRSA 756 a
HUMANOID PLANNING PERMANENT TRANSFER TO PANAMA 1 FEBRUARY ws

REQUEST HQS CONSIDER APPROVAL OF HUIS SY 1 JANUARY 1951 TO PERMIT
SUFFICIENT OVERLAP FOR ORIENTATION tN DUTIES AND CONTACTS.

Tor!SttZ 7 DEC 50 SECRET Cet N
ST ES FORBIDDEN TO MAKE A COPY OF THIS MESSAGE

ee aT a saad


--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

CCURTRY: Costa Rica

OBJECTIVES AND TASKS:
SALARY: — mo
EVALUATION OF SERVICES:

EVALUATION OF
INFORMATION:

OTHER FACTORS:

COMMENT:

SECRET
TRSA=74,5
WOPPRATIOVAL REVIEW :

CRYPTONYM: Humanoid

PERIOD: 1 July to 30 Sept 1950.
As set forth in TRSA-564.
4750.per month. :

No change.

No. change.

_Subfect is contact personally by Station

Chief.

Subject is contemplating moving to Panama ,
approximately in April 1951, where he hopes to
continue his echooling and work for this

orranization. He has had previous experience |

and contacts in Panama and can be highly
recommended for similar work theree A
substitution for subject has been considered
and is being processed. .

peescceticace oe

Spm

Yo/-/é 6 ¢°T]

Be Pept 50 .



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

Pe ‘SECRET - i
: : TRSA-646 :

OPLFATICKAL RSVIFW i
SRYPTCNY:: Husanoid :

COUNTRY: Coste Rica PENICD: 1 April te 30 June 1950. ,

CBJZ:TIVES AND TASXS:: Objectives, tasks, sad tergets ere set forth
, da deteil in THSA-564. . . :

SALARY: , 89750 per meath,

> BVALUATIGN OF SZXVIUES: Services beve been cf cousiderable velue to
operstions. The scents which he heniles ure
the ost productive of thcse cow being used
by this stetion, and his menegezent cf these
informants hes been excellent, from both an
{nfornation and a security stendpcint.

EVALUATION OF The informetion provided by the agents which
INFORMATION: subject handles, a greet part of which is
owing to his oam industry 6nd devotion in
their development, is essily the most valuable
produced by this staticn.

pee agenengee epee ween mene eet

OTHER FACTORS: _ Ho comment.

_ COMMENTS : _ “Ne chenges sre contenpleted in subject's
status. He is centempletiag a nove to .
Argentina scme tine within the next two years
ana hopes to contiave his preseat employment
{mn that country, ond if possible to make a
“ career of this business in any capacity he
: ean obteiz. His integrity, discretion, end
industry canaot be too highly comzended and
we feel that he is eminently sulted for staff
or cover explcoynent.in any capacity deemed .
| GComzensurate with his fotellectusl and other
ebilities.

BoQune #0
Jos-/68 FT)

chia wang Deen bane ch ele etn oT

tree tmere atee tnnee



--- Page 61 ---
be ~ on 4
ord -

i ata | SCuHEE gee VO"

1 a H . .

: id aed

| fiat of Peatieay fen deea |
|) / eiaty povaten nivanton 2 \
iz J \ Qreratiene uettera \
: 4 Taeanedd . ; \ / :
"| Ber) Mibakes 6s ; \ , . . i
ET 7 ’ me,

. i.
Xe A vevlan of the Sneratal yoeards on Resmeets phone thee
salary ort emansey dm tho wast ef 4.09 ware ehereed to indo

. Be Cedlzarizy 10 unld nai ba mecensnry te change tho alist
| Bent ab thio tine tut the pay increase for ihexnsld, oMMatva . -t.

4 dys 1950, Sila dodicitely dazcvese tha oir dintawemgta Sp ; 7 he
the aaecek yoos to 6 Eigms ta expos of G9 11D, i ' er es ae



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

. SECRE?

OPFRATICNAL REVIEW |
OPERATICNAL REVIEW

TRSA-S8E

CRYPTCHYM: Humanoid

0" COUNTRY: Costa Ries Penton: 1 January to 51 March 1950,
' OBJECTIVES AND TASK3: Objectives, tasks, and targets ere set
— forth in detail in THSA~564, . |

SALARY: $500 per wonth during the quarter under !
: Consiceration, $750 Der month effective 7 {
1 April 1950, ; 4

4 EVALUATION oF Services have been of Gonsiderable value .
“ . SERVICES: to opersticns. The sgents which he handles
sre the -ost productive of those now being : {
used by this station, and bis Eenegecent fo. |
of these informants has been excellent, COE as
from beth an information and © security 7
standpoint, oS |

EVALUATION oP The information previded by the agents a ca
INFORMATION: whoa subject headles, a great part of which Ho oe
. . _ 48 owing to hia own industry and devotion : de
fo their development, is Sesily the cost. . Ls

eo st Valuable produced by this stution. i
» -. QTERR Factors: _ Ko consent, a
o> Gopseererg: No changes are contemplated in subject's |
. a _- Btetus, 7

Bt hureg So -
Sollégrti

Be a pwemuantinytae eee te nee wee

Fyveeaon

We


--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

ie _ a DQ ame an Homonerd Sev Ano Pape oe

E
i
f

b .
_ a Ce oe a
1 VIA: aA ~ Dis. ICH NO. TREK-564

(SPLOT Alf On SA POUCH)

to «6 Chief, Foreign Divisioa T pate:____31 Merch 1950 a

: From: Chief of Stetion, San José pune
i u .
: SUBJECT: erummu— Operetions on

secnc— Project Hucenoid’- °°, oe

Ref: TRSW+447

whe 1. In accordance with verbel agreenent made by the Chief of
f Station in Washington end formalized in referenced menorandun, the
£, moothly salery paid to Humanoid will be increased from the present _ 4
1 ""2°1500 ‘to #750.C0 effective 1 april 1950, ; :

2. ~A revised "Field Project Outline” applicable to Project
i. Humancid is submitted herewith, in accordence with GOI No. 2.

3. Possible existing confusion with regard to our charging
cf expenses of Project Humsnoid end allied projects for which

t ra

. a
boo Huzanoid supplies cutout services will be clerified in the near 4 1
: . future as revised "Pield Project Cutlines" &pplicable to these. i ‘

letter projects sre prepared end forwarded.

4. The attached "Field Project Outline" supercedes THSA-547,

Bb

Elmer C. Mercer

3
vw
4
4
4
3
Fe

Bh nunc _ lttch by 70°

3p herek SO, v
Abl= [ESIS/

ND COPY
SECRET

CLASSIFICATION

ra



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

SERVIC

st

"SALARY

EVALUATION CF

ES

EVALUATICN OF
INFORZATION

FACTORS —

TRS-A-506
QPERATICNAL REVIEW
CRYPTONYK: Humanoid

COUNTHY: Coste Rica © PERIOD: 1 October to 31 December 1949.
etl aeee

OBJECTIVES AND
TASKS

Tols agent provides cutout services in
Connecticn with the penetraticas of :
Venguardia Populer ani also fer the postel
{atercept project. In connection with

the latter he doss‘all of the technical
‘reproduction work required. He 6lso
reports miscellaneous i{nrormation which he
obtains from his school and business
Contscts, Project dates from June 1949,

¢500 per month. Increased fron $400 Noven-
ber 1949.

Services have been of ccnsiderebdle value
to cpareticns, The agents which ha
hendles ore the most productive of trose
now being used by this station, end his

. Mandgement of these faformants has been
good, from both an information and a
security standpoint.

The foformution provided by the informants
of the’ subject has been valuable opera~
tionally acd is considered @enerally .
reliable. , L

‘Contacts with the subject: are made directly
He is now attempting to cbtain a secure

. Place in which to meet HUMANIST-2. Other

-  Inforcants hendled by this agent are
’ HUGGER, HUNANKIND-1, and HUMANKIND-3.

, Ko changes sre contemplated in the manner
--of handling this sgent. .

ee Deere

!
i

oh
i



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

taken in consideration of excellent services, not in
time, but in quelity, in the manegement and direction
of Projects Humankind, Humanist-2, and Hugger.

.. OFFICIAL DISPATCH |
eK 1] i : orspatcx no, 2RSA~468 ood ir
Loe SPECIFY Ain OR SEA POUtH f
: “CLASSIFICATION © ~- :
cB - 10 : Chief, Fcreign Brench T DATE: 1 November 1949 |
iy ’ from  ; Chief of Station, San José . ,
: 0 SUBJECT: cenenaL. Project Humanoid . t
bee . _ speciric. Amendment to Contract ; . Jt |
: ed . 1. Effective 1 November 1949 the culary of c i
a : the individual designated as Humancid was increased | : i
‘ Lo " ., $100.00 to a total of $500 per month. This action was I
i

iC
{
ie
}

Elmer C. Mercer :

It hoo. 49 . Lf.
Do GE ETI

CONFID

CLASSIFICATION

foam no.
: how toay 81-86


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

TRS-A-449 . per 651) 49-25

OPZRATIONAL REVIEW ,
CRYPTONY: Humanoid
COUNTRY: Costa Rica PERIOD: 1 July to 30 September 1949

i
i
|
i
a
i
t
|
H
i.
1
1.

OBJECTIVES AND (2) Cutout services, | .
TASKS s ; (2) Cocmunist penetration of locel labor orgsn-
izations end/or student groups.
(3) Discretionury reporting. and operstional
Pursuit of any and all intelligence information :
Coning his way by reason of his normal daily
activities.
SALARY: ¢400 per month. L
. i
‘ EVALUATION OF (1) As Hunenkind cutout: Subject has cont inusa !
i

SERVICES: to handle this delicate and time-consuming
. assienrent in a completely satisfactory manner, -
As Hugger outout: Although Hueger still
does not produce as we would like, it is not os
ths fault cf subject, who hes devoted time . f
a . , and effort to his education and direotion. : : .
. (2) Rather then employment or investigation Q ;
of prospective informents developed by subjact
. . with regard to these objectives, we have :
, assigned subjeot the handling and direction
. of Huganist-2, We have every reason to believe
that he will do this .sstisfeotorily, and based
on the high-level infermation which we receive
- > through this source, subfeot. will be able to
proceed ere intelligently to the. coverage
“of the topics assigned.
(3) Subject is proceeding slowly as directed
by us, and attempting first of all to integrate
the three projects with which he is charged.

co tt erent mt ee ne gree renee anne ipee emansaneee,

woes te ati Be a

EVALUATION OF
INFORNATICN:

Directly, subject has yet provided little
information, Thet stemming from his projects,
however, is among the most useful and va lusble
which we cbtein..

“: QFHER FACTORS: “None.
2: Subject: 1s considered ‘to -be -the- 20st~valueble..--
employee we have at the present time from the
. point of view of actual present usefulness,

as well as thet of interest, industry, and
|: , Comprehension of. objectives.

tas Bese MST thal 4 Owe. n |

eet CH AEIB Dor (CE PFE > +

TS ae aeacdhs mec die ER Ane eect cence Poet ett oe ~



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

Sy ; on...

29 Septenber 1949

Communist Orgmisars

| “REVERENCE: TS=655, WASH 5590, TRS--3°77 f

oe gid biety eftert is being nats to confirm with dotailo - or deny =
ths information contained in THS-655, ‘The sourco’of that. revert, as
well 9 Hubbub, who de a personal friend of tho ort inal informant, have

both bsan attempting for somo tine te axtract mare. information fras 5 :

tiny In edition, tranater of itmanist~2 to tha nanagemont of limnoid,
ubiech oscurred this week, has provided us with.an additional sveme of
contimastion and Ibmanoid is necking the matter his Nop 1 priority Jodo

2o We axpect to be chile to cable
of the original information within tao

* appsarc to have some basis in fast, all
fer further details,



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

a

78 6 fe:

7 Tesasous are purely business and have nothing to do with our

: to 6 new locale, which is incidentslly aore desirable from the.
‘will cost $400.00 per month, an increase of ¢275.00 over .that

. Humankind effective 15 September 1949, . . ue

-hes been carefully planned end discussed with 51] concerned and

@liminate the present o

“, ate . |

SS ery oe

OFFICIAL DISPATCH

viaz___Air Pouch : DISPATCH No. TES-A=429
SPECIFY Aff om SEA POUCH . ee

i

j

fe !
an Rees OK iii . . ; “ft
- . {

z

4

1

i

. CLASSIFICATION

To :, Ghief, Foreign Branch T “pate:___13 September 1949 |
FROM =: Chief of Station, San José, Costa Rica

SUBJECT: ceneru- Operations . eG
speciFic- Specific Operational Changes : : A

REFERENCE; TR3-A-396, TRS~A-385

1. Certain rearrangemsnts iovolying three current
projects. of this office ere baing made in order to produce greater ' -
effectiveness and security. The projects involved ara Humanoid,
Humanist end Humankind. : _—

: * 2 ‘Fhe ower of the separate office used by Humanoid
to process the material received through Project Humankind has
Fequesteds that the space be vacated by 15 September 1949. His

oF

Operetions, Oa thst dete, therefore, our effects will be coved

Point of view of convenience and security. The new "safe-hcvuse®

paid for the former office, and is to be charged to Project

3. To offset this increased cost bat principally to
provide edequate exploitation of Humanist-2, that: individual -
will be turned over to. Humanoid for direct handling prior to
1 October 1949, Humanist-1, whose sole functicn has been to
Contact Eunanist-2 and who hes received a salary of $250.06 per
month, will be eliminated on 1 October 1949, This arrangexent

Can be made without security risk, It will provide intelligent,
American control of our potentially most valuable eeent, and
umbersome. oozmunicatioa and contact.

fea no.
apn spay PH°28

Blmer C,. Mercer

CLASSIFICATION Yof-/657Ts —_


--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

eee ee an
~ > OFFIGIAL DISPATCH =
: yaar. Air Pouch , DISPATCH NO. _TRS-A=403 |

i oy SPECIFY £1@ 08 SEA F

“-KAPOE 4
ctassieicatt

TO  °: Ghief, Foreign Brench T ‘DaTE:__9 August 1949
“FROM: Ghier of Station, San José,Costa Rica _ a

"SUBJECT: cexeRaL- Operations ot
specific. Operational Data, Project Humanoid :

REFERENCE: TRS-A-347 es : . ; %

The following operational data is forwarded in accordance with
Field Memorandum No. 6 of September, 1947:

1. Humanoid.

2. Cutout services with & lerge amount of personal discretion
permitted.

3. Subject is considered to be extrenely reliable and intelligent,
which, combined with his past experience, qualify him for a
wide range of assignments. : an

‘San José, Costa Rica. ;
No. oo Se ~
He would, but at present is prevented from travelling by
personal errengements which it would be inconvenient for
him to change. . ;

Al) personnel are peid by us: Humankind-1, $100.00;
Humankind-S, $100.00; Hugger, $100.00 (monthly)

.

Yes,

e ub: “fs-charged with pri 7

. Humankind and Project Hugger. Aside from this, he is charged

_ with investigation and recruiting of information personnel

- @8 suggested by himself in accordance with his opportunities,
but only after consultation with us. :

Fore uo.
ape eer

st-20° CLASSIFICATION

3


--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

i
4

an

—— SRE Bo APO TIED

Page 2 - — TRS-A-403 - . g August 1949

ll. By direct contact in a "safe house",

“12, Materiel emanating from Project Humankind through Subject
ig photographic. Material from Project Hugger and from
Subject himself is written.

13. Approximately 40%.

14. Written. Copy was forwarded as TRS-A-364; /

i

i - 15. The subject matter with which Subject is concerned under the |
Bo arrangements noted under No. 10 above is that of communi si :
‘ . activity in student and lsbor groups.

. 16. He works only as directed by us, but ‘frequently suggssts
mattozs for his own consideration. —

17. Subject is paid in colones at the rate of $400 per month,

18. After six months employment, approximately December, 1949,
we expect to raise his salary to $500 per month.

19. "Contact expenses in connection with Projects Hugger and
Humankind are vaid subject, and average $200 per month.
Maintenance expenses and rent in connection with the "safe
house" where he does his work average $125.00 per month.

20. We would, were such a contingency to occur, To date it
. has not. . - ot

-22.. -(a) Superior (>) Superior

“22, Semi-covert because of his netionality.

| 23. (A) High level.
Elmer well ° son



--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

OPERATIONAL CLEARAKCE
10: Chief, FAT (itl rye Aeury)
. 4

Cperational Clearsnce is hercty granted for the use of KUKAXOID, ~~

eet «eee nen cree raerrmme etree eee Halt S hi

|

bE

i

cn

i

? 4

to

[. : |

lo yo

I cn

i : yy

; _

. f . . |

nan : ekg:

: 5 Linitations: As defined in TRS-A-276. | i

JOEF C. BOKNET
Operations] Clearence Officer a
_for Assistant Director, Specte2 2 Cperetions

Dos-/0 0 eT)

_ of 2 " feptes.

a nee Taste Ver
arene "SECRET a
wish Da! ve er" 3

ERAN EA Ure Re ra An th a se Sa RA Neth



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

ae gecnkh

a . . Operations’. Clearanse Officer, 030
. Chief, FBT
Famancia _ ; o ,

: 1. 3 is requested that previsiczal operational @learance be granted . i
f | fer the use af Hmanaide mn oy
‘ 2. It ie further requested that © covert investigation bo mado an .

gpnemer .

é


--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

” OBJESTIVZS AND
- PASES:

: EVALUATION OF

SERVISES:

EVALUATION OF
INFORMATION:

etean “Ae
SECRET  s-a-376
OPERATIONAL RETIEW

CRYPTCNYM: Humanoid

- SOUNPRY: Costa Rice PERIO): 1 - 30 June 1949

(1).= Cutout services,

(2}.- Sonmunist. penetration of local labor
orgealizaticns and/or studant €roups.

(3). Diseretionsery raperting ani oparaticnal
Pursuit of eoy end 81) intelileeace iofcrmatioa
coning his way by reason of his normal dally
activities.

Oesavo Por month. (otgroy * Ko Voaad ger.)

(1). As Homsriind cetout: Sadject hes proven -
excepticnally succesaful in the face of séme
unusubl dirficultjes. He hes, however, daveloped
the centacts necessary undor this heecing on a
personal {riendiiy besis tc the. Feint vhere all -
ere lending their enthusiastic ccoperution, a

Ao iugeer cutcut: For he first tine in the
histcry of bis enployneat with us, Bugger ie
Bubnitting well-orgecizad reperts und -beéinning
to apprectete our needs. Hig Erogress is directly
attrioutable tc the tine ana effort devoted to :
direction by Humanoid,

(2). Subject hes been fully ‘occupisd ‘during the
short pericd ccvered herein ana bes meds ac
* Progrese with respect to this assignment.

(3), Subsect bes cultivated three potential
sources in fields of probetle interest to us.
After further local investigation of their —
Possibilities, headguserters will be consulted.

Directly, suosect hag provided no informticn, .
That stemaing from tne projects he is now super-
vising, however,-1s accurete and always valuable,

Hone, 7

_ should settle toto more-cr- less of a=roatine

In the lumediate future, sudject’s cutout activitias —

we tha ene

geen

releasing iis energies for Gevelopaent of other
Bo Qu 49
Sel- /6r7T)



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

pty » sae,

‘ fa

OFFICIAL DISPATCH |

Via: Air Pouch DISPATCH NO, ?23-A-364
SPECIFY AIR OR Sia POUCH

CLASSIFICATION

TO . + Ghief, Foreign granch T ate: 15 June 1949
FROM =: Chief of Station, San José, Costa Rica . 7 $
SUBJECT: cererm. Operations ; , . :

SPECIFIC? Project Fumanoid 4

Reference: TE3-4-347 . 2

1. A copy of the contract signed by the
individual principally concerned in subject preject
is atteched. The signed original ig retained in our

- files.

2. Pertinent operational daté in accordance

with Field Memorandum Ko. 6 dated 22 September 1947
.. Will be forwarded when the operational reutine bas
, been established in more or less its finel form and

we are better able to judge the efficiency and -velue
_of the. project. -_ : oO -

1: .

7 (> Quaw 49 yt
» Jeoy-lorrrl 3
. wool EEE



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

} a =~ can
TRSA~369
22 dane 1949

transferred to the control of Hmanold (see TRS~A-347)

20 Informit Hugger, formerly reporting through subject, has been


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

Pa ee

ENCY DOCUMENTS

USAF Personal History and security

+ THIRD AG

omen “WSO SesT ose eas

checks.

shan. acaba

DN at

i
i

aac

i

A



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

OFFICIAL DISPATGH

VIA? Lin 1 DISPATCH NO,
: SPECIFY KIR OR SLA POUCH Sa

: : CLASSIFICATION .
t °- 10°: Chief, Foreign Breach T DATE:_5 Zenuary 1949
: : "FROM : Chief of Station, San José, Costa ice : i L.

SUBJECT: cexrra- Cperations i

C : specific. Project Hydropathic .«
: Reference: TZ2P-A-365; T2P-Wi-411

1. This station intends to make the fullest possible use of 4

Hydropathic, but it is not considered feasible to proceed . f

with a formal request for project suthorization until he - i

. has established himself in this srea and we heve mede his . <j

bbe “ acquéintance. Tentatively it is planned to use hia in a4 °: . q

fo cut-out Capacity, <eeting informsnts which we wili previde, vs
for an orientation period of indefinite duration. tn this

t
period it will be possible to eveluate Subdject's capacity 4

7 to plsy an integrated pert in our operational Set-up, and ae 7
. 7 épproval for our plens in this respect. will then- be re- : 5
. " quested. : : j

‘Hydropathic will be contacted upon arrival and initial
‘- arrangements for his cut-out services forwarded to head-
‘querters. ~ : .

2-28 Re OO tele her
co - Panama City — , es

Foru wo.
ape inet

s1-28 CLASSIFICATION

yA eb e


--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

° d

aot “Se Oo

YEA: . DISPATCH NO. TRS-A-250 _ é Re

¢ SPECIFY AIR O8 SEB POUCH > . . : t
4 ‘CLASSIFICATION : :

i : . “3 H

: To : Chief of Station, - DATE:___§5 Jenuapy 1049 _ |

i . Panama City é i

y FROM : Chief of Station, . i !

bon, Ban Joss . MN

i 1, , SUBJECT: Genera. Operaticna - : mt t

poe. specific. Project iydropethio 3 !

P . Reference: TEP-4-365, Pert I \- ;

| 7 The attached document, having served its purpose, 2

i is returned to your station. "3

j “Your cooperatica in the aetter is greatly appreciated. 3 '

a al |

i y T4Z f

an 23-23 —Bbee We Elidr gd. Mercer. i

Ps : 2 Rael. — Teas Jules _fhecenlaperd . :

‘90 = Washington ao ‘ a

- vORM MO.
_ ape tear

CLASSIFICATION



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

i + ; - lon

OFFICIAL DISPATGH
Sparc NO. _TZPaimt02

SECR- Fe

: CLASSIFICATION

oot

VOA:_ ATR .

SPECIFY AIW® OR SEA POUCH

To : Acting Chief, FBT DATE: 5 Decenher 1948,

FROM : Chief of Station, Panam City, Panama.

we SUBJECT: GESERAL- Operations
: specific.  HYDROPATHIC

Bo. . 7 Ref: TZP4i-411

1. HYDROPATHIC is not a project (Meno to all Latin American Stations, dtd.
9 June 1947). It is a sirple recruitzent of an individual agent to be
controlled exclusively by the San José Station. TZP=-A-355 Part II sug~

, gested a manner in which he right establish contact with EYDROCYST I.

| -Since HYDZOCYST I is leaving Costa Rica tecporarily, this is no longer

a consideration.

2. All ‘documents in our files have been: forwarded to San José. This station
has only contacted Subject twice and hes told hin nothing about our organi-
zation or any possibilities of any full tine positions. If we can assist
by arranging a contact between HYLROPATHIC anc San José or in any other
manner, we will be glad to do so. In the meantine, we will take no further
action unless instructed to do so by the Hone Office. oe :

nen cite ak

cre By pec 48

SER Tt
fot 90. oy ae GLASSIFICATION


