
--- Page 1 ---
—

"ft04-10245-10003 | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

— DISPATCH NO, _HICGI-A-10.

cy PAD: (23-80/2-99)

cere yr ~688/2-139) Local :
Secret eee vera
CLASSIFICATION Lv - :

To : Chief, WHD [Mm DATE: Novenber 1

- FROM : Chief of Station, Yaban :
SUBJECT: cencan— Administrative . 4K a
secre Arthur G. VAIVADA :
eee

“J, Attached herewith is a memorendum prepared by the Subject, dated
29 October 1957, calling the attention of Headquarters to the fect that
his assignnent in Habana terminates in June 1958 and setting out his wishes j
as to reassignnent thereafter. :

>
y
a

2. While Vaivada did not include it in his memcrandum, in recent
conversations with the case officer he has ex:ressed considerable interest ;
in the possibility of being assigned under unofficial cover to Spain, :
saying that both he and his wife would welcome such an assignment. The
Subject has also said in those conversations that he would not take it
amiss if an opsortunity for reassignment outside of the Central America-
Caribbean area were to become open to him at any time orior to June 1958.

3. In the opinion of the Station, Vaivada has done a very good job.
here, having been confronted with and overcome a number of difficult i
problems and situations during his tour of over three years in Habana.
The Station is happy to reccmmend that his request for reassignment be
given every consideration.

Same R, Palouger
James R. Palinger
Attachments:

Memorandum of Reassigament (h copies)
Distribution:
“i - Washington w/att.
2+ Piles w/att.
4 November 1957

JRP/afn

=. ye fa
Et Got 63.33
rng

SECRET

CLASSIFICATION

\
=~
Hi IS
ae bas)
8

anise 51-28A



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

i . Havana, Cuba
\ 29 October 1957

wate eo

“SUBJECT: Reassignment - Arthur 0, Vadvada -
TO Headquarters Desk

| quRoUGH:  chiee of Station, Havana, Cuba

1. While at Headquarters in the early part of May 1957, it wae verbally
agreed that I return to Cuba for about one year, security permitting,

2. While ry overational work in Cuba from August 195) until February
1957 was concentrated on commnist targets in the University of Habana, it
should te pointed out that my duties during that period also involved many
contacts with subversive oprositionist elements, ‘hen goverrrental persecution
increased during February 1957, two of my key agents were lost, one of than
by goverrmental assassination, so that I was obliged to leave Cuba temporarily
perding clarification of tie security factors involved, During my three
months atsence in PEPRIVE the local situation deteriorated; and after ny
return ny position was less favorable than it had been as a newcomer sime I
had lost assets tut nad retained the cumlative security hazards of three years
of cultivation and reeruitrent efforts. The University was, and still is,
closed. Our comumist penetration efforts are continuously harrassed by
official persecuticn of the target group, | . :

se abe I.

tm 4;

begin to study the ocssibilities for reassignment about June 1958, or prior
to that date if necessary. As to future assignments, I have no reservations
or specisl recuests. I am willing and geepared to travel to any area
consistent with my qualifications, Generally speaking, ad for obvious
security reasons, I am interested in getting out of the Central America-
Caribtean area if rossible. It may be recalled that I was denied an Argentine
visa in 1953, for purely technical reasons. This situation: may be changed,
and I would not be opposed to a tour in Argentina, Chile, or any of the South
American republics. In this matter, the nature of the new project or
assignrent would take precedence with me over personal preferences as to
particular area of assignment, . a

4

eee ela De ene ce



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Reassignment - érthr G. Vaivada
29 October 1957, Pape 2

kL. Regarding my cover status: I entered Cuba in 1954 under student
cover (Pan American Foundation Scholarship), and as it becane increasingly
more difficult to naintain owing to student disturbences, I completed a
course in the writing of free-lance fiction and am thrice published. This
writing has been used as a realistic, s ap cover, even after I wag
provided with a notional business cover (retiie Surveys Institute) cy Read-
quarters, TI understand that journalism is considered a weak and tine-vorn
cover; yet if it is worled at, and financially managed through a PBRORIKE

checking account, it not only satisfies local SS probes bat it does not have  -

the inherent disadvantages inwlved in setting up a full-fledged business
cover. I set this out as a Possible suggestion to Headcuarters, but have
no insistence as to Journalistic over’ business cover. The notional
business cover provided me has Proved satisfactory in a limited sense thus
far, end even utilized as cover for action occasionally, bat I would be
wncertain about introducing it in a less "Americanized country than Cuba,


