
--- Page 1 ---
‘aca 10066- 10076) 1 $2025 RE RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 h Ime. Rr
c i)

c

MEMO FOR FILE

SUBJECT C : OTS (late TSD) and Jim McCord's Cuban Activities:

1. Ben Colling ‘phoned to say that one of the feLlowsin jail.
is still around, and after he got out he inquired around and got no
indication that McCord was ever involved, ‘Hone of the other oTs people:

have any recollection of McCord's involvement,

2e. I said that I was sure that the man who was rolled up -
might not have any idea pf NeCord's invotvenent, if indeed he vas -

involved, If McCord'!s involvelenent was merely headquarters plannigs
and no releasing operation was ever undertaken his role might never
‘surfaces However, we had been told that planning-did involve. Tsp
pople at the time, along with Pecuritys For instance, I mew that .

the Security man with TSD at the time had a job of hand-yolding with

the families of the thrse non; there may be some TSD record of that.
which would lead to someone who would Inowe ; .
Be Golling was pulled out of a staff meeting to talk to ne 2 and —_— .
said he would call back leter. : .

SDB

“RETURNTO cA.
Background Use Only
Do Not Reprod

, osty


--- Page 2 ---
14-00000

- MEMORANDUM FOR: PIRECTOR OF CENTRAL TELLIGENCE

| ments. “Shortly. ther eafter, t he 5 Havane * shai ation racing t the i con
currence of Ambassador Bonsal and Miss ‘Carolyn O. Stacey, an
Embassy employee, to mount an audio opera m against NCNA through:
the wall of the adjacent apartment in which Miss Stecey lived, - In
November 1959, the FE Division sent one case officer and one TsD
technician to Havana, and the installation of a microphone and tape”
; Fecorder was completed in Miss Stacey's apartrment on 29 November -

a 2. ‘By s June. 1960, it thad become vyident that two other zooms
occupied by NGNA: possibly-hotized- communication ‘equipment and
were used for conferences, At that time Bryer ans] FE Division
a ease officer, went to Havana and explored the possibility of improving
the operation, Hé managed to lease an Rpariment directly over the’. oe
NCNA’ office and arranged for a stay ~behin ad agent to Occupy this s ace,

3. Ta August 1950, ‘a team of three sD technicians who were
_ in Havana on 2 separate SR Division operation agr ged to install the...
wo additional equipment required for the NCNA operation, A second FE:
: ‘Division, case officer, Robert Neet, came down to Havana; and he,- a
: together with the technicians, installed 3. robe microphone and tape |
a ' vacorder in the apartment obtained by [Ma oF ver the NONA cffica, | .
1 About this time the equipment was removed from Miss Stacey's 7. 2
; apartment, with the exception of the plastic probe which was teft ~~

)

nthe wall.and plastered over.

4
bee



--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

4, As an additional security precaution to provide a safe
haven, and after consultation with the Acting Chief of Station, akey|
to an apartment in the same building 2 ezased by Mrs, Mazjorie
Lennox, an Embassy 3 secretar y, was obtained, Mrs, Lennox was .
told that access to her apartment: was 2 esded for photographic -_
surveiNance’ purposes..

and ee ies ‘would work against ‘holding indefinitely the lease to.
the apartment over -NCONA since the owners of the building were
_ cancelling sub-lessors' contracts ‘and recalling leases... Ii was,
therefore, decided to install transmitters and switches in order to
permit continued monitoring of the target irom ‘@ distant listening
post, “Another: three-man teara of TSD technicians “consisting ' 9.
David L, Christ {alias Carswell), Walter E.. Szuminski {Alias
Taransky} and Thornton J. ‘Anderson jalias ‘Danbrext} documented
as tourists had been sent to Havana to install audio equipment in the
Chinese Nationalist Embassy before it was due to be turned over to tee
he Chinese Comrnunits,. This operation aborted, . This team was ..: - |
then sent to work on the instatlation of the transmitie xs inthe apart. _
snent over the NCNA office. : .

6. At 2400 hours on 14 September,’ Christ, who *vith the
other technicians was working in the target apartment, falled to keer
2 scheduled appointrment with Neet, At 0100 hours on the 15th of © -

September, the apartment of Mrs. Lennox was entered into and.
searched by Suvban authorities, and. she was teken into custody, AES
7 154 #0 hours on 15 September, Neet, 2 he stay-behi Ind | agent and his: wife-

we e picked up by th Cuban authorities and detained,

: _ As of teday the agent rernaing inthe cust stody of the Cuban’:
- authorities, His wife bas been released and is still in Havana, .Neet
was released.1715 hours 16 Sertember and has subsequently veturn ned.
to Washington where he is being debriefed..|. Mrs. - Lennox w: Sat,
subsequently released and has also returned to Washington where she
is'being debriefed, The three TSD technicians remain in confinement,”
They have been seen in confinement but not contacted by an Embassy
. oficer when ha first attempted to secure the release of Mrs. Lennox.
; Christ was last seen by Nest when they were j

s
the morning of 15 Septembar, At that time Christ

o


--- Page 4 ---
14-00000

: found on one ‘of. the ‘technicians “who ‘identified th, the apar tment.to-

“employees.: ‘It ds unclear’ at present wh:
“‘wpor t by. the technicians and station pancho aae be used in a
; they: were caught. .

. knowledge as- to

. apartment in which the 1 men werk ‘caught i is in the i name ‘of f
beine. ogent swith the original. leage being in the name: onpan

be charged with espionage "against the people ef China... Subsequent |

: Hugh. Kessler to. ‘contact the three men at 1730- hours on 17-September |

. leaving: ‘Cuba 2s tourists since the filling out of the landing card -

to have been maltreated. :

: ‘8. “According to articies in the éuban papers the three
technicians were arrested. while in the apar rtment over the NCN:
office and completing the ‘installation of the equipment, The ~~
press article adds that the key to Mrs. Lennox's apar stment was

which it belonged, “AL Cuban) “pr @sa releases have referred to the
men by alias arid. have net.identified them as Government or Age

ptor y had been: ‘poreed

© > atay- .
34-the.

“sg 9. Initial information indicated that. the three technicians would

preas releases have been unclear on this point. An attermpt by Consul

was unsuccessful, . He was mot’ ‘per mitt
they were in custody, ae

them but was told

tted to see

: “The three technicians travelled to Cuba as sts uz ists. under .:
vary tight commercial cover, two.of them working fox a. company 4 in’:
New York and the third, on 2 in | Baltimore, in cack ‘case'the cova

door: “Tele phone’ messages: ‘and zoail are: picket Fi
Agency contract employee, The men were’ provided with this ‘cover |
as well as unbackstopped home addresses for use when entering or.

requires this information. Subsequent to their detention the home”
addresses have been partially backstopped so. that inquiries will - -
indicate that someone with this alias name had lived in the apar tment
suse in question. Insofar as the cover companies are concerned, |
fforts are being made to provide 2a backstop to withstand inguiries -.
rom the press shouid the Cubans reveal this information. In view |

e. gE

br



--- Page 5 ---
14-00000

| other inquirers,... The law firm has been briefed on the éntire situa
. tion. ‘80 that they may-be in 2 position to ect if any action by them.

pea whether recognizable photog: rapas of the individuals are released -
>to the” press,” ‘The two wives so faz have taken. the bad news’ exces

cf the thinness of the cover, itis uncertain whether this wall succeed, :

‘ll. A cleare ed and wi tting law firm in ‘New York h has be en briafed
by Mr. iL. Houston, on the situation with the: thought th + inquiries . :
seceived by the cover company could be referred to the firm of: --
lawyers from whom ro comment would be obtained by the press or

appears ‘desirable or feasible: “Tt ome aot appear that snuch: suppor’
of aay. kind can be obtained £ from th i

tre dethens ee Sook i in a diner in the Das ar
by the Gffice of Security, and he will get in touch with Security 4 if
he neceives S any inquiries on this maites 2 _Secuzi ty, by the same

Hons and. course of Acton.

: 13, The wives of the other two technicians have been told what .
has Happened and are being contacted at least.once daily by TSD.
statlers and their wives who have been briefed on the situa: ion, Ale:

roblems on which the Ageacy ‘could a be
the wives are telling their neighbors
sp ‘This story will be adjusted depen

he Cuban Government takes; whether the aliases remain unbroken

well,.

Q
rf
n
‘



--- Page 6 ---
MEMORAY DUM’ RE (SiescaLepe ,

.

7 re a) Septermer 1986

’ resord

There is a folder of sensitive non-CS/ material pertaining to this... -
operation, retired under Black Taoe wrapping, Job #57-86/78, restricted ,
to Offices of DCL, DDSI, DBP, C/WH, C/H/PL, o/ii/s, C/o, 3/TSD, Director

of Security and General Counsel. China Operations is not cited as. an

originator, addressee, or info resipient of any of tnis sensitive’

material..

WH/RMO



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000q> .

.
2 cow
bc .
| .
t.
ARE Oi ISAS "REG?
Seebioral » .
fet. 1, iysth Gperacia, *) Mator—
Billy Bo Carpbell, Tomchnder. ,-
Le
Tex os . '
wan arb : red : Hee year ¢
Cen. Az aI LO Bo Zr: oe theatre pa!
aay cose sitheut. advent ams. « How
Miand, Mexiec Civy, Su
contingenty ples be fo.
eupleyses. ;
The vor
thist Eagse | ge are 3
ericd sine Ee t
have Dao
pe weadat at,

trek end

tle.

car
Se



--- Page 8 ---
: . . Lo men C Ce wa al ma uf &

Be Request for bilesk tre oe

so i. Rear aut that RELRASE SOUTEINGENCY OFLA 62-2 be deplemented.

| 2. Pors oF entry.

ve

2
‘

3. Date, Losal time, ad aird:

h, Dasirea dest, ns OD.

, 5. Other regrimetots, de., otretehers er bunks in the event
gubjevts are Bowpital esses. a oe ;

G. Name, organization oma ‘elephona muscer of zequeating party. ~

7% Name and telepaase nucher of * RUBE RK gontests: et daating
exd off-inniing points. . . ;

C. The following pergonnel sre unceleageatsie ped “ics 3 with
respoosibility of activating thie pier: a a :

tae

2. Major Richart. f. St sane, 28/6SD/T! s/o
Organization: Aix Surnert Wivisio, uo/P
Home Phome: JH 3-105

_ OF€iee Phone: Sterile Nerborz 2B 83205, EE 3-855
Eaveusd aes 82,7658, THOT ;
Read Tare 1558

“2. Me. Roberh Merraro - . Ss oe
COrgenization: fir Sorpurt Rivisies, Db/2. ;
Hore Phome: JA '3 -
Offiee Faene: Gare as 2

em eterna,

3. Major Billy 8. Cashel, Comender Tat. ZL ; _
Orgenivation: Bas. 1, Wsth Cy: tonal Braleaidan aml .
Traiving Cxam, Egiiu Air Foree Base, Floride.

Howe Phone: 652737 ; ; aa
Off{e05«e Fhonet Eglin Air Force Resa, Floclda 631590

4, Mejor Keusetn Re Burtea, © welt Det. at
Creanization: D2

! : y rsp
Kjeo Pini De Ta Af


--- Page 9 ---
Distelovtion: |

-~3-

De Tet: 3. fivatsh 1 0-5! ond orc’ dn steutby easectty umbil
further notjae. Staniby capecity is heroin defined as espabibity to
Booition the eiscratt at any gort of catey da east, sevih or auuthyest:
YW. S. fron Easton to Los dugeles wlthin 15 heure.

EB. Aseuriug the subjects will be released dn Havana cr Mexico
City, Bet, L wih pregere mission feliera for Flights frca cost

. provebis porte of entry + te Teolation end Andrews Aly Forte Base»

93. 7
-fexeueo na scone }

Graig. & 2 ~ CL Star?
3-6

ce

BS

ofee

G/tsp

CoG

Tee

c/w.

pED/DDR

Gd US 0 0

t's ge ¢ & 4


