
--- Page 1 ---
=|104-10225-10000) [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

THIS PMR PENT ts CHARGED bop yet, ;
&
RETURN TUES DOCUMENT PO tP/ARC HAVES & i
DISPOSITION SUCTION, KM @9S93, ON OR BEFORE : [
DATE INDICATED. ood ne [
IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO) ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL ENTENSION 75%,

00 NOT REMOVE THIS FORM , OE

1790 use previous eeirions.

os . 4 RO NUT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
an ay i hy | : MUTILATE FOLDER.

Sea EG, . wt

Ss. ley [ : : ' .
O6 [EZ fka poppe 7
wae et op 27 ' :

oe [yg 2372

“+ [of Oo oy 1

7 ee =
ce ee | on
LO POUT = :
ce ee ef ee ep a i.
| e
| i : FILE NOQTO OA CLA AD 24) :
epee pee fe :
DOCUMENT: an :
rs irs As Oe FOLDER: _Z /7 ; : . ‘
—— eT i __ 7

mire ge so] | tT

BOX: , po) ————

IP /ARD Rn chad

INTERNAL =] UNCLASSIFIED

GLO “ious 7] secret =] CONFIDENTIAL =] use ony 5
oad zs = amet mia a aaa oe
” : E rf
. a P
40» | 8
4 '

SION

\
\e
| f

S6t taqmaoag-T

uate?

i



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

ceT
a Seo ta

Secu

31 Decembr 1952

MEMORANDUM FORs Deputy Diroctor for Plane

SUBJECT s Beckyrouml Material for Dr. Tyson'a visit on Wodnosday,
Jamary 7th. .

1. TI would like the attached papers to call to your attention
the very good vork thet Dr. Tyson has done which is generally not known
here, His succussful use of enigrog in making a calm and factual pre=
sentation to the Aceriean public of conditions Lehind the Iron Curtain
is, in my opinion, the banie on which tho Crusade for Freedom ean be run

by tho Heritage Foundation in the fiiture,

2. Dr. Tyson sharoa our doubta atout the Pree University in
Exile. Be agrees that the two principles upon which the University was
founded

A. that thero wore sufflotent qualified Iron Curtain
escapees to Juetify institutionalizing their education; and

B. that by creating such an inatitution for escapees an
eaprit de corps ia created, together with a dotermination
on tho jart of tho oscaposs to serve their homelands at

some future date

have not boen proved, ,

3. All of the evidence to prove the validity of those prinotples
ia certainly not in, Tho evidenoe at hand raloes sorious doubts, and is

as follovas

4s Of the current 208 students of the Frea University, 37
are Yugoelavs, ani i2 were born in Western Euro] can countrie .
(The high total ratio —- almost 25% of the student body -- of
Xugoslav students, which is not a target. country, together with
tho non-satellite born studenta indicates an inubllity to recruit
the Kinde of students the University wae intended to train.) It
should also be noted thxt from the information available to us it
ia not poseible to determine vhat proportion of thos» listed aa
born in target countries actually left thea before Soviet domina-~
tion. T have the impression, which is subetantiated by the recruit.
ing miasiona of Mr. Royal Tyler throughout Europa and even Turkey,
that sultaLle candidates ara already extremely difficult to find,
Tt should be noted also that of the 64 outaldo scholarships given
to exiles in various Europaan Universities, 16 are for Yugoslavs,


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

~ SECRET ™

Socurity Informatio

~2=

B.. We have had -vartous raporve which indicate that the
morale of a mmbor of students at Strasbourg 18 not good. These
morale problema arise from a variety of reasons, smeng which are:

(1) They are not antivaly certain why ‘they are there
and just what the Amerioan sponsors intend for then;

(2) They fear that after they finish their education
they will be without Jobs;

(3) There has boan a steady and aystematic campaign
carried on by French Communtst ctudenta at the University
of Strasbourg to demoralize and disorgunize the FEUE student
body. In addition, several students are suspected of being
espionage agents,

4. Dr. Tyson te leaving for Europe on the 21st of Jamury to make
a thorough investigation and evaluation of the Free University in order to
answer these questions. We ao aiding him by having the officials of the
President's Escapes Program make available a completa inventory of escapees
who might be potential candidates for the Univoreity.

5. Dr. Tyson vas not the instigator of the proposals for a gymnasim
for the Froo University. Tho proposals were made and pushed by Royal Tyler
and Spenoer Phenix, The handling of this matter as fur as Tyler vaa conoerned
vas another exauple of hia difficulties in dealing with Phenix for, ao finan
elal officer of NCFZ, and having no position in the separate corporation,
that 19, tho Free University, Phenix has and is dealing with matters of

THoMas W, ERADEN,
Chief,
International Organizations Division

Attachnenta: a/g

IO/TONTC WED /cmm

Distribution:

Orig ~ Addressee sane .
Lee = Cro ; 7 SeCret ~
lec - Io-Toxre Gerurity LAr ceed

lee - RI :


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

Sigunlly INFORHATION

Si Seeenber Jes?

HEMCRALUUL FOR: De ‘UTY DEREC TOR (FLinsS)

VlAt Chief, Political and i

ycholorieaL

SUBJLCT: RCFE Cooperation with CIA

The cooperation oY RUFE in certain mitlers shou
to your atblention,s

vey Lotiie ad
lable ¢
wok

1.) In aiding tho ae
Sy CFE: (a) hay

ats (b)
Bulgardany and al .
fcending us complete extracts
h the tri

tokr

Soak bags
slansky trials and Will distribute a pa
in the satellite langayes to its exten
Li :

2. NCFE is 2
broadcast the su
fron Vienna, on Vie

sing bo the
ace of incomin
nA tuace Cont

3. In: viinion,

as; done some SE
us with skill and rr

“ib speed.

TO/TUNTe:
iy ibut.

Ur - rressee
2 ce - lo/tTonc
lee - C/i0

SEGHET

SECURITY INFORMATION


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

fait
Sc ee en

Shug ey
Chief, Cover Division, Flena/FI

hier, contact Mivieton, Mm

|
Crosace for Freedom

P-byse

19 necaaber 1952

HN5S9L

The attached extract fron the 12 peceabor 1952 igeus of

Fifth aruy's Domestic Intelligence teport is forwarded ae being

of possible interest to your office,

Eou
Enel: 1


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

pee PETER GE TES
"an § ™, CHEN approached the Head of ¢ Botre* CATAL
Dame versity Becurity Section, anda wiseted aren |
ea List of ali Chinese nationals attending the
University. Chon represented binsclr as a member
of the STUDENTS RELATICHS SECTION, COMMITTAE VOR A
FREE ASIA, INC., 105 Narket Btreet, San Francisco,
Californin. CHEN stated that hie reasca for
requesting ouch a list wao thot his organizetion
wae active in prouoting better relaticas between
Chinese nationals attending colleges and universities
in the United gtates and the American people. Hotz
Dame received for a second time a pasphlet fron the
COMUTTEE FOR A WREB ASIA cotitled, "Asia in the
VYorld Today’. Officials at Notra Daze have also
been contacted by the HATIONAL COMUTTEE FOR A FREE
EUROPE, 110 West 57th Streot, Hey Yor’ 19, Hew York.
This organization requested a list of all foreign
instructors and etudents presently instructing or
attending courses at the University. A business
card attached to a pamphlet revcaled the following
information: Miso Bllen M. STUDELY, 1223 Hast 57th
Strest, Chicago 37, Illinois, Chinsse Student and
Alunnj. Service, Chicago Area, COMOTIEES ON YRIERDLY
RELATIONS ANOROG PORBIGN SIUDEHTS, 23 Broadway,
Dew York 7, Hew York. There 1a no inforration in
G-2 files this Headquartera relative to STUDELY or

CHEH."

arc ating
Guar: ‘+


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

BLIP? Zo Fy

yr AUN

a

SeGae

16 Locember 1952

MEMORANDUM FORs DEPUTY DIRLCTOR (PLANS)
SUBJFOT 1 Edvard Wo Barrett and NCFE

REVERENCE 8 Your Note Lated 11 December 1952

T'm informed ty Admiral “Miller that tho matter of Edward W. Parrett
Joining NCFE as a director, was discusecd at an Fxecutive Comttea meote

ing a month ago.
No formal deciolon was nade because of considerable opposition 60
tho matter has been tabled.

THOMAS Wo BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations [ivision

ad
~y
oy

=x
7)
—


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

15 December 1952

Dear Archier

I much enjoyed our chance for a talk, and B1ll Durkee,
who assists me in the subject. we discussed, is tremendously
enthusiastic, as T am, about the possibility that you will
consider favoradly the appointasnt Frank mentioned,

Let me stata again what seems to me most important in
the facts under discussjon. The Job is of national and
world-wide importance. It can help achieve greatness, It
can endanger us all. It requires a man of imacination and
ideas but also a man of deep and thouxhtful responsibility

to discharge it well,

I should like you to cansider that T am at your service
at any time to sive you any facts you would like to have ar
any opinions for that matter. All of us here consider that
we would be greatly privileged to be able to help you if you

undertook tha job.

Sincarely,

Thomas W, Braden

Mr. Archibald Alexander
1430 - 33rd Street, Ny W.
Washington, D.C.


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

a. ; SEGRET .
Ne SEOMET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: = Gfteae -

and oath comment nuret
botora further routing.

una should be used in tha "TO" column, Under oach comment a fing should be drawn across shoot

Each ollicer should intial (check mark insufficient)
outing and Record Shee ba returned ta Rogistry,

FROM: NO, cy pop Boa _|
OATK
c 1l December 1952

COMMENTS

EORM NO, 51-10
FEB 1950

ee ircary (U8. oreenmee! eeintine OFFICE

SECRET-



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

July &,1952

Note: Nelson please deliver this to Allen.

To: Allen Dulles

You recently asked me for our views on Yugoslavia,
The enclosed memorandum 15 9 consensus formed from
all of cur key staff members, It algo meets with
the approval of John Hughes, I think this 13 a fair
ghater t of what we are doling to date and what our
views are. I hope this will be of some use to you,

Va
teen vid

Enclosure


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

:
i

opr a arene ane nee tae seen at a eegeeel

so

by radio or raise
telst re

people or

2. In.
wo sec no

arranconent

enlly, we
certain
Soviot

radio pro.

for a Free

3. AS

of democracy! 4
consistent and
from thelr agael
under which »
are retained |by:

4)

a3

aid
of

the
doneatic
os

Yura3
have he!

e) Fir

{bbe
of whe 7
1
sg far as
réagdn to
AU may
neve [ro OF

ae

ra

a y
An an:

"8

f
non=f oropadan

enigration
| GVENL Se.

'

Tre’

atud
i

to

plan to interf
Yugo

sees Ol No, Art
y With tug temes,ie eiogirg eft the

flings

on

ant aetiviblios coined
tually bonefied
rehdde

gar aunuheSb
curen

Lhag

d te the concepts

organiza c
tis entirely

al [reedaa

tiled

ether limltabions
some 69 Yuros

peu of work.

. Yusoslayv degak,
formation analysts,
auae of their

ze 31 Yusoslavg are
with the Bast
the

StL Eucopoan
Qarship siudan ty.

thie
and

Law kee,

vice 9 Yusgoslava

zZ2¥ press and oblher
tion of actual,
red to kere

ar of

the
divisions represen

supnarted ty the
he tutal exile J.

|



--- Page 12 ---
— LOL (6 77

boy T ~N tom gd

Seaucdy di fertation

; il December 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIRF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE

SUBJECT r National Comittee for a Free Europe

1. I would like to call DD/P's attention to this uncolicited
memorandun, It 13 additional evidence for my own observation made
to him orally that the work of backstopping NCFE ig being carried
forward in a manner which at least attempts to meet the challenge
of servicing the entire Agency in those aspects of NCFE work which
can be useful to the various Divisions of the Agency.

2, As he is aware, NCFE conducts an enormous amount of
research and other activity. I believe we can now zay with some
certainty that this record is being put to use by Washington.

v jbo (Gra Der
THOMAS W, ERADEN

Chief
International Organizations Division

Attachment
Memo from DC/0,SI dtd 26 Nov, 52

~~ SECRET ~

Security Infarmation


--- Page 13 ---
1000

STANDING FoR BaD, 4

Sf Pde{

use ,

Secunly + formation

Office Memorandiith ° UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

TO 2
PROM +
SUBJECT:

Shief, PP/IOD DATE: 26 November 1952.00

Deyuty Chief, Operations Staff, 0/81
Fulfillment of Requirement RDA-3345

1, This offices wishes to exprees its anpreciation for
the excellent cooperation provided by your TOHIC Branch In
connection with our requirement RDA-3345 concerning higher
edugnation in Poland.

2. The material which we received met our neod precisely
acd enabled us to close out thie requirement.

Pan CHANNING

C8I/JEQuigley:bm

Dietribution:
Orig and 1 - Forward ~~
- Subject file
- Daily rending file
- Chrono
- Sineel
Chief, SRD (W. Platt)

altel ood ot od

SECRET

Epcurity Information



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

eens ; . a Svqp

Phe en 4 too
muy tne ra eas
SOME TY '

11 December 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: University of the Saar

1. The University of the Saar was created on 8 March 1947.
It has four facilities -~ two in Saarbrucken (Letters and Law)
and two in Hombourg (Medicine and Science), Faculty members are
French, German, Swiss, British and Saarols,

2. A number of "institutes” exist with undefined relations
to the University though financed, as is the rest of the University,
by the French Government, and include a epecial institute for
interpraters, an institute for economic science, and a European
Institute. The Support of the French Government of this University,
aside from its merits, is part of the French attempt to Europeanize
the Saar,

3. The European Institute, devoted to European unity, is a
recent creation and is largely the result of the promotions of
former Deputy, Andre Philip. It was the European Institute to
which the Herald Tribune article specifically refers,

4. The University participated extensively, especially the
European Institute, in the European Youth Campaign. Some of the
Specific activities vere as follows:

March 1952: The Campaign cooperated with the International
Institute of the University of Sarrebruck in arranging a
meeting of young professors in the Saar and another mesting
of youth leaders, both to discuss European problems, Films
were supplied by the Campaign for both these meetings,

By the end of April, 25 youth organizations (practically all)
in the Saar were associated with the Campaign, During April,
May, and June an extensive program of discussion groups was
arranged in the secondary schools throughout the Saar. These
Broups were sponsored jointly by the Campaign and the youth
groups of the Saar. The groups discussed all phases of the
unity question but concentrated particularly on the Schuman



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

Plan dua to the economic position of the Saar in this
matter. Films and publications of the Campaign were used
in the discussions. 7000 students participated..

During June 1952, in cooperation with the Campaign, students
and professors of the International Institute formed a
commttee along with youth leaders to discuss the particular
problems of the Saar in a United Europe.- :

On March 27, 1952 the Campaign held a targe study group in
cooperation with the European Institute of the University

of the Saar. Students attended from Aix, Hambourg, Oxford,
Tubingen, Leyden, Nancy, Berlin and Paris. Lecturers were

provided by the Campaign,

THOMAS W, BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division

. Oe
1

SFcun dy po



--- Page 16 ---
14-00000

te

Sacurty Inlormation DD/P bh

“s . SECRET [oor 23]

10 Neve

r1gs2 a _-

MEMOWANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division

SUBJECT : University of the Saar

which I an enxlous for the addressees of the se tned and
copies of this memorandum to read, The writer of the piece has
avidently been mich impresacd with the efforts of t
dn the field of advancing European unity, end if the
he vives is en accurate one, it seems to me that we
more about this and (b) give consideration to provicing gone
support for Lt if it te good, It might even prove t+ ce the case
that this is a better and acre deserving show than eome of the
activities which we are currently eupporting haviag eintlar
objectives, I think we are generally agreed that 1t ig Letter to
wet in behind and give evpport and encovrayement to 2 movement
which has demonstrated the ability to atand on ite ww. feet than
to try to create and euetain an activity which would .<% exiet
but for our own contributions, :

y

2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of thia activity, etc.

fx)

FRANK G, WISHES
Deputy Director (FL

ce: C/WS (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE

SECRET

Secunty into mafia


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

Security Ielurnation

‘ SECRET [so

10 Huvember 19S2

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division

SUBJECT : University of the Saar

1. In the Sunday November 9 issue of the New York Herald
Tribune there was a rather full and very interesting account
of the purpases and objectives of the University of the Saar,
which I am enaious for the addressees of the original and
copies of this memorandum to read, The writer of the piece has
avidently been wuch impressed with the efforts of this institution
in the field of advancing European unity, and if the account which
he vives is an accurato one, Lt seems to me that we should (a) know
moro about this and (b) give consideration to providing sume
support for it if it ts good, It might even proves to be the case
that this is a better and mora deserving show than some of the .
activities which we are currently supporting having siallar . ‘
objectives, I think we ace penerally ayreed that it is better to
get in behind and give support and encouragement to a movenent
which hag demonstrated the ability to stand on its ow feet than
to try to create and sustain an activity which would not exist
but for our ewn contributions,

2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of this activity, etc.

75)

FRANK G. WIS!
Deputy Director (Plans)

ect C/WE (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE

SECRET

Security dalam vhoy


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

toed

SGT

Security Inforens¥en

10 Necember 19$¢

MEMONANOUM FOR: DEPUTY DERECIOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)

SUBJECT: Call by Spencer Phenix on DONCI”

1. Spencer Phenix will call upon the DNCI Friday for the
purpose of taking up with hUn certain questions among which are

the following:

a. A_gymnastua for the Strasbourg Untveratty. The history
of the gymnasium requast is ag follows:

On 8 August 1952, at a meeting of the PRC, NCFE
proposed capital expenditures of $377,500 for the
Free University in Exile, nic amount was placed in
a@ reserve fund along with other requested budret Ltema,
It was agreed that funds held in this reservo could be

released to NCFE by the DO/F in conjunction with the
pDp/A if in their J nt the submission of further
’ data Justified such xpendi tures.

On 17 September 1952, Spencer Phenix, for NCFE,
made a request for $47,000 to be released from the CIA-|
held reserve for the construction of a gymnaslun at the

Free University.

This request was rejected by the DD/P, He said he
would reconsider the request if further data supported

it.

On 8 October 1952, Mr. Fhenix made another request
supplying further data, This time the request was
reduced to $43,500. This request was also rejected by

the OD/P.

Orn 7
a rere x
tn 7
Security fet rection


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

eae
te
yey
lJ

ar Ay

ey Aiee™ ) Kee, re
an Vt A pee y Avy PV we
40” yor fe é OMe x fe a i
' ; i AAD GES on a e refers

4 the fact that the trustees have given formal approval

Pa P
Y \e Vy 5 ‘a

to the establishment of a jymnasium and thrt his under-

Lp y . standing of the reserve fund is that when the Board of

4 x 5 Directors of NCFE ask for the money, they recoive it at

. once. He says that there appears to be some mi.sunder=
| standing of this procedure, pointing out that the locus
of misuncerstanding ‘L3 in and around Frank W'o office."

». The Turkish Rroadcasting Station. Mr. Phentx intends
wv to raise this question as a basle policy matter, he having been
informed by us that while there is great enthusiasm for the project
and while the State Department has set January ASth as the date by
which VOA must oither secure agreement from the Turkich Government
or withdraw itself from conzidoration, the basic policy question of
io a whether RFE then moves in has not been definitively settled.
W Mr. Phenix would like to know definitely now whethor, contingent
rkey, NCFR can

proceed with the buildin

(ad \ upon the fallure of the Voles to gain entry to Tu
y of a Turkish station, ‘thio item, which

"

i

j wild probably be in the neighborhood of five milifon dollars, was
presented at the PRC meeting, at which time it was agreed 1t would

[be considered as a separate project at a later date.

ce. The Slansky Trial. Mr. Phenix is worrled about the

v
7
N statements in the Slansky trial indicating use of RFE by the United

x States Government to send operational messages. We have told him

that this secret arrangement was made with RFE by CLA men in the
uested. ‘Corrective

y }field, No approval of Headquarters was ever req
/ “} [eye have been taken in the FE Division to insure that action which
1 may compromise operational facilities does not occur again without
iitation with and approval of top authority of NCFE and

jprior consy

vy Svcra.
. y d. Barbara Bowen. Mr. Phenix is concerned about a little

works in the Munich office, who through some mischance of

‘f
Hy Hn girl who
. saveral years standing is still on the roles of this Ayency and draws

retirement pay, although her salary is paid by NCFE. Phenix regards

é K
this as a penetration though in fact Miss Bowen is a velued employee

of NCFE and has no contact with anyone from cla. We are trying to
regularize the situation by affording her the opportunLty of resign-
ing from the Agency or resigning from NCFE. :

e. Second Installation for Strasbourg University. The
trustees of the Free University in Exile have voted to create a
do: German-speaking free university in exile, provabiy to be located in
. the Saar. Phenix reports in his memorandum of December Sth that the

\\- v A DDL pas given Royal Tyler assurance regarding this extension.

é

rey

Syy y rh del
S; ue ne: Ay?
Cg Ae eS


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

ye

M4 \ 4 as suggested a9
y” oy b. that the Agen

Mr. Phonix requests arsnranuce that if Mr. Royal Tyler
French authorities at the Teer to create such a unive
granted permiesion, the Ageucy will supply the funds.
request has been made and
budgeted.

So formal
tig project of course haa set been

£. Names of p
with DD/P Notice No, 20-4 2}
to furnish the names of honed Army and Navy offleers employed by
NCFE. Mr. Phenkx 1s conceraed about the legal ramift ns of thig
atep, stating hla fear that wnat thls order implles fse zim is that
the monies he dispenses at Treasurer are government for H
been assured by un that tr 72739 of tho Avency-wide rersuest is to
inventory tnoss who are receiving Navy and Amay pensior.t and serving
in proprietary organizations. He hag also been assurst vist Army and
Navy penslonecs in hia orgavization will be exempt fron 2ny action
taken by the Avency on the “lem of double pay. He {= quite natur-

ally worrled nbout it.
r Phenix. In arguing

2. The Philosophy sf %
the above questions, and 6 Phenix brings to his expoort the
Ba

argument that he 1a not diz.eceing yovernment funds. Ze says that
once government funds reata uae 1248 Foundation they decome private
funds, This is no mere s4it~-aelusion for the sako of maintaining a
position before his conseLauce. Because from this corric+ion he

proceeds to argue:

(ya. that the Aven

case on

F cannot ask him to furnish such names
ve, or lists and records 22 any kind.

has no right to quary the -

of the start tirectors as to the expentit:

ye Lt \ funds once re.:eated by the Agency,
y
Wd ra ce, that the Avercy nas no right to intervene {2 NCFE
ve t ra affairs or to issue guidance or instructions after
\s iy funds have see pessed, Phenix modifies # point
vw” wy ad by volunteer: nat tha Directors are alwzys glad
\ t 2 { 1 to receive atrice from friends such as DEC.
’ . 3. Spencer Phenlx 1s 2 7007 man at his job and I e-cterstand
y the futility of arguing pri. 2e rather than cases, Wevertheless,

the Phenix pnilosophy, arg: ae it is to the staff ant ¢irectors
of NCKE, and stated to ug suenever possible -- frequentiy without
rélation to the tacts under ciscuszion -- often Untampe Fes by el
aaah is Wer ( Oe souls of o Ve Rey

Wee as

2
R, fe
ree Jo.
é < a ; SS BRALEM
Chief
te

r en
ees

International Organizations Division

24 Army and Navy Officers. In compliance
led on ®7 October, we hare asked Mr. Phenix

sa


--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

£

4 nert — 7
4 T pects Sos

, a SPC

fiecember 2, 3

eur Allen,

telephon: Inst woox you Sage
fbly be interested bn tse
worl congidering as Presicest
ted, do ave not mean
J not ta so until .

Ie WE Wee
peer thet hb
ReC.P.AN. ond
io cuceead Nin Miller.
ed ale nowe to anyone as yen +
further from you. As 1 us n dire te te
tulring to ein seme tine tris week and hapy eccertain

then whether he ldmgel? wowed some interest in t
never you do pot any furt information on this ;

tis KNOW.

Menntine, & munber of s5a6r names nuve been suggeste? zd
we L give thom careful fierution. Netur.lly we wllt
Jiseugs them with you befers veking uny definite action.

hogs


--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

e

wets

' ee

x

Deeenber 1,

Lary Hedsood,

ne encloced documents riy be of intevert to you end

are cent to you cor insorm: tion.

Edneercly yourc,

we

thing Paitin



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

Ucrtober Bl, 295%

the Josoph C. Grer
2840 Txcisad Drive, NF.
Fsstinrten 8, D.C.

Desr kr. Grews

ewe ees atisehed herewith you wil!
methoos tt heve been eaopteu by
the ssteilite stetes,

tind ec moot interecting s y ol the
the USK to attriet the minds of youth i:

Tt has long been mown that some such progren was being followed, ont

recently thet, det.i. has becone available.

endeu in this country to te.eh
estern demicrecy

nethods, efrorts ex
ecning or treeaom as reprecentea by w

contrast to these
peonle tne resi

It is aimo fe to stcte thet swe have teen relying soleiy cn en
ntimentrsi aversion te "communism", becauce no intelligent or eyctemetic

+

red thet will e:pture the minds of the youns secpLe
+t tne communist ideolss

s yet been organ
Ststes in the seme Jervent menner tt
an youth.

. ora iittle more care a yerv, in connection vith the reorgcnizaticon of
cea setivitics of the Divis sion of lnlellectuzt Cooperatiaa we by be

enlist the acsp of American intetlectuzrs — net the ints

“erence.

e@ very beginning i have been emazed to discover the deartn +
ar with t oe whieh engeres NC nterest —

trices ean. T was curious tc
out thy there rere so rew upon whom we coulc drew tor ae_p, so I started zn ine
Ti are now being cannited.

teschine of AL
ce degree | ut

rbor

story or ol covernmen
it nzs in Europe.
cover those enh

verified it Bi Shout any count. In Bre:
ron Curtcin it aes ich
sce the tides ov
centuries,
uences 2s
reimm posicy faces ereve

but our ine
countries no
tO emphesice inets
ebdoed end rlorec ¢
custea and in most r
develoms robes Genocre tic proces



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

nC. Gr

The Honorable Jos -2- October Fi, £052

dismues, and in one prrt of the vorid it 1s deepiv concemed rith the very
seetion of Europe cbout which r1l NUIT. activities revouve. Yet the Amcricen
puolie is preetiertiy Lititerete respecting Uris erer, doti ite and its
prerent. 1 know wasreoi IT eneck & resylt of ferred to.
When it is coupteted I sm inclinea to think tee re tainr,
perticulariy if we berr in mind tit thie i-rues et sto.e must be setiied3 that
they are a concern to thir country; end thet our neonle are nreetic y unirformed,
they now Little 1. onytidny rdout tac sisniciesnee behind what has

Lh oceur ev the next fer told beamise ther ave hed no

opvortunity to lerm the nistorie cir tb oak.

In this counsy tocry there are anproxtastecy ov colieses end univer
thee ofverins tour yerv courres ‘ot’ yo kendans te the deeelar ov fs de;ree,

mare does not ineluce the 575 junlov collenes ich ususliy corduct non=
derrec-grenting prope: yerrs an Leneth — corvoxsrtely t ivet two years
of tue treditionel four yeer proprim. es our inecuir } fene it dc alrerdy
spperent thet thore ere oniy cevers] dozen institutions in » former proun witch
ofter instruction in this ares, ond very Few in the astter. Moet of those which
do cover this orce ere the darver univer, ve the cours are verily

erccuate in cherecter end thus elective. 7 neces briey coverage is

on piiea in curvey courves, uut even these urn vet ena do not deveion the atien~
tion +t hdstoricslly thia part of the world nov deserves, ‘hen this curvey is
camp pleted a comprenensize report os the Lobe mede. Tt lo verer to
coilezes included in 2 litt curpiled o n Counce c ich
is tie “overall representutive ovgenization in ty 2 tion.

her peut

country 2

ion ot tae _Derecters to this situsticn beceuse it
public not only doer not krow whet
‘deonee of se abe tryin

Genersticn efter pene in Americn iiiitecete about the
he aeek ox knevledre of this

outside worad, What ve pre ciscove
eres will of course prove true of other parts ot the wLobe sueiss tee Par Nast
or South Arrica,

I um coiling tae ettent

2ongt um

%, cut remuniiy

- concerninre t

e denendent
ore avicent that ve
uree or ascistence. Tho
tnovesore

In our Division we veel this particusarls
2 help rom the deris sorid. The plein sect
cm not rely on Amerie n hisher ecue: tren so. go
tively vow indivicuels who have studied tis icn, ©
eliftied to eid uc in our efrorts, eve either too overbur
eon their tine beecuse they sre cueiiiieu, or: taey are
need to be re:iea on in an enterprise ac deliente ae the ore

x B
a
ea

Thece ure signs thet in some seadenic soc lities
is develovine. however, we notwiit 2 ner generation to emerge
even tnourca, under wortever a provrem ef triinine couad be



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

The Honornole Jose h G. Grow ~3- Oetobar BL, 1s?

correet the siturtion. The important vuestaon is whet enn we co wboub at ond
whet enelt we do.

As alrendy steted, tho dneutiy ebove mentioned prew cut of cur attonpte
to discover poople In éAmeriesn hisher eauertion who are qurlitied to heip uc.
We suspected thy wero nob nunerous, mut wo are cmazed ot the imal! numbor.
shall continue to try to persuade tava to help us, out tat weil acy be Jun to
mui dry alreudy.

ve

Cen thone assocluted with us dv aaytolny to emphosius this vituetion
etroncly enousth ds ec guapters co th 4 so.ethine wall be attucpted te correct
dt’) Sbviously this ty not en provden bart fees witain the neve OF NCKES tno
y univercltie , neeonde:y sels! md the cnosuauc
even veh with tae

probies concems all colbert:
tdetd douigmated av adult eduestior. gponslbility any
vovernmiant Liseit.

Touhntt appreciate your surgectionc, ond will gend you the Ying report
of this survey wien coupleted.

Cineueely yours
oo -

Leverhar ty

Enclocure:
"Youth in the Soviet Latenstte Statedm


--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

"lo vuly 1952

1. At the last Project Reviow Committee meeting on NCFE, you
askad that tho State Department be consultod on policy in respect
to National Councila. A roview by State has bogun. Moantime,
however, for your information and in order to enable you to anawor
quastions which may be raised by Meacro. Dolboaro or Niller, I want
to explain to you how the to Divieion is presontly handling exile

affairs.

2. The dittieulty in this matter arises largely from the
fact that three organizations are doing the job. Stato has appar~
ently found it necessary to deal directly with exiles. ‘CIA area
divisions, EE and SE, also doal directly with exiles for arva:
purposes. NCFE hands out tho monoy and tries to keap thom togethor
in National Councils. Out of this triplo play a large degree of
bad feeling and mistrust has arisen betwoen CiA and State on the
one hand and NCFE on the other. State, including Wally Barbour,
and the area divisions of CIA accuse NCFE of playing personal petty
favorites and of not keeping us informed. On the other hand, coop-
eration of State and CIA witi NCFE in giving poaitivo continuing
guidance in their efforts has not been forthcoming. In the past
no coordinated attempt has beon made to give "crE high-level’
overwall policy direction. Roelaticns have been personal, casual,
uncoordinated, and somotimes confusinge :

3 We have taken the following action to try to insure
orderly efforts to fuse or coordinate the various oxile activities

gonducted by .the three organtzationas

a@ This division has asked the cencerned araa divisions
to initiate plans for reorganization and wification of
each national council. ‘The resultant paper is then ©
coontinated with the proper authorities in State and a final

line is agreed upon.

d. This plan ds then communicated to NCFE and the
organization is asked for comments, ‘eriticisns and —
suggesticnss : :

ce After such’ are nade or agreed uvon, the paper
becomes the Poltey. directive which charts NCFEts course of
actions a


--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

d. NCFE then informa this dtvieton of progress baing
made and supposedly rejieutsa authority to depart from such

completed policy papers.

To date two such policy directives havo boen written.
Tue firstiwas a plan for the reorganization of the kumantan
National Council. It. was submitted to IICKR, and thelr
oriticioms and sugzestiona nave been ine orporated. ‘he
plan 1s now being oxocutods : .

The second was a similar Stata Lepartaent-CIA papor on
the rooryzanization of tho bulgarian National Comd trecs
This will be submitted to NUFE on Thursday, 10 July, and a
einilar course of action will be followede an

he T realize that thic will seem t+ you oc a sonsunat alimle
and obvious way of insuring coordination, but vie fact de that it
had naver bean done beforee I hope that 1% reoults inaz faw flaps
ag possible and as few occasions when people are running off in all.

dirnctions.

“Se A current case where people are running off in all
directions 1s the follsh situation. Tida broke at the very tine
wo were beginning work on a coordinated ClAeS3tatomNCFE paper. NCKE
has been operating upon the agsiaption that {£ a Polish Hational
Council 1s to be formed, all groupe are to ia rapresented. Unknown:
to NCFE, and in fact to may FE Division naz been sinking attempts
to unlfy two of the three maln froups by rolding conversations
with representatives {n London. Thare are a good many Chargea

and counter-charges flying ahout at prezeat on this situations Tho
man abroad is saying he had informe NCFE of wrat he intended to doy

and people in NCFE say he hadn't. W: are trying to strai
out, but the situation is illustrative of now the plan above
outlined can prevent such flaps.

co



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

28 Novonbor 1952

MENOQANPUM PORE DEPUTY BERESISR (PLANS)

| MRIECT Propoued Viait by Hobert Lang with 2ffiedals of CLA

EYRS ONLY Nezorantwa to GP fron Kieaard Selaa,

RIFERANCRI
Acting Calef, %perations, bifF, dated 25 Nov. 1952

1. ALtor consultation wWta Mr. Dorkee, ( would Like to make tio
following conwonts on Hr. Heias' wasorandua, Mr. Molns 1a correct tnat
Mr. Lang has had difiteulty. in dealing with CLA. Mr. ifelma is slao
correct if he undorstoad that inte etato of affairs 13 tha responsibliity
of Admiral Miller. (To Adpiral MLilortu resvonaibllity must ba added .
that of Srencer Phenix, Vieo-Freaident and Trvssurer.)

2. within and outside NOT, admiral Miliorta Coalings wlth tir. Lang -
ere based on tw attitudes: - . :

a. Miller's desire to iavo control of nis organisation by
having everytaing ahanneled through himy ond : .

& Hiller's desire to miintain an autonomous organization
watoh will accept overesli poldey mutdance from tha hip:nest
levols of tho government, tut wadoh will not allow cithor donie
Nation ly, or close contact with, CIA in order to discuss that
organisation's problens or to by Infonned of its vanenently

diverdored activities.

Iq tide conneotion, a -siatenunt by Adeiral wiiler in a iettar.
> Mrs Alun Valentine, until recently frusidont of the Canaltteo for.
Free Asta, te of interest: :

1 Aupuet 1952
"It was xood to see you, if just for an instant, in wWas’ington.

°For your private sar, [ might tell you that we won our battle
handa down. Merely tw confirma tils, our fascutive Hoard is having
linch in Washington with Allon and Hadell next. Nonday, Tris will
be a general talk, tut I an sure that policies will come u for
discussion. tappily, everything moans to be sailin: ‘along in good
shape.” foe . : :



--- Page 29 ---
14-0000



--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

wee gg
‘ 1

wed

fre lettor was written at a thai when Uw 17 fvision had. accteved
for CTA tts first detailed budzet from NCFE and wac furtnor arking a
mutuallty of relations between NCFE and CLs, uitimately defined in

| Mexorancua of Unders tandins , a@atod 2h September, alynod ty M. Te il llor
and Alien'w. Duiles.

Jt proves what at tne tine we only suspeatad,
that Hiller was calling on support from Valentino against ClAs.

3. Mr. Fanmix aid lang rosont Adziral Alller'n tendency for tignt
adaimiotretion. Poth ive earried-on a campalim within Nie to discredit
Killer. However, Hr. inenix, perhaps Lang, and aulvosut all of tno
respon:Able offfictals Robaek Miller in nis attitude towards CIA.
Yor oxaapla, dgenite repeated roquaste-by i7/ and as recontly as uuea
woeks avo by RCI pereonally, Millor naz refueod to tum svor to Cla a
liet of NCPE employees. iven a request by i221 to John hugnes hay foiled
to produco tris list. :

tn addition, Yr. Paani acta ag the Goren oxport in vcr,
cutting out Lang. mx alone han negotiated and dealt with tierian
niga offictale on y 7oeltion in Germany. Mer. Lang and Mr. fiends
have fundamental disputes about how iF! a German problems should bo
hendled. Fart of ur. Lang's cesirs for porscns) talks with offictala
£ itate crows out of tda wich to get baokiny for

of tac Nopartaent of
nto poeition.

lk. In a sense, uF? ia tha last NCFR bestion to bo nealad.
Mr. Leng's statenent taat he nas ruceived virwally no puidana, polley
or otngrwise from this aryanization te Largely « ploy on words.. iv. Lang
hae not sousht the guldener of mombern of hie own organization, umeh leas
tia giidance of CIA. wien the ID Ubviclon Wor ovar responsibility for
NCFL, the CIA intelitzenoe oupport unit, wilea esppitad RFF intormation
and ruidance, Wab abolished on Mr. Lang's advice tiot sion dnformation
and p:idance wro m lcnger necossary. EYE troadcauting policy is sot
dam in a handboox wnien nas becn thorounaly exuained and accepted by
CIA and from tims to time specific guidance nas teen given to hike HFE
accepts any materials and ;uicance ag sugrections, not orders. te bellove
Lanz te pntting all tie guidance tnore Lo to give, and tiat ae 1s looking
for tno kind of mivh poilay forecasting wides dees not oxist.—

S. These are te political facts of life tur the 1) Divleton, and
indead for CIA. Tia ID TAviston has attcmepted to deal witn wile eltuation
bys ) winalng tra’ evnfidence of the Lirectors and Division scads of
NCFF, and (2). maintaining friendly porsonai reiationship with both’

Adiral Miller andar. cpencer tnendx. Much proyress has been mado in
gaining knowledge of, and control over, tho activities. of NCEE.

Agida trom friendly dealings, our epecific concapt of gaining
control over NCFE as a whole, nov beon to pura and cnoouraye the tought
that NCFF should be operated o6 a whole. T:e present siparation and

uncoordinated activities of divisions, oup:claily KFF, while perhaps



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

“Je

neceosary. in the past, ia not satisfactory at present. Addod to tiie
hao been the there that tra must be a re-thinking of wat NCFE nag
done, to doing, and s:ould do tn tno future. Our efforta aro bezinning
to bear fruit. he oave found that tneso Lines nave struck a recponeive
chomd anong the working personnel of UCHR. In many wayo, tne current
RFF dirficulties-in Uermany -- unfortunate as they are =- nave been
holpfil, for they have made it clear to: evarybody o:naorned, Including
Mr. Lang, that re-trinking of objectives and taciniqueg based on eop-
orative offort by NCH and clA as a whole 4e vital ££ the orgariegation

fa to do ita Job effectively. !

6. To reformlate our own and NCYE 9 ideas, tna 19 Diviaton has
been antl 10 carrying on diecussions wits the offictals and working
nerronnel of NCFKE. In some of these diueussions, ur. Francis B. steveng
of the Stata Desartaent has been a diroct participant. ine {9 Civision
has aloo ‘been omloring tnese mattors wits officials of CIA and tie

Department of State.

7. nooo discussions have covered a wide variety of cubjecta whie!:
oan gonerally be dencribed as toliows:

a What Le CP's place ug a whole in American valiey toward
the satellite nationa; what is Amortean polley; what modifications

are likelyy . .

be How oan Herr, eepoctally the Tivision of Yadera liclationa,
oontridute mrs effectively to beyerolcrtical and politica: warfare,
not only for effects behind the Lron Curtain but in tus rive borld?
vor example: Yow can NCE Securely engage tu furtior activities in
the pattern of tte svecessful actions at tan Unlwed Nations “lave
Labor Hearings und the Intom tional ficd Cross seetings at joronto?

Ge uld HCKY continue to c-peort enigra couneiis, or snould
Som® other technique be duveloped wate: can anable Lt to make nore
effective use of enlgres for poyensloyierl warfare purposes?

- ds How can the Reasearch and i ublications Division, the Livie
sion of Intellectual Ccaparation, and tuc “rea Univeral ty boot
sortribute to these efforts? :

@ Is NCFE effietontly organised? what, for exmiple, is tao
affoot of the Mvision of !siirea Kelations! daallngo wita enlgreg -
on tie position of KFF in Eurose, atc.

f How tho foraidale rosoares and infompation resources of
NCFE oan securely be used by CIA. : . ,

g. ‘low gan NCE be goarad more closely to the activities and
meeds of CIA? ”

SPEND TW dra



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

ole

h. Analysis of kedio Pree Europe's effectivenoas, programming,
political position in Garnany, now AFF can ba used tc mpport CIA
overations specifically, alternate brondcasting sites for HFE ate.

. 4. HYow.can Clas gives spectfie guidence to HFEf What kind of
informition 4s wanted, for exsiple, by RFE? What studies and means
of overcoming Jamming can be made availablo t) RFF? How can Anerican
and ierition legationo 1n the aatellites best provide guidance and
information for RFE? .

7. Tarso are toma =f tte toples being discussad. In a few weeks
the time will come in my opinion when the main outlines of thia comaon
thought will be sufficiently clear co that tne working, officials of NCFFE,
ineluding Yr. Lang, should meet wits officials ot' cra and the Dennartmoent

of State for two main purposesr

a. A briefing on U.5. polley toward CIA operatinns berdad the
Iron Curtain eo that trace officials will see olearly the way in witch
they are expectad to fit ints total J.5. efforts, and the manner in wi:ich
they ehovld operate. :

b. Analyze and contrib: te, in come detali, to the main Lines
of tha: zht developed in orter to arrive at conmrehensive worzing poliey
for HCPE, and detailed methods of its cooperation with CIA.

8. For tm forecoing reasons, I sugzvest Unt Mr. Lang doea not,
at this tiac, cone dom tw meet tre CIA. offictals ao sugvested by
Mr. Hele tut that Mr. Lany*z yielt be a vert of the Io Plvisionts
overeall effort t gain working control over NCYE au briefly outlinad

above.

TiS:

International Orgazizations Division

IO: TON C:¥PD/eh

Orig - Addressee (thru CPP)
1 oc - AC/OP/DD/P
2-00-=-GR-

1 co - 10/MNIC

l cc - GO -

lee -



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

ae et Ae ee
. - oe - . : ce .

(" a

7 eecuriiy i .
v . ; eee WAM 26 1952

eae

Vu

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, IO Division

SUBJECT! Fomation of a Unified Rumanian Refuges:
Organisation oe
REFERENCS: Hesorandun to 10, Subject: Current U. S. Kttenpt

to Form a Unified Runanian Refugee Organisation,
dated 12 September 1952 .

1. Tho NCFE nexotiations for a united Rumanian refuseo organization
appear to be culninating successfully. Although a nunber of differences
have been resolved, a few controversial matters renoin, These points
have been discussed several tines, both with the !CIf ard the refurees,
but are of such immertance as to warrant special attention and exphasis
at this moments .

: 2. The sost urgent problem, the one xost likely to nullify the-

| recent efforts and cause further difficulties, is that of Gencrsal Fedescus

“The problen is to find a position which the General will consider suffie
ciently important for him and which we will consider sufficiently innocuoss

: te ensure that he cannot interfere with the Comittee. A najority ef tie

: refuses are in accord on the necessity for placing limitations of activ= -
ity on the General. for operational reasz::s, we require such Liaitations. -

The existing good relations between the NCFE and the General should bo

, utilised to persuade the General that a passive, honorary position 1s the

; only way to cuard his health for, by implication, later action. Fe must

: pe made to realise that he is not veing relved but is being saved. If

"he cannot be prevailed on to adopt tiie attitude, he will have to bo told

. } with complete frankness that his obstructicnisa cannot ce tolerated, that
: he will have'to re-cain nassive outside, rather than within, the new orfan-

: ination or risk losing the agsistance he now receives. Tne first nethod

' 4s the more dosivable, and 1t, 19 sucrested that the General's secretary,

| Barbu Niculescu, te invorred of the NCrE's intention and warned of the

: latter step if his cooperaticn is"not obtained in expediting the General's
acceptance of a rassive role. Niculescu sheule be dealt with quite frankly .
ond informed of the consequences, to him as well as to the General, if he
does not cooperate. :



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

3. In regard to paracpraph h of reference nenorandum, the matter of
the Counc!] eapnarently nas not seen discussed thorougily with the refureess.
The Lsportance of an or:anization for tha masses of refugees, controlled
vy the rxecutive Comittes of 1 “17, anould not be underestemated. . The
workin: eo iieaions vrovosod oy Visolanu (burepean Federation Woverent,
ry, rusiicationa, etc.) shoulca ue drawn fran the Council rather than fron
the refuyees at larce. Ferticr, there are many refireas Ser whom the
Commitioe nay no need, ror we at mresent, who desire to nertt einate ina
refurvee oryenization. ‘hat the desifa to belong to so:neteiny: Le particularly
atrony, aion;; the younrer refugces, i.e. tiose cf potential operational valuo,
‘ds evidenced Wy the nuaber who have affiliated with the Lron Guard, other
fanatie orpanisationc, student, and professional srourse MKerbershin: should
be f. to larpe mmcers of referees (exclusive ar burdecore Tron Guards,
ts, eriitinals, etc.), and should be manifested by menbershin cards.
To stren mn the sense of partictyation small annual cues could ie required
i" nto thse ComeLttee Kewspaper (widen weuld be 6 dized so
that sucecriptien.cost would not we excesaive). The forvai, of trig
Council is coryscered perticularly worthwhile since it offers a way to draw
worthy refueea trom leas cestracte orraniaatians and te develop their use-
fulness fer tho futures : :

With respect to the secret fund in the pos.esuion of cir. Cretsianu
an hational Camdtteo, we do not esnvicer that an issue shovld
Aiscursing ane eentrol of this money. EKoth *taolenu and
Cretzianu have asreet te account fer thn funcs 1 to anditing of the books.
It fa rosatcle that a finarce committee, consists 2€ Crebzianu and one or
two otiers, will ve awointed in the new orgarisation to handie tus sub-
sicdies and ta audit the secret funds

‘Se Merorte that Gafencu hag develonnd an intransixent attitude toward
the new comwittee have buen received frou severrl s ces. £6 Mrs Lolbeare
to in Zurope ani is a triond of Cafencnts, it is sa:posted that he attennt
to cetain avain vatferea's cocperaiion with the curren: negotiations.

6. It ia requested that this memorandum io forwarded to the CHE so
that the inforsation say co of Lasediate asuistance in the nerotiations
Planred for this week.

JOHN £, RAXER
Chief, SE


--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

" Attachment

26 Noveaber 1952

HRMRANDUY FOR! CHIFF, FOLTTICAL. AND PSXCANLOGT CAL. WARFARE oe
. a
SUINICT Rosulte of debriefing of Ceoch Defecter *

REFERENCE s Meno fron Bob Joyea 17 Nov. 32, attac: ning Stato Cable
fron Frankfort #913

1. I am sure Fob Joyce will upon refloction not allow hineelf to
be troubled by. the remarks cf ono Czach dofector to tis State 2 Departrent :

Nicsion in Germany...
2. These are tne facte:

a. Radlo Free Europe has been xoet careful in its handling
of the subject of liberation. hay navo not in the pact nor do
tney now allow anyone to speak on the air of "literation now*.

b. Attached for your information 1a a detailed guidance on
thie subject issued by Kadio Free Europe «- poltey whien governs.
ell of their broadcasts.

®. AS an oxanple of now careful kadio Free Europe 4a on
this mbjeot, Jus did not use Mr. John Foster Dulles! rocent
controversial campaign eposeh on the subjcot of libesration
bocanse they believed that oven toouga it was news and a state-
ment made by a rosponsitlo Averican, it migat be micinterpreted
behind tao Curtain. .

3. ‘t think that Radio Froe Yurope nag maintained excellent disci-
pline on this subject. You can imagine that it is under considerable
preesure from Iron Gurtain andyration to take the line of oarly rapa
for liberation in the srospect that in sane way Anerican pubile opinion
and world opinion night be thus comitted to a policy of literation ty

arned foros,

lh. I would be glad to have you chow t:de mexorandua to ur. Joyes
4f£ you care to do 59. He should know that everyone ls constantly on
the alert and carefully watching the problen # ta raieua.

THOAAS 3. BRADEN
Cideft :
International Organisations Diviaion

Soecial Quidance .
dtd 2 Sopt. 52

CLOtwPD=TWB/eh lees . 16/toxre
Orig & 1 = Addressee 1 ce -CL0 Lec - FI



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

BYE ONLY 25 November 1952

“MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, P & F

SUBJECT s Talk with Hr. Robart Lang

1. I spent an hour and o quarter in New York on Friday,  .
Uk Novenber, with Hr. Robert Lang of Radio Free Europo. Tho major
portion of this time was devoted to a briefing by Lang of tho NCFE
structure and the position which RFE occuplos in it, includin: the
philosophy of RFE operations, Lang gave an fapressive performance
and struck ma on such short acquaintanco os an individual of ability,
Judgmant, and energy.

2. Mre Lang made quite a point of tho fact that his opuration
inside NCFE Lo virtually independent. He Intimted that he receives
no guidance from the Presidont or other officers and has exponded
conaiderable effort;in the past seoin: to 1t that an dron curtain ia.
kopt between RFE amd the top command of CFE. Ho said that if RFE
had not developed and expanded according to a philosophy which it
itself had originated, it would haw got nownere and vould still be
frustrated by whot he kept referring to asa thn "old State Department
line" as exemplified by the views of Deitt loole, Fred Dolbeare,
and others. He then pointed out that-ho had received virtually no
guidance, policy or otherwise, from this orvanization. Also he
claimed to suffer from lack of contact with'us. iio statod that when
ho saw Mr. Dulles o week or 50 ago, it was tho first timo he had .
talked to anyone in authority bere in auny a moon. As far ag
Kr. fraden and co-spany are concerned, be said that they dealt largely
with Admiral ittllor and his immediate staff. It was cloar that ho
would prefer to deal directly with Washington. He also feols in-
hibited by the fact that be has to cajolo Admiral [iller into per=
misaion to como to tiashinzton. i:0 cited as evidence an incident re-
cently vien he felt obliged to ask a friend in the State Departuent to
intercode with adatral Miller to Perait b him two como down hore for

consultation.

3. There waa nothing hitter or frustrated in Hr. Lang's re-
marks, Father he struck mo ag an individual who was ‘discussing the

facts of life, be Miat they may.
he I told him that 1 would discuss with you the wiedon of .

having him como down here for a day soxs time in the next week or so

: See
f SEU.



--- Page 37 ---
14-0000

SecRtT
gieumy a

in order to spend a couple of hours around a table with Trecy
Barnes, Al Ulmer, ric Tisza, and other appropriate individuals, at

which cession he would have an opportunity to got forth hin problema :
and invite whatever assistance ve as an organization can provide.

$. After you have road the foregoim:, I vould Like to talk —
with you and Hr. Praden for the purpose of pussing on Li/v's reactions
to my suggestion, —

o nicheby terna

Acting Chief, Gperationa, DDP
ees Chief, I0

Ste
Sey en


--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

SECRET | bor 1387. |

Security Informotlert a

2h November 1952

MEACRANDUM FOR? Chief, International Orpanisationa, Diviaion

SUBSRCT a Or. J. H. Retinger

“2. Please note and return to Mr, Dulles the attached lettor
from Dr. J, 4. Rotinser who has eaked Mr. Dulles for an appointe
ment during his vielt in Washin;-ton betwaon November 25 and 26,
You will also noto that Mr. Dulles does not propos to answer the
letter nor (presumably) to rrant the appotntnent. I aa not sure
whether you aro faailiar with the backround on Retinger ineluding
our past difficulties with him, re you ure not, I think it te
important for you to have a look at the files which inelude
numerous Liters of derogatory tnformation concerning Retinger and
hia doolared hiwtility. tovord the National Committee for Free
Europe. We went to the mat wlth our British friends in. whet 7
believo proved to be a auccessful effort to have Retinger renoved
from the key position which he held on the so-called McPillan
Committee. (You are aware of the fact that the british servica
ie now working with the Hed llan Committes ,and 1n support cf 1t.)

2. Retinrerts position ns Secretary General of the FKuropean
Movement =~ aa evidenced by the letterhead == is probably known
to you. Breauré of our interest in this notivity, it da tarortant
for you and the appropriate members of your staff to be fully on
notice of Ratinrer's connection and past performance, I could not
bo very enthusiastic alout or too hopeful for the production of
genuinely constructive results -- In keeping with Policies of the
United States Qovemment ce of any organization of which Retinc-er
would be the: Secretary General, To the extent that his loyalties
can be daternined, it is clear that they duo not run toward the
United States, ; :

(Signed) FOAUK OQ. WISHEI
FRANK GO, SWISHER .
Deputy Director (Plane)

Attachment (2)
Letter to DDCI from pr. Retinger
dated 15 November 1952,

ect DICT

psec RET

Sees ity Infartaation


--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

SECRET Jor 2 12ZLe)

+s Semieey Information

—

21 Novemter 1952 :

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizationa Divicion
SUBJECT : Leland Etowes I&S Approval of NCFE Kequest.

1, This memorandum will record the understanding arrived at
dn a conversation todyy with Colonel Edwards, Chief of 1%5, and
reported orally to Mr. Durkee by mo. Admiral Miller telephoned
me today with an urgent request that we give our authorization and
approval to the use of Mr. Stowe for a further period of 81x months
in the capacity of a consultant to PFE and not us a reguler employee,
This was the same basis »%. was finally approved for the firet pericd
of eix months which 49 about to expire.

2, In discussing this matter with Colonel Edwards 1 refreshed
hie recollection as to certain features of tho original arrangement, -
ineluding the fact that Stowe is an ¢x;remely capable individual
who has attracted other good people, notably Russell Hill, into the
effort, and who has no gerious security rapo against him. (#4 is
not regarded as a loyalty or eccurity risk bul rather as a eource
of pousible embarrassment in view of certain earlier writinys of his.)
Admiral Miller informed se and I passed on to Colonel Edwardz the
fact that there have teen no questions: or flurries of any kind
concerning Stowe and the further fact that he has been dotrg a very
effective. job. Colonel 2éwerds approved from a security standpoint
the continuation of-Mr. Stowe as a consultant to NFEZ for « further

period of six months, :

3. I requested Mr. Durkee to 80 advise Admiral Miller at the
earliest possible momert. I assume he has done 60. .

@

| FRANK G, WISNER
-Daputy Director (Plans)

ces C/PP

SECRET

Security trig:


--- Page 40 ---
14-00000

3

: : on,
SECRET :

(hen Filled tny

DOCUMENT TRANSFER. AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT UF DOCUMENT a OOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION

RI FILE NO.

ac FE . , D. DISPAJCH OW SOURCE NOC. SYMBOL NO. |
N BRitiS 4 Now - (Se

7. SOuRCL CHYPTONYM| @. OATE UF INFO. |B. EVALUATION

3. ANALYST Y @. OATE PROCKSSEO 10. O1SSCMINATFD IN

DOCUMENT OLSFOS 1 TLON

7 GHOSd BEFLMAED 10 tid FILE 1). TwaNsrERACD TO
: RI FILE NO.

PERTINENT INF ORMAT

‘or & bl Ts agian

19,
. FIGE THES FORM IN PIE NO. > | |

bony B67 use recvious corttone. SECRET t704en

e-sr


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

hr. Erutus Contes

NG. 211952

MEMORANCUH YOR: Chief, Cover ivisioa
Terur FI Plans

SUBJECEs NCEY Paployment of Mr. Irvtus Coste

l.- Tris 18 to advise you that, die to delay in our onerationa,
the NCEE hes teon requested to provice interin camployment. for

2. ve-have heen informed that the NCFR/M5C hes offered Mr. Coste
a contra or the 6 ration of a study on Antepration of the Ruuanian
with the icviet econ However, ln view of oubject's knowledge .of the
refugee political oituabicn and intere + in pronacanda measures, a rosl--
tion utslizing this backround wonls Le secre ach ntageous to the Cre
and this fAvision than the proposed econgniie Bsbucye

3. it is requested that nrcrozed, emnloynent of Subject be
Giugussed with the NCFZ and that we forvied of the nection tacune
Trie udvigclen 13 prepared bo reluberuc CFE for Guvgect!s galery
if such: ie desired. Lt is underated that dvsject will continve,
duving the cetiod of UCKE empleynert, 19 perform for this vivision
certain assignments wich will net 4: arf. reteith his KCFE worke

le four ap,roval of tha proresal for such eanloyment La requestede

ce-5/Mciewson/xp (15 love 1992)

Distributions ..
Crige & 1 - :ddres:ies
1

2
1-10



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

X99 G9 SETH

13 Noveaver 1952

EEVORAUDUM FOR: DEPUTY TIPECIOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: Conversation with Kr. Jan Nowak

lL. Ab your request, I nad a conversation today wil!
Nowak, head of the Polish radio desk of KFE in Kunich.
that you did not get to see hin. Cur conversation reminded me that ~
our work is terribly important, wiiich is a nice reminder on a busy
afternoon.

2. I say "important" because Nowak reviexed with me the letters

he had received fro listenars in Poland and these, toxcther with nis
own enormous enthusiasm for the work he is doing, reminded:me that our
long days in Washington have an effect on tie lives and hopes of people
far away. Nowak, wno was in the’ Polish resistance during the war and
on one of his three escapes from Poland at one time spent several
ks in Switzerland where he had made contact with your representatives,
later worked for the 35C and he pointed out that at no time during the
war was he given to feel ty the 23C the sense of responsibility and

ission whiea he fecls in his job in RFE. He said he was told wien
Re was brought to RFE that the responsibility for the programs was his

ad that if at any time prograns went on the air widich wer: irresponsible,’
then he would Lose his job Ho says that «nen he has questions which
he thinks might influcnes United States policy, he confers beforehand
with Griffith and the Anericans in Nunica, and sometimes ar:ments ensue,
but he feels, and I am certain he feels sincerely, that ho has an equal
snare with Americans in a great effort to carry the tr vath back hone.

I say "terribly" important because Nowak, like other exiles,
out loud how long our work can continue to have an impact. He
mself convinced that every Polish soldier is a potenvial ally of
ast but ne wonders, and makes his listener wonder, how ‘long we can
axcect this sympathy among a rising generation for which the past is

nexorably fading.

he Nowak made one point whica I an sure he intended for your
ears, that ne was afraid that "certain peovle in Germany" " Who had
contacts into Poland might lead nis friends benind the Cu rtain to



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

;  «&
NY secur

betray themselves unnecessarily and tragicaliy. He said that he had
heard that the people had promoted beni: Curtain a wiispering
campaign amo the Poles at tia time of the cent elections to the
effect that the elections wera to be postns: He seemed to think
this an unnecessary rick for tix who too% ¢. in it. He also said
that he had been anprozened by thesa same fp: who asked him to urge
the Poles by broadcast to eross out the ne he Communist candi-
dates when they voted. He learned only later, :¢ said, that the system
of voting at the lass tion was sucn i order to cross out
candidates it was nece ry to step out of taliot box and co it in
the open before witnesses. He had in any event refused such cugsestions.
I got the impression at he feels somo of cur people are a litcle
immature. . .

Ooh
Is FD ee

t
As

5. I liked him. AsI cay, seolng hin mate me proud of wnat we
are doing.

International Organizations Division



--- Page 44 ---
14-00000

SPORDY INE age

SECRET NOV

MEMORANDUM FOR! Chief, International Cryanisations fivision

SUBJECT! | pn/P'e Kenorandun to you 30 October 1952 entitlod,
uo 7 @Nationol Comaittee for Free Lurope, Ri, and Rolated
Mattere”

1. You will be interested to know, I an sure, that itr. Wisner's friend,
Mr. Georescu, hag recently been most helpfl. ‘Through his efforts and the
cooperation of Jim Pekich of Sz European Divislon, I believe that HC7E is on
the threshold of a unified Rumanian National Council. :

2. I'm in entire agreemont also with Mr. GQeorrescu's obsorvation on
the personnel soteup within NCFE. As you know, Hre Dolbeare is concerned
about his role. He is the first to admit that his strength is ebbing, and
that ke should retire. I think it mist be arreed also that tr. Lelbeare has’
dona a splendid job, a Job that wovld have beon, and will still be,
for a man in tho prine of life. .

I have discussed this problem in confidence with Francie Be Stevens.
As a result of my inquiries about a possible successor to Mr. Dolbearo, Hre
Stevens suggests that Mr. Nathaniol. Penistone avis io a person erirently
qualified to do this job. I would to intercated in knowing whether MP.
tisner knows thie man. ,

3. I believe also, Hr. Georgescu's misgivings about Mr. Yarrow aro woll-
foured. In the last two months, Hr. Yarrow has teken an increasingly prene
{nent position in Mr. Dolbeare's Division, as @ result of Mr. Lolbcare's
physical inability to do a Ml time job. lire Yarrow is blunt, and inclined
to be dictatorial. He has a preditection for direct action in situations
that rightly call for finesse and caroful development. For these reasons,

{n addition to the fact that he is of Russian extraction and. speaks witha .
heavy accent, I om convinced that he should -not replace Mrs Polbearee In
py opinion, under the right Leadership, Mr. Yarrow could wontinue to make a
valuatle contribution to NCFE's dealings with emigres as an adminiatratore

I believe that such o solution is politically possible, for NCFE
4n this phase of its activities is going through a period of groping and
painful reorientation. TI hope that the start wo have made in working out a
re-statement and a. re-direction of activities within Liviaion of Emigre Re-
lations will provide a program of positive projects which will supply anmund=
tion for psycholorical warfare, beth behind the Iron Curtain and in the Free
World. Such a progran will call for.an efficient adminietrator versed in
exils affairs e= a position for which Mre Yarrow fa well qualified. -Under
the political leadership of a person of Fr. cavist caliber, for direct dealings ©
with, exigres, I feel that the Livision of Enigre Relations will be able to
clear up preasnt inefficiencies and contribute effectively to NCFE's ove

nissicr.s :

SECRET 9 wnuuzar e. runes
. Chief, I0/TONIC -


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

= SECRET - ve tte Le
© fenaity Information baer -. 7
en
° / RY cototer 1662
“ MEMORANDUM GH Chtof, International Orpe-tvattons Division.”

tational Corsaittee for Free F

OPO, TT, and
rointed matters. _

SUNSTCT s

1. This nesorandina fa to infora yuu of a wor of itema wich
have recently core to wy attention and to witch } think yo. afold
tive ¢ ficeration and toke necesrary acticin, Ve C. (ica) Ceorgencu,
who dy anold friend ena a very heloful eeultant of tency,
ceme to see ne the other evening, and discussed certain aspects of
MO.) Fiea pes teen working on both ffections of (ee iacantans in an
effort to bring: then topethor, anc T think thet Lig critieien fs, on
the wi.vlo, constructive. fic staler that entirclr apart fra; the quea=
tion of factiamulis: axene the Rumanian crows sad other national
groupe, there la the ;reatest amount of inefficiency at the deek level
Of SCrt.. Tris results from Eaving too nany porlitelars and diplomats
in positions of muthority and too few peremes °f ary practical expert-
ence; too ouch tine is conmosed and too much af the veneral effort —~
yoea completely to weste ar the renulit. of endless politicsl discus=
sions, much of it entirely theoretical. Tt would te dastratie to
review the entire versocnal roteup within NOY? at an carly cate and
place tn char;e of the varfous denks fncividcals sho are canstie of
adainiatering their people and wunntng: a rote
te advised and. asristed ty the politicians end
, would have the responsability for pettiag
hice told ne very eo fide: ontially that he thowh
never been otrore, vas setting: weaker and weaker, and he voleed sase
alarcivinga about Persie Yarrow. {io safd thet be aces not Krow
Yerrov at all well, but hea tiy dnoress{on fro: cthers thet Tarrow
{es bighehandad and dictaterfel bt. ide teeli-cs tiat its tacks
round if not particularly sutteble for a persan sho in to hold a
popttion of wo such responsibility In dealing vith Southenscern
Luropean naticnals,

: 2. I think T hove already told you that \icter -icael, the : :
writer of the hottile pieces wich you Lrou, ht to cy attention, .
complained sbuoct the treatewnt that he recetved oro: Finis verry, who

be taid had led hin to beltevo t he wat soins to te called. upon i
for advice ond assistance to the Arency. Thera vere no follows va
ups and Liesel vor stifed. bicerel also singled cut for sharp ‘ ot
‘attack Captain Gintcer, vio he said he Lolieved was in a hiph
Plece in CJA and who was a thoroughly tncoapetent end undesirable

nl

SECRET

teremation


--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

red to Cindper as a tt, too Nick" oe whalevor
‘yo also cotd tet Siniysr is a “prauuo.
leelended Ifthe fonel exyoresied hime
salf ag tal oyed that a porsea Uke Tf frer whould bs used by
the 2, ency while a-pe:rson Like hinsel! ake Iprored.

individcal. Ho raver:
that ne 4n Prnoklyne

Bt work bet anes his

3
cf the

peretytse ate ct wea fot  eteestncd ts te a
be Ab the blecetor 1 etalf mot ning he 0, ain
reteat the matter of our using, the ac crfear, Lerita, © Fear. sede tt cet for

wit HORT,
benefit of Ure
vo *andation hava
2 tu UB Bic to arke

cover att ponsibly Pund-ratein
Cs and the “reedos Crusade, ©
vullve that the clrectors of tha Exe

met revently and agreed to provide a
availatle to us their sponrora.ip, pood nent, ofc, Acrarding, to

the Sirector, Gr. “an Mryor has been pris rast ly ronpons ible for
this i Anthrop Aldrien ed uttrey Uroply were te
sore extent instrune: ‘tale Tho cxecutive ‘ecretary of the Fourdation,
whe was schoduled to vioit Yashinugton on 1D tctoker, will ke em: ing
dan sucetine srortly after Vovecbor be. $8 thet t “a Blould be
ready with concrete propor ae an to the senner 17 ich we would
like to seko use of the Foundstion and ite various afneto. “@
would, of cournu, want to coor iter te devaloped in thle
Connection with the work thet nto uo “or
the Crusade this wear. After neve d sfe7s $t wen arreed at the
meeting that the An rican berttae Fu might Le browit in
either dur'ng tha rorticoning crusade cease! or fomedlately tt sre=
after, cevending spon eiet ahould apo: te mcet desfratles. At
the very least we snoild use tre To wr fCY COVEN TDOCeS,
stnes by advertising the supvort af this now orgscizetiony
ve wela fein a very solid end subatant{al nt of ettritetivn eb
the seurey of funda. Ve =
Crvsace or directly into one or toth
ve Arericen Keritare Poundattin.  (Thde woul
ecut with the Treasury : rtrent asticrities to furrantes
“st any ecbsoquent investiretion.) Firaliv, the Crusace might
sueted in future years under the Fecseriead of ard ir te

: The 4, shots in the
Foundation vould not want to work Sat “furtera! wing ticopelves, and
they pave been assured thet ve world not atx U.en to ao 80, It
would te up te us to provide the s anc wlts of the effort.

é

“4 pas uncertas

InP
recty Lirector (Plana) ©

cer cpp
SECRET

Security Information


--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

“MEMORANDUM POR: MK. THOMAS W. BRADGN

-sRET SECURITY LNFOMMATI OA

29 October 1952

International Organizations Division

SUBJECT: Change of num of Baltic Panels

With referonce to your memorandum of October 15,
1952 concerning tho deaire of the Baltic Panels to
change their nanuey to the Commi tteo for bree Estonia,
Latvia, and Lithuania, respectively, I wish to inform
you that the Department perceives no reason to oppose
such a change.

It 1s suggested however, that NCO insist that the
new namea.for the Bultic Panels be precisely those
mentioned in your memorandum of Jctover ls. it is our

feeling that if the panels-wure to be called National .

Committous, for exumplu, confusion might arise aith

-Pespect to other organizatiuns trom these countries

already in existence and the Impresaion might be
created that the comnittees are of greater political
Signiticance trun we alsh them to be.

HOLERT P. JOYCE
Policy Planning Staff
Department of State

SBECRDY SECURITY iNPORMATION

eh ert aT ae Renee ER Aan AUR Gein ASAT Ao


--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

an SECRET _
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Officor dasignations shouldbe uead in the "TO column. Under each comment a line shu!d ba drawn across thaat
and each comment nurnbored tu correspend with tha father in the “TO” column, Each officer should initial heck mark insaffeciant)
+ before further routing. This Routing and Record Shiset should ba rtuenod ty Ragistey, . .

FORM NO. St-t0 SECRET


--- Page 49 ---
14-00000 _

29 Octobur 1952

MEMONANIUM FOR: DEPUTY DURE CIOR (PLANS)

SUBJECTs a Crusady for ¥roecom

1. widlo in Detroit yesterday, £ talked with Charles Moore, who
1g the Director of Fublic Relations for Ford Motor Company, and also
with Henry Ford. I was morely paying a friendly call on Hoera ‘but he
raised the matter of tho Crusade and acked Kr. ‘ord to como in and
talk about St. ‘They are both vory unhappy with Hr. Walsh, who is .

Admiral HAller's man on the Crusade and whom K1te socured from the

State Department, and I also gathorod the seneral ‘iinpression of dis-

eatisfaetion with Hiller and his wiole effort -- "Tr wo had know :
what kind of an outfit we were working with, wo wouldnatl nava taken

it over." On the other hand, both Hr. Ford and Moore said tnat they

were "voiny ahead full st and intended to sec the job throwh to

the boat of their ability".

2. L tuink there is ino action to be taken: hora and merely pass
this on for your information, but Lt does bring to-mind again what I
think 1: growing evidence that the Crusace 4s moro trouble tian it is
worth. :

3. I tink this ousat to be tiv: Last Crusade for Freedom and
cht to alternatives. We are now taking
Phu Jer Free AcLa out of the Crusade noxt
mmanent fund-raising office in San Francisco,
token donations from three Agency foundations, and makin a serious
attempt to obtain sone money from Asian crowns and contacts. Sone
other cover is obviously needed and we are thinkin, in terns ¢1 the
Aneriean Herd tation or other sibilities that nay occur.
Hyational Comittee for a Free

We should take similar steps for the :

Rurope.

PAS We SRADEH
Giief -.
International Organizations Division

that we ougnt to ¢

year, substituting ¢



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

aes xt an tt af ages Leva

ORAEDUL FOR: IIEF, ER DIVISION ©
OIEF, SK DIVISION
GiHeF, 10 DIVO

SURJECTs Atlempts of personi outside tha Agency te inflzence
, Acenecy snd State Departnent policy wita ra
National Committes for'a Froo Lurope _

Z

1. I have i:ad reports from vaveral sources that persone 9
the Agency and outuide the State Deparlmont have abtesgted w intl
gency operations arid State Department policy in respect to tue jiational
Comittee for a Free Europe. Two.cf tiiese parsons, it tc reported, are

Carmel Offie and Kaya Barnos. . f
a,

2. To the extent ithat Nocers. Offlo and Barnes are aware of our
continuing relations with ChE, thelr awareness constitutes a danger
to our succeesful conduct of the operation. I “there fore aux you and
members of your Disiaion to refrain from any contact wita these gentle-
men or with others who, bj) virtue of thoir suspicions or ksowledze but
without any official capachty watever, are attenptinzg to grind their
personal axes through tho Hytional’ Committee for a Pree Burope.

/

3. I have alco had repo £ from several vources that sezbers of
this. Arency who happen to hold, ron: personal views on t2¢ conduct of
exile activities by NCFE hayé, ‘{n their diroct relationz witi the
exiles, encouraged the ext! é5 oppose NUFE decisions ard policies.
Fleaso tranamit to your rfspective staffs my strong aversion to this
kind of in-fighting. I fall your ettention to the agrecient signed
ty mysolf and Mr. GeorgA Kennan of ‘the State Dopartnent on 13 February
1949, whieh reads in parts

"Exiles and/refugees WALI. be\roferred to the liew York
Conmnittee/ for a).l matters al an operational nature,
including the provision of ae and facilities for

thense. eg and their activitids."

‘he safe memorancun states that WCertain operetional activities
will not propefly fall within the provincd of tha liew York Comittee" and
reserves thes¢ activities to tiis Avency, hut these reserved operational
activities wore clearly not intended to embyace the cncoure
exiles to fits ht off decisions made oh, the CAmittee as to "

vars ir shor estavlis 7
Ait orlrn 6 faa °

FRANK GA WI SER

Af wt he Le oo : Deputy Diroctor (Flens)


--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

” . ; aan I
pee
Analyeis of Memorandua Mr. Croighton Seott

The following memorandum, I balieva, discuesse most of the.
points raised by Hr. Scott. .

1. Scevipte prepared in Munich are almost never roed by Anericana
before broadcant.elthoush the goneral conten’ of aach broadcast is
agreed upon in programing conferaicos botwean tho Asvrican and exile
atatfe. fhe reavons why the broadcasts aro not real v Anori cans
before they go on the air ave aa fal tows:

@ Because the natural inclination of Avwricans ie to-
change tho troadceats, and such changes, 2FF officials feal,
are likely to.lessen the ‘“ganulno" quality of axile broad.
casts for the liateners.

bd Bocauce the exiles fool. thanselves to be patriots
working for thetr countries, ond the submission of scripts
to Anocricann bafore they are broedcast would ba regarded by
the oxtlos as casting doubt upon their sllegtance and fervor.

tha American staff bolieves that it can exarcios policy control ty
sugrestions during progran discus:dons rather than by making dole-
thong and corrections in the ecripty thaisalves.

2. During ny trip to urope in Juney 1 asked Hr. We %. Griffita,
Political Advisor for HIF, to institute the service of remlarly

” translating the most sensitive ifr broadcasts after tie fact. Ha

hao comlied with thie request and (1A now recaives Englia: trang-

lations of Munich seripts within a nenth after broadcast. CIA also
receives an imuediate teletype sumeary of all Kuntci broadcasts, ap
woll ao a weekly consolidated rumiary of all brosdcasts. fo provide
for imnediate English tranalation of all AFF programs after tio fact
would require an enormous ataff of translators. .

3. No doubt RFC hae made the alstakes kr. Scott mentions in
comeetion with the items about the woalmess of tie {ren Curtain and
tho ease of crossing it, and te Czechoslovakian curroney devalustion.
On the Mrat point, Mre Scott’s dates are in error, for firs did not
goon the atr wutil July |, 1950, Assuning tist ne ceans that such
broedcasts were made from that date until April 1951, it sauld be:
noted that this was the very beriming of Res waen all of its broad-
casts originated in New York. Such. troadcasts sertainly are not
boing continued. I agswme they wore the result of inexperience. the

— 4
a1 ot


--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

-3-

wL1l be dineontimied when 475 ces out of extetoneo, and they should
Rot to reestablisbel. Tou wili remember tiiat at tao dearings wien
coonsitered NCFT's 1953 trvicet, tho offictals of NCEF asked for $500,000
to cover tho emected losn of mucn privileges and because we felt that :
this woo wijugtified, we aaiied md wore granted the Fight to retain
this scmey in the CIA rezerve pending further juotificatlome

5. Ur. Seott!s oxmlaint that the Infomation servien of RFF,

‘has boon too expensive and naive 1s probably correct. In part tits

is the resvlt of ClA's inability, for justifiable security reasons,
to make information of a Lergo acale availatin to RYE. Howover, tie
Information “ervics 12 bein: reorpanized. There 1a reason to bolieve
that excellent prafeasional neweron, such as Russell Hill and xd
Ghomberlayne will provies the competence necessary for en inereacs
in efficlendy. . .

6. In sum, ire Seatt’o eritictems and compleinte seem a mixture
of Lact am? fiction satmated try a porconal antagonian. Hin te but one-
of 9 mumber of sucn attacks by foram: employoss. Our ow apcroac to
Rado Free Europe anovld ve not en mich an ascescneat of past aucesss
and falluror, as an exaination of future opportunities. A powerful
instrument hae bocn ercatcd, in the main successfully, in an incredibly
short tine. Whero it coor from nore, giving due consideration to .
eriticies such as Sect? 2, seems to as to bo our priority taske



--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

eat

SECCHITE UF

° SECRET

27 October 1952 _

MEMOHANDUM FOR: ‘Chief, International Grvanizations Division

SUBJECTS a ‘President's Comnittes on Imaipration and Naturalization
\
1. The attached memorandum, preatly modified in form by the
General Counsel of NCFE, is to be presented tomorrow afternoon at
an open hearing of the President's Committes which is conducting
hearings on the McCarran Bill.

2, I was informed of this proposed presentation on Friday
afternoon, Octoter 17. I obtained the attached from Mr. Greenlea,

.NCPE General Counsel, today. NCFE does not know that Mre Greenlea

has been in touch with us and should not know.

3. I suprest that you review, with Mr. Wisnor, whether NCFE
should make such a presentation. In eanence, the presentation is
an attack on the McCarran Bill. I sugrect that, perhans, NCFE
should not testify for two reasons:

a» This is close to a clear example of a tax exempt

charitable orranization, attempting to influence
legislation and;

be The political implications are liable to be an
embarrassment for CIA.

4.e Apparently, NCFE is making this prezentation in the hopes
of receiving wide publicity so they will ke in a position to say to
the emigrees with whom they deal, "lock what we are trying to do for

you.

5. I urge your rapid concern, for the presentation is due to be
made tomorrow afternoon.

Hie P, DURKEE ;
Catef, I0/TONIC

SEGHET


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

_ The National Connittee for a Freo Surope, Ine., was formed

in 1949 when «a “group of private oiticens jolnod togethor for positive

action against Soviot enslavozont. It ooncentrates its efforts on the

100 million Central snd Sasterr Europeans today Living undor inhuman

conditions of force and fear. “thts tyranny, Anposed by Soviet Russia

in flagrant violatica af her gotenn guarantees, proaludes tho endure

ine world pence desired by free men overywhere. The National Committee

for a Free Europe is the Anerloan peoples! answor to tho Kremlin's dee=
potic rule.
The Comittee seekat

(1) To pieroe the Tron Certain with meseares af moral and practical
valuo through the facilities of [Reato Free Europe, »\thus taking
tho fight’ to the onenles' camps

(2) To build for the future by, edusating’ young refugees from Com=
munism through the [isa-turepoan Studios Center. ‘hore in the United
States, and the: ‘Pree ‘mureoeeat Univorsity in atte [in Strasbourg,
Franoe. In this aonner we attempt tc proserve the oultural herit-
age of the past which the enemy seeks to destroys :

(3) To develor political unity and a dynamlo platfora of aims and prin-
oiples among the exile croups through tho[ Division of Exile Rele-
tionss)

(4) To assemble, enalyze anc distribute knowledge sbout ourrent con-

ditions in the captive areas

(5) To create aotive rublio support. both moral and material, for these

activities.


--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

2.

Vitel to tho work ond well being of the National Comnittee
for a Free Europe are its approximately two thousond olion pssoolates.
6 percent of these eliens aro in Europe, with the rost reaiding ei-
ther temporarily or pormenently in the Unitod Statos. At the present

time over one hundred of those olions residing hers feco imainont do-

portation.
A aight be inserted paronthaticel ly at this point that ell

of these liens ‘presently feoing deportation have attonptod’ to remain
NS
within, the ‘spirit end” tho lettor of the lav, but, beosuiss of the ebsur- oft

ditties of ths lew have boon “forced into the “poattion of baing wind

violators of it. ‘ie do not poe  etthor now or et eny point in this

disoussion, about evadors of, or fugitives ‘from, Justice, but shal}

mo
only refer to Anéividuele of good feith, attemptinn “to the best of

a
their ability to conforn to the rules and regulations of tho country

a“ ;
whitch they believe, often mistakenly, to be the refuge of the afflloted.
At varlous tines during the history of our orpentzation it
has been necessary for tho ational Conmittec or ita subsidiaries to

ask certain aliens with partioylar talents to come to the United States

Phi

on extremly short notioa, They were, ef-ooures, admitted sa visitors.

_ a g Lewes

After thosu-riteng hed arrived in the United States, they vero imnediate-
SALLE. _—

ly faood with the problem of attompting in some menner to roguinrise \
Te

Fun bree Se pve

their status here, 60 that trips back and forth from‘Europe for visa
newal purposes would not be necessitated,. Under they present tantgration a“

At tpeeplen Cans ls
lew the only possibility of ootaining—eveh-reru rrtzetion wes by having

. . ‘ ha _



--- Page 56 ---
14-00000

-3-
the allen apply at an Amertosan Conoulate in-Canada, owait the issuance
of a viea nuabor, and then rete the alien personally piok up the viea
at the appropriate sansulato. Tpte proosdire uaual ly | took from a yoor

Agee AWK
to 18 months. Rut this nada—ofvorm kartenbton-wi ll conse under tho new

law, atnos aliona aly not be ndmtetod, into the United States from Canada

without having Tirst oaploted aortein: roaidonttal requirements thoroe
'

ae fa The only manner of aaforuordine, tho. reaidanoe of an alien ;
visitor in the United States ut prosont 1s to attempt to got “unlimited

—
wera 4
ie Kae extensions of his visitor's vlan. This te of course Anposetbie, | Tho
v a :
¥% myers . allen finds himsel:, therefore, in the. position of baine, daporteble to
mabe. .
Mee yy the country fro whioh he cane, and in most oases aftor having stayed in
. Na a
ne we + the United States for over a yoar, the respective governnents will refuse
aad
Qe” rae him pormisaion to return. In the end tho alion finds himself in a posi-
Mur }
we > tion worgo than the one which he enjoyed while residing in a Displaced
wv . , :
o” Persons oomp in Germany.

Students supported by our 1a-2uropaon Studies Contor find tliem-
selves in en oven ore exbsrrassing position, They are allowed to como
to the United States as students providing thelr re-entry pormits to tho
countries from which they cone are atill valid, Any student who comes
to take advantage of our soholarshipa oomes for at lenst a ‘ported of
fron two to four years and is therefore unable to maintain his residence
abroad and keer “his ssholarehtp at the game time, They soon arrive at
the noint where they cennct return to Furope, oannot continue their atudios
here, end are constantly harrassed by offioers of the Imigration Service.

(shows « atudents atudyins at our Froe Europe University in Exile in Strasbourg


--- Page 57 ---
14-00000

-de

oannot com to the (nited States to continuo thoir otudies at pradunte
sohools hore, ear most of thea aro ohnrpeablo-to- hoavily overaub=

yl
aoribed quotas. \, iy v4 Yee, Awe “ ? ;

‘our work sere’ in tho National Coumlttoe for a Froa Kuropo fs

enoentlally ‘payoholorioel, Gur ensootates in Radto Freo Furope, tho

“Divieton of at lo Rolations, eto., onnnot do offlatont, offootlva, op. :
1 Cane

phe Co twa heed | So ac eraee aeeL, ths wow
produstiyo work vhen~they—are- “eons tditly both e horrassad by oflolals

of the -tonteration-Serxics. “hon-thotr-sbay-in-the-tinttot Staten is_on
Wete. dare OG)
adny to day-besis Troy eannot dovote tholr full energies to tho work

for which thoy onmo to thle country, *hite-4t—te-brie-ohat Kibet of thom

intend to return to the ovunt ry £ thetr orimin whon Communist dontnation
Leb woke} WG une

is overthromm thoro{ they sust heve nome assuranco ‘thet they oon remiin
pocoofully here until-thet-moment. Thorofore, Lt vould acon appropriate

lowe thet
get, Caley Als

temporary visitors in tha United § States, | be Mood to edjudt their stetua

that sewe provision be made in tho ete, th

Avtte

to that of tomporary, Lf not Pormanont,.rosidenoe in tha United Statoo.

inothamaspeeb..of the: lnw-vhish should be-oonmiderod-te—tha
taatthatN ray of the axilo leaders of vartoua Iron Curtain countrfLos
wore adnigsable to the United Statos uncor the Dinplaced Fersuns sot of

1948 as emnded, Hovever, when asked by the Imaleration authoritioa

whether they intended te remain in the Jnited Stateo tonporarily or por-

monently, they ans:rered in all honosty thrt thoy {ntended to remain hore

enly until their oT ecartrtes had been liberated from the yoke of Cone

Neb ae |”

untiat tyranny. bh—wounsea, dy tholr om adaisston thoy were therefore

automatically barred froa adjusting thelr stntua from thet of tenporery

visitor to permanent resident. tr-the.case—of Gr student asscolatea,


--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

eS

Ait! ds a
thoy are obliged: by the ,Comaitten, as 0 roquisite to revolving a ‘soholar-

a
Lerma!

ship, to sinn a rteatement nereoing to return to the country of their

oririn whon liberetion comes so that their trointar wlll bo ‘of direst |
Phys ate.

unfortunate

help in the onuse of buildin: a freo world. | [t 1a inddy
Aah i Am ponet
that beth tho “Treant lew pad the forthocalng ono spkea-ne proviaion

‘for politionl refugeqs except in the once of thoac individuela who are

Lt ted tq tho United States undor diplomatio atending and subsequent-

adwe & >
ly wer the servioa of thetr sovornaont. ff Delia

At the present moment: tndividuate awaltinz edjustment under

thla partioular sostion of ‘the, PPeelav are in an satremely procarious
position. All of thea have a lifetime of polities} eativity bohind
then, and therefore the adninistrative doley in proneaning tholr appli-.
onations, aonplotiar investigations, eto., han been dnterminable.. Now,
most of them ars receiving notices from the Department of Justiva atate- |
iug that sinoe thelr applisations have not beon processed within the tine
limit, they aro nov-elicible for deportation procectings whion will be

effooted forthaten.
! toe ANN
Besh the present end the ruturo imalgration- lawa make we prow

violton for administrative discretion in tho enfcroenent of the deperta-

tion laws. Should the looal oovaissioner be allowed to use his dis-

iittex of Zongpyin individusle auch as thase |
pa i eee eae _
disougsed, the probl-a. fs great vert would bo oheeret-apr tn. X. he ,

orationary powers in the.

—"" “The nationel quotes systea is sonpletely out of evoord with

’laost all of the Iron Curtain countries,

Br er present worldwide conditions... J
eae : with the possible ‘exceptions af Crechoslovakia and Polend, have annual
: a} . Loe on
oe. fe errr |
t \) 7) Ow wt

7 \, VAS peed


--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

-G- ; , \

quotas of only 100, ‘and these quotas are almost all eversubeart bod to the
year 2000, Should tho mortpages leld om those quotas by the Diapiaced
Persona hot be removed, or if Kunzarians, for oxanple, sare ablo ‘to bore
row frou the Mritish quota, ~o ahald be able to bring to tho United
Stetes mony nllons posnessing particular skills whose sorvices ora ure
gently necdod by this organteotion. “any of our wllane ‘yea hiphly akillod
technicol, professional, medioal or ‘selontifle men whose tretuing, expor=
tonoe and ability would mort oortainly be prospectively benefiotal to the
Imited Steten. .

Tt 4a because of the hoavily ovoreubsoribed condition of tho
quotes of Hungary, Bulgaria, oto., thet mort of the applisations for visas,
«nde es long 8 two years ago in /merioan Conaulntoe in Consda, ore doin
returned unprooessed, with tho notation that no notion oan ba taken on
thelr application due to the imainont epproach of the offactive dato of
the new law.

; Neither the present lm, nor the nev law ankes proper provision
for Diaplaced Forsons who are bone fido visitora to the United States, ,
Nene of thoso people have pasnports frou their om countries, sinoo all
of then havo ro jeoted tho politicel party presently holdinr sway thero.

Aa a reault they aro traveling on Frenoh, Goraan, or other free country
affidavits of identity or travel docunrents. Before e visa son be extended
under tho Lev, the travel coowsents end ro-entry peraite mast be valid for
a neriod of sixty days poyond the date of application.” These countries
will not extend these doouments since the bearers are not netionale of

the iseuin~ oount ry. _ This, in effect, moans that theso visitors oan mly



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

-T7e

romain for a period sf fra atx to nino months, and thon sast return to-

Furope, oftentises xi ti2ut boing able to aonplote tho vo

Oome, ;
Finally, it wold sees that somo proviaton ools b¢ sade for
the ropid procossing of %h5 viens of both prnapootive and erente. end pros~
peotive viaitors so tka in cane of necoosity an elion csr: ts brought
quickly to the United Stetea without tho usunl two yoar daley.
cenerelly seeattur, {£ oono draotie ohenges nm o-% ande in :
the Lanigration laws ¢x tho earliest possible moment, 2 262 foresco tho
virtual disbanding tae Fetioel Councils Uiviston of this creenizetion,

and a sortous ourtaliaest of the quality of tho broudoaats row Radio

Froe Zurope,-and,—aliiocan t+--Le-pot-.d-propos to the-preazst mattur,..we..
yh .
ghauld Jike.to- potnt-ovt-tant-these broadcasts are nekinz a Serrifie in-

pnot behind the Iron c=rtelr, me hag only to read tho virilest etteoks
epainet our organiestioz rrinted in tho Comunt ot press fu over tho world
to be assured of thoir eftectivencea. Tho propaganda velus 40 the Come
munigst eeuso of the sass ceportetions now bein, planned of these well-known
oxtles ie of vourse immeeurebdle.

when Public Ler 414 was being dobuted in tho Con-ress, it was
submitted that the prezent iaaicration and Iationality sot rea one riddlod
with inconaistonoles 4 eompletely onsulted in "rod tape.” “Te respeot~
fully submit that ‘the forthe oine law to full of even more trzonsistoncles,
13 conpletoly unawers of present world aenditione, will in effet stop ell
idmaigration exoept tron ‘these scuntrios which aro aoclally ecceptable, and

will oreate en impsaoible levyrinth of reatrictive red tase.

rc for which thoy .

i
!


--- Page 61 ---
14-00000

ay

23 October 1952

MEIORWIVY% FOR: DERUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)

GUQeCT: Maynard Barnes and Carmel Offie

2. Zn conversation the other day you asked me Virough what
yaar] Parnes and Carmel Offtle wero stating their opinions
on the nev Of NCFE's request to move the adminiatrative head-
quarts ¢ the exile countries fran Washington tw New York, and
‘who was Listening to Barnes and Offie. :

na channel seem3 to be tho Southeastern ¥uropean Division
Soular Colonel Yatsevitch, SE/QP. Tie Southeastern
ivision maintains an extremely skeptical view of HCFE
= S the exile field and has pone te considerable’ trouble,

throush ag well _as throwrh Barnes and Offie, % ereato the
greatnas coset @obkivetdon mt cals “la Bis ranean gove-af tho

am lOCKE tu general. I am abllaching an article by Edgar
Was written at tho bohest of Mr. Of£fie2 and was
ntended to be the first of a sories. ne lave been
n having the series idea dropped. ~

3. Wedle I believe that tnere is cone justification in the
532 Division continually makos about the exile record of
‘Committee, T think the inter-governze-tal squabble -
sed ty. the Division's repeated attempts to use exiles,

waleh ie erous
members 22 tne Stata Departanent, and otiers as a counding board for
its ow . of sympathy with i makes.it diffiec for the

munities to fulfill its charter and for CIA vw control
operations witinut interference from the State Department
Zroa ovtside the Agency. .

st that you send the attached mexorandan to tho
and TO. It is worled in such anancer that it:

will rot reveal tids reference.

‘HDMAS WW. ERADEN .

poo! chief
. .,. . International Organizations Division

nts:
‘yr article.:
2. Sugzeried meno.



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

aren . a ; L

13 Octobor 1952

MsMORANUUM FORs CHIu¥, 10
PROM” + Chilof, RI/olS

SULS ECT t Exchange of Intelligence Information botwecn the
NGFS and the uvv/P Orfices

‘J. The National Comnittes for a Froo “uropo ta the reservoir of
a groat woalth of intelligence {£:formation, particularly in tho field
of psychological warfare, A four-day ourvey of the NcFs conductod by
an OLS cave offiour indicated that three oF: components = tho Reccarch
and Publications Service, the MideZurepean Stuiios Center, and tho
Radio Free Europe =~ can maxo a very valuable contribution to the opora~
tional intelligence required by tha 00/P offices.

2. It 4s the purpose of thiy memorancum to suggest a proceture for
the most offoctive use of the NCr+ intelligence potential. The most
practical approach seo to be ae follows:

a. At this tine it doen not apjear necossary to establish a
continuous flow of ruw an! finished intulligence from the CFE
to the DD/P offices, Rather, we would likes to uso NCFE facilities.
whenever individual cases indicate that such action is advisable,

b. We would like to maintain a direct relutionship with tho
NCFis Yor the purzose of onlisting ita support in the wore on our
individual cases. When tho naturo of the caso indicates that the
NCFS can maxe a valuable contribution to it, we could maxe arrangzo=
ments through tho @hief of I0/TONIC, to make direct contact with
one of the security-cleared NCP3 officers. A permanontly-desaignated
OLS case officer (A. Snatton and/or it. Knoepfmacher) would then
procead to New York to discuss the substantive resaarch probloma
in the NCFé and reach an agreeent on the scope of NCFé. support.

3. It is recognised that the final authority on all contacts with
the NCFS rests with the Chief of I0/TOMIC, anu that tho latter may direct
and linit such contacts whenev:r he desires. . ,



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

4. Wo suygeat that, for the purpose of meatiny security require=
ments, tho two O15 ense officers aonigned to Nurs Uuison be given

Peruanent cover which would be arranged b; the HiCF.. Porsonnel Officer
and tha Chief of 10/TuiIc, . ;

5. It te recognized that the relationship betwean KO4/515 and
the NCP must be based on mutual exchange of infornation. We are,
thurufors, prepared te provide such intelligence rusaarch support to
tho NCFe ag may be given within socurity [iaito ond our nuinhour capa
ubilitics, Tho requestn fur inteliigence Support from the CPE would

. be channeled to K4/013 through the Chief of 10/TouIc,

6. Our proposals contatned in thi momorandwa have beon discussed
with the Chief of 1o/TouvIC and an understanding has been reached on all
points covered, It is requested that the sugested Procedure be .

approved,



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

be

" . A beg Cao oun oy?

Security iitoemette? . foo. Sen f

P|

act 1 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR. CAFI

FROM a cfr :
SUBJECT a Survey of tho Huttonol Comitteo for a Froa”

” Earope

1. .TRs sesornmius servos to infora you of a fourday survey
made of the Natfonnl Committee for a Free Europe by Alexenfer Shatton
of RUN/OIS, The survey han uncovered a rreat wenlth of information,
contained toth in rev flleu ond finished revorts, which in of
Operntional intelligence interont, Wo are now making orrangamonth, .
through the ID Pivislon, for continuins acvess to tho ICIE flies
and for direst Madson with the HOFE Steff, :

2. In the course of hin conversation with Shatton, the :
Prosident of the RCFE (Admiral Herold “Qller) exprensed concorn over
tho fret that ho hed not boen notified of Shation's arrivel and
stated thst he does not look with favor at Cla individuals working
in the NCFR without Ais kmowloigo, Althourh Shetton informed hin
that his visit hed been clenred with the IO Division, Admire] Killer .
remained somewhat unconvinced that the urrangozents had properly
boon mde, IT sumest thet thiv misunderstanding .be brought to the
attontion of the MD/P, so thet he may bo informed of tho facts in
the event the setter is brought up by Adniral Miller in his contucts
with the DCI an! the PDCI, . . j

3, Hr. Shetten's viait to the NCFE headquarters took pliee en
16, 17, 1S and 19 September, :

Serre

Security et ems ae


--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

help on this.

OP 72
SECRET Aw oct eee wey
SECuaiTY INFORMA HON ree pws

\, October 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chiocf, International Organizations Division,
P .

& P staff

SUBJECTS National Comilttoo for Free Evropo's Request for
: ~ Funda to Build-a Gymnasium at the Froo University-
in-Exile; Roclaxor of Adutral Miller. :

1. I believe that I told Mr. fraden last evening of tho tolo-
phone call which I had received. from Adairal Hiller and of what To
nad said in response to his roquost: for funda to build the gynnasilutle
I .want to make it clear that, I offered him no specific encouragement ,
and confined my remarks to a atatement that if he wishod to grav up
a proper application wo would study-it very carefully. I told him
that this.scemed to us an unnecessary expense and one which I would
find difficult to defend with the Director in light of our present

: _ economy drive. ao

2. I should greatly appreciate a thorough staff job being
done on this’ matter to relieve mo of the necessity of thinking up
all of the arguzents fro and con, especially the lattor. 411 somoe
one pleane dig up in the Congressional Records the speechos mado

during tho last session of Concress 4n condemnation of the State Dee

partment's lavieh approach to the educational and cultural exchange

program? If wo were ever forced to defend this Free. University

program, I think we would be extromely vulnerable on the score of
having spent $50,000 for a gymnaeium or anything like it. Tida de
the icing on tho cake and hag the sound of boing definitoly in the

luzury ‘category. Thore is also the very questionzble wisdom of our
- gpencing additional money cn "permanent plant", when we: cannot ba

sure how long we ill be able to continue our support of this enter=
prise, nor for that matter how long tho present flow of studebt
material will continue. :

3. Please -- let us sharpen up our thinking and our pencils

as well. In the final analyais I shall probably have to veto this

proposition, and will certainly do so unless it is much more con=
vincingly supported than heretofore. However, I woul like sane

(Signed) FRAMK a. WISER
. FRANK O, WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)

SECRET
SECURITY shfe 231108


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDUM FOR+ Chief, TO Divioton

SUBJECTs NCFE-SE Division Conference on Rumanian
Refugeo Situation .

REYDUENCE) | Heno to Chief, TOD, Subjects Current Us 8
Attenpt to Form a Unified Rumanian Refuges -
Organisation, dated 12 Beptonber 1952.

1. .It ie requested that the referenced menorandum be
forwardod to the NCFE for study prior to the conference (ref,
para, 8) betwoon NCFE ropresentatives and personnel of this
Divisions : .

2 Due to the importance of the negotiations with the
Rumaniana, no action should be taxen on the plon outlined in
the memorandum until after the conference ig held. The Division
renregentative to be assigned on TOY in New York (ref, paras 7)
will be designated prior to the conference.

3e Ye have been informed that Mr. Visolanu has not received
an acknowledgment of his letter and proposal. It is surpested that
the NCFE write Hr. Visolanu, exrressing appreciation for his come
munication, and infor: him that the NCB hag been studying various
proposals and hopes that within the next few weeks further dis-
cussions can bo arrangede .

JOHN B. BAKER
Chhef, SE.



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

4

ae dye. 52

MAMRAOK POR) DEFUTY TRTCHR (PLANZ),
MYT Request for Budget Heviclon for VCFE
REFPREH CE Mono to Ch/A and Dt/P frow Comptroller 13 Sept. 52

Le Yaragrapha 1, 2 and |, of tho subject nevrandus requesting
a budgst revision for HCe® are oxmlaine4 in tie aupporting data
attached to that masorandum. Iteno totaling 778,343 te be. released

- fron the roverve neld by CIA, sussarieed in t.o83 paragrapiia, are

for material supjort of substantive oporatims already @proveds
Release of thece itans to WCTE in concurred in-by International
Orgonteations Diviston. It to recomended toat the mun of 875,343
bo reloased to HCFE. : .

2. The item in paragra::: 3, 1.6. 241,090 for nine months!
operating expenses from July 1952 through Hares 1¥53 for the Inter-
National Contor of Free [rade Unionists in Fxile, Faria, ia concurred
in by. the 19 Division. tho reason for ite scursence is as follows:

a Sipport in the asount of £71,993 fer the Intornational
"Center of Froo Trade Unionists in txdle thrown ICKE
was undertaken by a mesoravizs for tie DD/b dated
1 cepteuber 1751, Lowls G2 ivomzoon, Chief, Speatal

rrojecta, Orc. , :

b. In oarly Juno 1952, tho matter of continuins support
for the ICYTU in Todle was reviewed by tue DOC,
Admival Miller and hr. Breden. it-was decided tint

. the ICFDM in fodle would contiaus: to bo cubsidieod
in the amount of £40,00) for a mine months! period,
running from July 1952 throvg; March 1753.

3. A cablo, 1N-34233, fron Mr. Braden indicates tho Cidef of
tne Faris Station and i/r. Uraden have ciseuseet the possitility of © -
ending relations with the [CF in Exile. Ar. wadon indioates he
wishes te take up this matter sith the cod . on idu return. :

|
F
E

ae ner theta Ree te HE RB co EM ee ERATE Mn SM OUI ONE ct USRPEM Bh ee bee aah oe

th Basen,


--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

lk. It 40 therefore recomended that te mam of $4,000 be
released to NCFE to enable thom to continue payments as already
agrood. If tho support for the IC7W in Exile should bo. tormiinated,
finds ronaining in. RCFE's hands can be applied to owner. ; Prapowed
activitios now held for Justi fieation by CLA.

oe. . _ : GERALD EF. MILLER
Lo, : Ctdef.
. Poltttent and Peycologioal varfaro

Attacmenta
Reference nemo with
attachnents.

IO/TONE CiWPDs Jp/eh
(2 Sept 52)
Distribution

g: ddreaseo
IO/TONIC = 2 co
cto -lece.
Rt “© lec

SECREI


--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

\ Lee hl
| MBCURANCU! Polls Chief, Io Division
L suavEets "Library of Congress astern B:ropean Acceasions

\OREPURERCES Pund Uesorardus x0. $13, 2 Septexber 1952

1. SB Division nas noted with interest that offective Alcust ww, 1952,
the ®ashington research stuff of tha CFG will vecin processing boeks
and publications received froz the Iron Curtain countries by. the library
ar Canepase, Phaca asarseniang nanmecent po were wAleahle fcoree 2° Inform
mation which this Division is presently unable to exploit, since we have
“ po personnel with the lan,uag: qvalifications required to review all that
is received for our specific interests. 2

2. Keferonced memorandum indicates that the NCFE has arra: ged to |
wderofilm portions of given books containing itens of propaganda or
infor;ational value. One copy of the print will be “ailed to the New
York research desks, while the original ~icrofiln will be sent by pouch
to lunich, presunatly for RFE. This Pivisicn requests that an acditional
copy of the print be obtuined on a continuing basig by TO for further ©
‘analysis by the interested Area Mivisions and for pouching to our field
stations which hava indicated a specific interest in thig material, It
is suggested tiut the copy be trexen down into aactions corresvonding to
the Area Divisions interested in order. thet this material may receive
Anseciate attention by the appropriate Area Piviaion,

3. SE Division would appreciate receiving your covsents regarding
this request since we aru anxious to utilize this . aterlal as scon as
possible and wish to sake other arrangeuents if tnese sug vestions are
found inpractical, :

JOHN Ey BAKER.
Chief, S&

Copy to EB



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

oO > SECRET

SECURITY INFORMATION

2) Sopremter 1952

MEMORANDUM FOKs GEPUTY CHES, POLITIZAL AND PSYCHOLIICAL RK

SUBJECT: | Agutgnment af 4oxlle Pudio facthit.: (48-59)

l. According te Moyern. Towland aed Enmona frown arrengesents
have teen made to utilise the 43-50 tn Gaerman;.

2. The completion of tre transaction le awalting @ teat thet |
to teinw underctanean cy outelide eavineera tirougn Oereral w>7lelband,.
This test, Iam told, i9 neveasitated Ly tne fact that tere is not
avallevle a conplate sgecification af tae equipmear. .

3. Ib i6 eatinated by Mr. Brown that the test will ve completed
in a few veeks. :

inp, et
val State Di -tatan

FP/CPYICLEs tas

Districasioat .
widreasee - original & L
wr. Kowiard - 1

“ir. Brown,19 + L

SECRET



--- Page 71 ---
14-0090

‘Yugonlevia) eho may be employed in any com
‘Job titles. Such taforsetion hea not Been avallosle to the interested

. 17 Septerver 1952

KEMORANDUN FORa OMLER, ITRERATICHAL ORGAN LATIONS DIVESLON

agrentros Nite We Pe Durkuos cntef, 10/To#1C

SeBRCTY Refugee Stipendiaries of NCFE

RENERENCE! Bocrot Mono dtd 12 Aucust qo82 from Chief, 1O/TOxIes
Le % of Stipordlaries of NCE

to Chief, S23 Subject: tle

‘Z. In compliance with your request of 12 August, the refercnecd |
merorandun Wis circulated to tho various intervated branches of SE Livisione
of the thirteen Immenione Listed oo etipendiarics of NCEE, only one, |

wr. hrutas Coste, 19 an the payroll of SE pivirlone However, it has beon
o:r understanding, that ire Coste har received ne ntinend aince Yeeerber,
1951. we would aporectate o further check on the status of Hre Conte
ronpect to hic reported stipand. 40 other duplications were reported.

By Lt dn requested thn? tn’adattion ‘te the referenced lst of
stipondiariss, 10 Pivieion obtain fron ths ~ and i alist of all
yefugee erployooe fron within the So sres

mania, Delsarte, AYsanla, ond
4tay, with their palarics and

branches in the part, Bit exvpertencs rea ghow) Lot the availapirity of
thia date on 2 current basis would be cost Kelprul vo the responsible case

officers.

1 . Jou EB, RAXER
- chief, S&

ppscacranesber

TAgtributions 2S
Addresses - Orig & 2 :
sefrP » 2

, RL o2


--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

12 Septenber 1952

\
HPDIANUM FOR: CHIEF, PSYGIOLOMCAL A147F DLYE SION
ATTFNTIONs Mey E.J. Harctoon, PY fvaluation

UBIECT: W DIC Use of FY Guidance Fapora .

1. In discussing this subject, the follony facts of IONIC
operations should be kept in view - 7

. a DNC prepares ita own dally gcidance papers, written -
by a special. staff which has at ite digosai a -furspean-wido news-—

_ Gathering apparatus.

b. State Departuant overnight policy guidances aro regularly
delivored to TONIC on the day of iacue. .

2. Guidance papers from PY are dispatcned as coon as they are
recelvod. . Por instance, Special Guidanes on Eacteriological Warfare,
dated August 7, 1952, and Weekly Propaganda Guidance Ho. 9, dated
August 8, 1952, were sent on August Ll. - a .

: 3. The value of PY guidance popera for 2 TONIC waa’ taken up:
with MIMIC officials last May, ‘Their observations are contained in
the following quotations from their lotters to this Divisions

QO The Chief Programming Officlal wrote:

"We have received several of thasa pavers in tne past
couple of months. ‘They aro oxtresely useful for the
following reasons: . .

a They: set forth clearly u. 3. policy on one issue
_ OF another; . ,

be. They ‘occastonally report thinking in quarters fran
°. Which we hear nothing directly; -

- @ They usually contain pertinent quotations of expres-

. sion of viows by the enemy wich we can maké use of
(both publi shed and other couroces, suca ag interroga-
tories); - .

RET


--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

f to other
ntral and

ore Bids
hhack, wetle

mow, ln. vhs apne ean be: Lops tants tit
even so, wo find proposals that seem to us Lllozical,
and now and thon extremely unwise."

iy Te President of the organi sation wrote:

fYou enclosed a papor giving addi tional guidance matorlal
for propaganda countoring Communist BW charges. All the
lines therein suggested have becn successively ueed by us
atneo February 25 or thereabouts when the tople first
aroée.

"Papers of thia kind are of great uso, provided thoy arrivo
promptly. By promptly 1s meant, oitiwr in anticipation of
m event, or an expression of views on tho day the event
occurs.” .

@. Tho Deputy Director, Radio, voter

"ith regard to the paper (Frop-103, dated 23 March 1952)
thet you enclosed, I checked Sob!a department and they
advise that from the begining ve have made the points
specified in 6(a)3. and.5, 6(b)2, %a)l and 2, HA), 9(e), 10.

"As a matter of Information, to our particular audiences wo

may, instead of 6(b)2, that the Soviet Union ia trying to
‘persuade the leaders of German heavy industry, militariste,
ani exNazis to fo into partnerstio adth it; and instead of
. 6c) ‘that the prohibition cf alliances te fraudulent, Moscow
intending, as in August 19397, to ally iteelf with a reaction-
ary (eraany against our peoples. Again to our audiences, wo
ear instead of 9(a)2 that the German problem can be eolved,
and that the hestern powers are attempting to solve it in
tho interest of the security of our audiences. We are glad
to see that our line parallels that laid down in 9(d) and (e).9

A fair summary of “the use of FY guidance papers for RFE is as



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

ad

wheat oy

a. They oro useful insofar as they contain ideas that havo
Rot occurred to TONIC’s ow people or in reforonoa to events that aro
nota matter of. public knowledge. :

be In most cases tho guidance papers arrive so late that ;
WMC is already ongaged in treating the next stage in the development
of the propaganda’ thome suggested. :

o- As PY guidance papers, therefore, : aro at tho moment |
‘another contritution to the thinking of officials, it is not
poodble to-point to specific uses of thi ] rial suggested.

‘d. To be.most. useful, propaganda guidance from PY should
treat the dsvelopmont of spectal themes that have a specific relation.
‘to precise U. 3. Governnent operstions and objectivos aside. from .
genoral U. 3. foredg polley goals. To be moat useful to RFE, such.
guidance shoujd be developed over a poriod of timo in anticipation

. of tho actual facte or operations making up such programs.

FXMONS BROW
Acting Chief :
“Intemational Organisations Diviaton

LO/INNT CrwPD ren. -

Orie e Addnre
Len - 10/M
lice =~ CI”
2 cc + FE



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

12 Septenbor 1982

MEBGNANUGH FOR’ Chief, Ic Diviston

SUBJECT Current Us» Attert to torn. a Unified Rumanian

Rofuzoea Uryanization |

an . : .

RUPRRERCES Nonorandum to Chief, Iv Uivieton, Gubjects SE Divioton -
© Plan for Rimandan Extgre Organteation, dated 28 Nay 1952

. ~ . , 4

1

1. In view of tho constucrable length of tino since RCI ononed
Neyotiations for Kumactan refuyeo unity and subsequont, devolopmenta, a
reappraisal of tie oltuation and a delincation of final action are required.

2. It is evident that expression of NCFE intorest in tho Counetl of.
Political barties (actually 4t has been directed priaarily toward tho
National Foaanut Farty) haa had the desired effect on the two refuree proupo
in the United States, by rating the apecter of-a third force developing
and being reco;nised by tha smericans. It has also mode tho Kin: ovare of ©
tho earicusness with wiloh the Americana re,-ard the divigion. between tho -
two rroups. Further, it haa incited the Iron “uaid to adopt a "denocratic”
facade in the hope, pertasa, of fitting uventually into tho resulting
organization. However, in apite of the success of tho mancuver, further
oncovraresent of the CoPr and the Hi could well prove danierous to our
overall objective of unifyiny: the refurees, by addin fnel to their ciffers

encase

3. Caroful consideration haa becn given to the various worthwhile
proposala and counter proposals waiéh cre advanced in the coursa of the
recent discussions, It is honcd, in tlds cennection, that the ICs= has
made it ontirely clear to all the participants that thia series of dis~
cussions was undertaken purciy to explore the posalnilitius for arvrecnent
in concert with the refugces theaselves, and thet alter hearine all sides

"ef the question, tho NCiE will present for their consideration a "packarze®

propogal, on the basis of which finel azree:ent should be reached. lt Le
believed that the revision of the orijinal plan, set forth bolow and
enbvodying certain features witch hava developed in the covrse of the last
threo months, can provide a solution accontable both to this orcanization
and to the refugees. (peraticnal considerations, the desirability of
maintaining a reasonable degree of control, the necessity: for taking into
account. the refu-ee concept of democratic procecures, as well as the fim
stand on aise ty-en by the Rumanian National Committee, these are all
important factors affecting the provlex. The final organization should
bo enall enouk to control, sufficiently selective to attract prominent
exiles, inclusive onoush to contain the rank and file, and of on optiaun

size to carry out ite functions.effectivelys



--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

ye An organisational form of a large passive Council, to wich all
Rumanians who meet certain qualifications could belong, but with all aetion
vested in a crall Fxecctive Comittee, offers a practical way: to oatiofy
both U. £. and refuzee roqulrenonts.. The name of thiga overall organization
should be the Rumanian National Comittee" cince this would provide -a sense

- ef contimiity ‘and would tacilitale acceptance of tha proposal by Vieolanu

and the Kinge It wovld be formed Uy an expansion of the present Rumanian
National Gonmittee. into the Executive Comittee of apnroxinately twenty
persons. Heaberaitp in tho Couricll would be extended to the rank and fllo

by means of letters anncuncing the new orpawiization and inviting pertteipatlones
The "Council" of the Miianion National Comaittee would incluco mimbors from
all ecoumtries and would not meet in sescion. iadoscu should be dealmnated
honorary president of the Council. The executive Comnlites would be tho
finctisnal unit of the orcanization. It Would appoint sub-comisnions and
groups to perfora. the work of tho Comittee ond “ool ;nate represcntatives

of the Fomanien Kational Comittee at various refuseo centers, 4n urope,

South America, and tie Near. Eaote A menbership card would bo Aosuad to

all who affiliate with the Council. Membero of cxtrenlst proupo would be
excluded in principle fro: moanberahtp in the Rimaanian National Com tteas

‘except in certain cases passed upon by the Committoo and accepted by.ude

A newspaper would bo published and cLotriuuted in liberal quantities.

S. Tne Executive Comittee headquarters would be in New York City
and work in esnjuncticn with the KCrE and represontatives of CIA. It 1a
recommenced that the position of chairman of the kxecutive Comalttee be
held for a tern of one year, elective by meabers of this comnittea only.
Ite masvera snould bes: :

Constantin Visolanu, Chairman

Gheerghe Aggan
Cornel isLanu
Vintila Hratianu
Hicolae Caranfil
Edsond Clunta
Brutus Coste
blexanceu Cretaianu
Anton Crihan
Corlos Davila
HAnhail farcasan
Grigore Gafencu
Emil Ghtlezan
a) ee | Mircea lon.tiu
Aucustin ropa
Taneu Zissu



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

6, fe the first step in aciteving the orjanization outlined-above,
dt fa susrested that ‘tho NCFE reply to Visolanata menc expresgin: appre=
elation and inviting hia toa discussion of hia propoeal. At this neeting,
the KCFE should presant the {doas outlined in paranraph lh: as the Anerican
view of the compromise which, after careful study, uppears t offer. the
beat posstvle solution. In tho discussion, the HCiT should indicate that

“thig plan io the reault ‘of much tnoursht oy. interested proupa after dlse

cudstons with many refurces, that Lt has attexpted to aid the refurees
because of its interest in thea and their country's welfare, and that it

4g prepared to suprort a Mucantan refuree or;erdzation in a number of ©
wayse Visolanu should be invited to recomzand the people whos he considers
desirable for the Zxacutivs Comwnilttes. He will have been briefed ty Cla
prior to the mecting ond will propose the game Liat gencrelly as that in
pararraph Se The hCri should then request Visolanuts cooperation and active
participation in formins an orranisation along the lines gurcested in para~
graphs h and Sy It will su-ceat that Vicolanu, Fere and Crihan work with
Gafencu, Chilesan and Conte for this rurposce Each of these rentlemen should ©
be approached by CLA and NCKE prior to the opening contact meeting of the
groupe If any substitutions are made in the participants, CIA enould be
consiited prior to tho time arranperents are completed. After this proup
hag-worked cut cetatls of the orantzation and consulted with the others
surgested for the Executlvo Committee, the KCFZ wilt Apsre. invitetions to

a general meeting of tits Comrsitteo and will anrciet in vetting tue other
orcanizational detaile underway. Subvecomnisaions giould be catablished.
imaaciately, using the refujoes whe have Leen juz ieinating in tne recent
NCFE discussions. Arrangencnts will be nade for Visotanu end Gafenou and ©
an additional delegation to be nowed later, to co to-England to inform the
King of the agreements reached and the details of the new organization.

L : 7. Muring this phase of activity, At 4s recomended that someone
from this Uivioion be aseigned on TOY in-iiew Yerz to work closely with the

_NCFKE ‘and advise on. any neceasary chanres. CIA will contact cartain refugees

to ensure their cooperation prior to the initiation of this phage of aativ-
Atye! . : .

‘ 'A. This plan hao been coordinated with the Departsent of State. It

4s requested that the dotails be forwarded to the UCFE and a meeting arranged
te discuss the implementation. — a . .

JOHN E. BAKER
Chief, SE


--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

il SECRET

Security infgema:

DL September 1952,

MEMORANDUM FOR:—DEVUTY DIRECTOR |

SUBJECT: Conversation with Admiral H. B, Miller on Wedneaday,
the 10th of September.

The following 15 a muaorandun of my conversation with
Admiral {ler in Eow York on Wednosday, September 10th. I would
like to preface this account with the observation that Admiral Millor
seems to be in a hiphly emotionnl otate and renerally suspicious, of
those around him.

(1) Larry detoufville _

Admiral Uiller reported his meetings with Larry deNeuiville
in Paris and indicated a difference in his projectod use of Larry
deNeufville and that onvisagod by deNeufville, which Admiral Miller

- presuned representod CIA's interesta, Hiller proposes to uso

deNeufville as one of u three man brvin trust, one of whon is Louls
Gallantier and the other is still unnamed. Ho mentioned that he. had

- originally considered -delicufville as an aide in adainistrative matters
but had been informed that deNoufville was not oquipped for such duties,

(2) “You

Admiral Willer indicated that RFE was having difficulties with
VOA, especially with the new Information Intelligence Unit created by
the Stata Department, under the direction of Donald Shea, to provide
information for VGA's broadcasta to the Iron Curtain countries, ‘Those
difficulties included the preventing of RFE's information peoplo fran
interviewing oecapsos.

(3) Information Service — Leland Stowe

Admiral Willer indicated that he was more than satisfied with
Leland Stowe'e activities, and that with the excestion of RF corres.
pondents in London and Paris, they were satisfied with present personnel,
He also stated that Russell Ili] had becoze RFE correspondent in Germany,
He further indicated thet he will xake every effort to kecp Leland Stowe
on after the expiration of the present aix-~nonth consultative contract.



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

4 SEGRET

Security Informatics

~26

yo

(4). Father Morlion

| Admired lller stated that he hid conferences with Morielgnor
Cordini who stated that Father ‘Worlionts information was’ not reliable,

. Adniral Miller reported that McDonald, the RFS correspondent in Rome,
held the same vier, :

Admiral iiller exhibited som suspicion of the

actione of Mr, Delbeare in trying to soll ‘him the matter of Father ~
Morlion and Anna Brady, but stated if that was what lr. Dulles wanted,

[¢hab was all right with hia.

(5) ’ Crusade for Freedom =

" adsiral Willer indicated he was going to give two days a
week to the Crusade for Freedom, :

we WILLIAM P. DURKEE
Acting Chicf, ; _
Interrational Organisations Divieion

AC/10:4PDfemm
Distribution: .- .

Orig - Addressee {vis C/PP, and DD/P}
lec -CIo. , .
lee - I0/Tonic

2 ce = RT

rey ne Fe

Security | orn


--- Page 80 ---
14-00000

“National Committee for a Free Europe, tne.

VO weer S7TH STABET . NEW VORA IN. Y. . yisarnove peace 77600

Lante apourgs: SATEECOMM

September 2, 1852 ° .

vr, Thomas Braden
2203 Foxhall Read, N. WW.
washington , Dd. c ce

Dear Mr. bradent

At the suggestion of Admiral tiller, I aa
enclosing six copies of tha ne Cormittee bt a
'weapon in the Struggle for Freedom." 1f yoa mould
Like to have additional cories, please do not hesi-
tate to let me :

‘Sincerely yours,

- : i Sanel S. Wilker, Jr.

Director, Research and
Publications Service

SSW: bvb



--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

- — gepper

Security. information

— MEMOPAIT, POR Til Tuscon

SUBJECT: Meeting on Security Procedures in the

: present: Captain Catolov, fre Tyson, Thomas
! Heycrn, francia Hand, Sob Cuminchan,

Joon fonney

m:
T

le purpose or this mectins wed to inform the Cffice of
: Inspection and Sccurity. of the security arranyements made in the
4 selection of atudents for the Free University in Exile.

: 2. Asa result of the discuczions, ar outline by Captain

i Sabalov of his security procedures, it was agreed?

i : é That the present sceurtty practices were satisfactory
! . and that the nature of the ority problem does not call
: fer the kind of security scruviny necessary in Radio Free
: Europe. : :

i b. That the FPEVE is an excellent source of information fer
Cif and that in consequence Captain Sabalov will make
available to this Ayency: Lo.

“1) A ict cf all applicants to the Free University
with blograpnical data.

2) A list of all sludent with biographical data civen

general schclorship aid in Lurope.

Free University in Fxile «
or by field stations

3. That no contacts by CIA with th
be undertaken except by heaccuarters activ

Mr. Royal Tyler.
, . . ~ OAL
Aho 4

UELLIAN Ps DURKEE
2 a = TO/TONIC

SECRET

Security Information


--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

CONFIDENTIAL |

Security luformation

ER=3=2387

8 September 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director, Plans
Aobing Chief, International Organisutions

FROM 1° Deputy Director Contral ‘Intelligence

1. Mr. Phenix when. he vas recently here advised me that tho
Board of NCPE desired to change ito name from "National Comalttee
for a Free burope, les" to "Free Durope Committee.? Tha purross
ef thie was to avoid confusion wth the multitude of "national
comalttees” for various purposes, sone of them subdveralives

2. This preposed change wes discussed at the morning meeting
with the Director and Deputies and no objection was found if the
Committees really wanted to do it. I sugrzest that C/I0 confira
thie to Phenix as they want to set the legal steps in motions

ALLENW, DULLES

CONFIDENTIAL

Soce cy Information


--- Page 83 ---
14-0000

11 Auguot 1952

MOO RANTUM FOR: = DRPUTY NIREOT? oF CENTRAL THIFILIGEUCE

SUBJECT: Admiral Miller Letter about NOPE Fersonnel’
nentioned at tae F2C Meeting on Friday, 8 August

le Attached horote is Adxiral likller'o areusr on babelf of
NCFE to mmerous rayuests for por:onnel records of NCE in order -
% provide CIA with basic inforaztion about tails project.

2. In view of NOrn's roti cece to provide ue with suoh basle
information, ltr, Braden and f iwve discussed the poscibllity of
whather wo could effoetively parform a liaison function here for
you without such informition, and ve are agreed tizt wo cannot,

As you know, it is net our purscse to usa’ tits inferaation to
harrass pooplo in New York cr t qibble about galeries or dotails
of assigrmento. Wo do tink thas tac only way G+ ccn porfornm 1te
Fosponstbllity tevard NCTA is t keep Ltaelf fully 4nforsed in
every fleld of NCYE's activity, and that mowing unich cmployoso

are doing what 1o ossential tnformetion.

"3. You suggested at tne FEC nesting on & August that you
micht be able to givo us a hand in our effort to eet this informa-

tion. : ;

Leaf , DURKEE
Cie / Dix e

Attachmant
As atated.

o/Pstcwrp/en . ;
Orig - Addregsee ° :

1 co = CIO
2 coe MNIC

Roo- RE | 7 | | a.



--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

erey
. ib: .
Security (Information
7 Au;uot 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: NR. THOMAS WV. LIAUiN AW
Chief, International Organizations Division

SUBJECTS Kecuest While on Travel Ordors

Pleaou contact Larry d'Noufvillo to obtain debriefing
papor of Sperling and to te preucnt at further verbal dobrlofing
of Sperling. Sperling will be available in Pario from the 15th
of August to the ond of September. .

wri TAH P, DURKEB

¢/10/TONIC

oe SEE

© Seeurity lnformation


--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

. o . ‘
co , op blag 8
, ES 4
; VRIGHITY SECRET TO WASHINGTON PRUM za TURK
TO HELVES PUR THOMAS BRADEN FROM LPA-S20UKLTY INPOMATIOG --CL TE”
NY -312h , : ;
JUHN Ge HUGHES KEL -Jutttl CoH
MTHE BULL-AUGISTINE REFUNT GP JULT 29 Was FieevaKED IM Pals AN
DISTHLBUTED WE KULALL TOLER FALL ‘Tiki. WYMCLIWTELY OW KBADLUG IT
1 PROPUSED A MOULFICATIUN OF THE NAMB FUR THE PROFOSED GFERATIUN 50
(AS TO DEFINE MOE ACCURATELY (13 PURILGZ. I SUGGESTED SE CALL THE
a HLOJUET FiEE BROKE “BAILE CENTERS, AND THES TAME WAS ACCEPTED.

SYP MUST BZ BURNE IN ALND THaTt EVER SLNCE NCFE HAS BEel IN ACTIVE

GPERATIUN, LNCRZASLNG APTENTLUS BAU BL28 raAID BY US Tu THE PHOBLEM

GO? THOSE AiFUGEES Ih weCTERN EUKGPE WHO 4X2 NATIUHALS UF THE COUNTHLES
WITH WHICH MCFE LS CONCERNED, AND SUBSTANTIAL CUMS HAVE BEEN PLACED

#1 SHOWED INITIATIVE IN

TH THE HANDS oF Hue NATIGUAL COUNCILS i:
THIS PARTICULA: FIELD TO ENASLE THE To BUILD UP THE MORALE UF

T AND LTS PROPUCALS

THEIR HOMELESS NATLONALS, THE PRESBIT &

LK Tu A Woe EPFICTENT PERPORUANCE GN A SUMESHAT LARGSR SCALE OF

WHAT IS ALAFADL BEING DONE, TO ACCUMFLISH THIS RESULT, WE R2COMIEND
EMPLOYING A SUALL AMEIULCAN STAFF (GF ABCUT ELGHT FEUFLE) TO SUPERVISE
AND CONTROL TH ENTIRE OFERATICN. ; ,

THE NCFE EUDGET FUR 1952-53 POX ACRK CF THIS ‘CHARACTER IBCLUDED |

APPROAIMTELY RPT APPAUXIMATELY S30O;0OOTO CONTINUE PREVIOUSLY .
FG bey

SECRET


--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

setnel <2

APPROVED FROGRAMS. THE BULL-AUGUSTINE RECOMMENDATIONS SHOW ‘pat
A OMURE EFF ICLENT AND SUMEWHAT MURE COMPREHENSIVE OFEHATION (FOR
EXAMPLE: POLISH REFUGEES ARE NuWY To BE COVEKED) WILL CL H?T CUT
ABOUT $400,000 FOR THE TEN MONTHS—-SEPTESBEn THAUUGH JUNE, AN
INCREASE UF ONLY $100,000.

WPHIS PROGRAM 1S NOT A NE# ONE FOR KCPE AND LT LEYOLWES no
RESETTLEMENT HOUSING OR LARGE SCALE SUBSISTRCE EXrENDITURES. IT
DOES NOT CONFLICT WETH GR DUPLICATE ANYTHLIG THAT £5 NUW BELNG DONE
BY RPT BY OFFICIAL UNITED STATES AGENCLES NOK Dubu IT LNVULVE ANY :
LONG-TERM COMMITUENIS. “IY REPRESENTS AN EFFORT Tu DadObSTWATH THAT |

NCFE REALLY 15 CONCERNED WiTH ‘THE MORALE OF REFUGEES HEACHING WESTERN °

EUROPE FROM THE TRON CURTALN COUNTRIES. WE ChE NO REASUN, THEREFORE;

WY THE STATE DEPANTUENT CR ANY OTHER GOVERNME DEPAKTEENT NEED BE :

CONSULTED AT THIS TIME. PLEASE DISCUSS WITH WG. OULLES fut DULLES.

GR-351



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

”~

~~ SECRET

Security Information

5 August 1992

MEMORANDUM: FOR: CIUIBF, 10

_ BUBJECT: === Project THTONIC = Budgot FY 1953

1, Returned horewith as requested ar the budot data for the
fiscal y. ar 1953, recolved by Cli in the late afternoon of 2 august 1952
for review, evaluation and specific coment.

2. Only a cursory examination of such data is yossivlo within
the time presently available. tvhile fro: tho information subaitted
4% dooa not appear thot any of the estimates shown are ercatly out
of line, it must be pointed out tit CM does not feol that it is
in a position to intelli:ently evaluate the proposed budget with n-spect
to the program and operational purposes contained therein.

3. It 4s folt desirable, howovor, thit sufficient detailed
information yartinent to the organizational and manacement fentures

of the project should be made mvallable to CM to. permit_a review and
examination of those aspects in conjunction witn the related proposed

budget. provinions.

PRESTON L. SUTPHEN
Chief, Caumercial Division

Gt /itLs/th
Distributions
Oric, & 1 = Addresses

3 20M
2 © RI/FI

SARE
SECRE

Security, Information


--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

a

"SECRET

Sccurity Information
5 Auguct 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, IO
SUBJECT Project TPTONIC = Budget FY 1953

1. Returned herewith as requested ar the budget dita for tha
flecal y.ar 1553 received by CH in the late afternoon of 2 August 1952
for reviow, evaluation and specific coments :

2. Only a cursor; examination of such data 1s porsible within
the time presently available, while from the information cubnltted
it does not appezr th:t any of tha estimates shown aro greatly out
of line, “it.must be pointed out that G4 does not. feel that it 1s
in a position to intelliantly evaluate the proposed budget with respect
to the progran and operational purzoses contained therein,

3. It is folt desirable, hovover, thi:t sufficient detailed
information yertinent to the organizaticnal and mManagerent fentures
of the project should bo made avallable to CM to pernit_a review and
oxaninaticn of those aspects in conjunction with tae related proposed
budget provisions,

PRESTON L. SUTPREN
Chief, Camercial Division
Gs /Ls/fh .

Distributions
Ori;;. & 1 = Addressee

3 <cK
2 = RI/FI

an
Security Information


--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

Security INioen

- “ Avgast 5,1952

5 Dear fics

. Toa Braden, one of our friends wiii be coming,
; aver in your direction secon. :

. Pieano show him every courtesy and cverything

t that we have jn the wey of cperrtivns, It 16 exsene
: tiel that he lmow our cperations thorcoughly, and all.
i: weeps are cf*,

Sincerely youra,

Hq. e. Biller

Yr, Richard J. Condon
. Radio Free isscpe
APO BO7-A :

e/o Postraster : tg
kew York, New York . bony

STRICTLY CONPIDENTIAT,

cos Royall Tyler < Paris - / : — !
ee: George Caesar - Lisbon

ce: Oliver Hadwood’ — 35-19 oe

6 1952 mcae pn

Security. jr igrme



--- Page 90 ---
14-00000

2G:

{
Naha ‘HK 3-1338(2)
SEGREL 3
Security Information
4 hugest 1952

TAMING

OeAMDUM OF_UND.

1,. It is understood by Sponsor and the Fund that activitivs of the

Fund will te conducted dn accordance with the followin princi plons

a. The fund wll) present to the Sponsor on or before 1 May

' of each year a proposed program und financial budget for the

fiscal year bepinniny-on 1 July.. In general, this Preoentation
will include detail comparable to other Sponsor budget present=
ations and, of cource, must include as a minimum sufficient
information to. enable the Sponsor to analyze the program from
both a budgetary and policy viewpoint.

~b. After subjecting the proyram and budget to normal Sponsor
review ard analysis, the Sponsor will advise the Fund.as to the ~
“specific activitics of the over-all proyram which. the Sponsor
desires to suprort. and as to specific amounts approved for

, expenditure in connection with each Fund division, including a

smal] General Administration Contingency Fund which can be used

at the discretion of the Fund for minor unforeseon requirementa

of any division, Exceptions, limitations, or other special
Provisions will bo stipilated where apyropriate. The Fund will
undertake major activitiés other than those approved in its

annual program only when mutually agreed by the Sponsor and the
Fund. ‘Transfer of funds from one Fund division to another division
will not be made oxcept by prior mitual agreement of the ‘Sponsor

and the Fund.

cs A reasonable reserve fund will be held by Sponzor and
provided for in the Ludyet to take care of unforeseen emergencies
or contezplated activities which have not been sufficiently
developed to permit detailed budretary vlanning. hkeleases will
be made from this fund to the Fund a9 apuropriate upon present—
ation of proper justification to the Sponsor. ,

d. The Fund will furnish. the Sponsor with such regular financial
reports reflecting its operations as may be necessary to enable the
Sponsor to properly account for the Fund exp.nditures. The Fund
wil] also. furnish the Sponsor with copies of audit reports made to
the Fund by the firm of Certified Public Accountants employed for
that purpose by. the Fund with the approval of the Sponsor.



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

bo — SegRET

-2 > Security tnformation

-@ In order that the Fund may havo available at all times

“sutficient net liguid assets to provide for liabilities which

would oxint in the event unforeseen Liquidation became noceuoury, - -
Sponsor will provide the Fund with an adequate liculdation ~
reverve which will be held by the Foundation and invested dn

United States Government obligations of a readily convertible
b. ponsor and the Funds This reserve

variety mutually agreed b-
will be made available ts Fund aa required, to be used only

for the purposes of licuidation ao mutually agrext by Sponsor
and the Fund. ,

f. In case of liquidation, the arcots of the Nudd remaining
after payment and discharsy of all debto ‘and liabilities of the
corporation shall, as recuired by the Fund by-lavs, be distributed
"to such tax-exempt charitable organizations as shall bo
deturminud by the Board at Vireetore, in its discretion," but it
is understood that the Fusd will, in fact, desirnato the tax-oxcmpt .
charitable corporation knawn as "The 1848 Founistion" as tho .

recipient of such net assets.

@. The Sponsor will provide the Fund with arprosriate guidance
and tho Fund, to the extent it 1a aprriued thereof, vill insure that
all Fund activities are sonducted In a manner consistent with U.S.
Government polloy and the Sponsor policy and mission. . It 1s more-
over recognized that devoloyzents unforesecn et tho time of the
approval by the Sponsor of any annual program may require the
termination thereof, or ary sortions thereof, at any time by the
Fund either at its own instance or at the request of the Sponsor.

’

h. The Fund will accest restricted gifts fron private donors, other
than Crusade ror Free.on, ine., only when mutually agreed by the
Fund and the Sponsor. :

i. Tho Fund may subrit budgetery revisions either quarterly or
whenever. proposai new ac ies or wiforesecn developments require

a significant change in aprroved budpets,

j. Within the Jimits af apsroved budgets, the Fund will
requisition furnis from t fonsor cuarterly unless unanticipated
recuirements necessitate interim coculisitions.

k. To pronote their caccon secur ity interest, the Sponsor will

keep the Fund contiruoasir edviscd'as to desiratte security

proceiures and the Fund vill be free to request specific security
guidancé from the Sponsor at any tize, The Fund will not elect or ap=
“sey executive or any other Person who
sponsor-Furd relationship without the prior
In respect of employees who will

2

nowledse of th
spacirie concurrence of the Sponsor.


--- Page 92 ---
14-0000

settaert

Co Segret

-3=- Securit: | Aq

not have knowledzs of the Sponsor-Fund relationship, the Fund
will, nevertheless, obtain appropriate cecurity clearances from
tho Sponsor jricr ta employmonte :

a 2. Where appropriate, dotailed proceiurse will te coopuratively
developed by the Fur ard the Sponsor to dreure the offoctive Anplementation
gf Understandings

of the principles outlined in this Nonorandus:

For that purj;oee a liaison office 11 Sponsor's organization will
be designated by Sporcur. Except on financial and budyet nattera which
wil] te handled by Fund with Sponsor's Uffice of Mininistration, and
on matters which the Puri desires to lake uj witha the Dircetor of Spongst
or hig immediate Desties, relations bebwean Fund and Sponsor will
be coordinated by or tzrough this lialson offter and, oxce;A an above,
any matters which the, ‘und desires to bring ta the attention of Sponeor
may be referred to oF through such Matson office.

2*

Initialed as of thie 4th dey of August 1952s

fof AMD. Jef HM
(Mr. Dulles) (aictral Miller)



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

GHCLASY IFIED PESTRICTED COMTLP EM TIAL
TUSENOER WILL CIRCLE CASSIE ICAT ND BOTTOM)

CENTRAL UNTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICEAL ROUTING SLIP

{—"lapprovat (73 inroriation CJ stonature

(berion = Cte erty (7 return
Co Tkowwent - (aS oaepardiion oF repuy —] oispatcn
Co Koncurrence (7S ascomminoation (Co) Five

REMARKS:

This may interest you as evidence of the
good team-spirit we have among some of our operating
campaigners, It was left behind by Alan Valentine

in his personal files,
7 ¥4s fuodius
. re

“UNCLASSIFIED

oT oN no.
SECRET | CONFIDENTIAL

rm. a0.
ser 1947 2074

RESTRICTED



--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

a

ran PRIVATE pase |
Naionsl Goma AMR bsg Huwope, Inc

aK TN. . TELE MEL LALA TThles

how

VAMED ApoeEOE: cater

4

Mr. -Alan Valentina, President . , “a
Committee for a Free Asia, Inc. Vy

245 California Street
San Francisco, California
i

Dear Alan: !
: . a :

: . It was good to see you, if just for’an instant,

in Washington, ~ .

t For your private ear, I might tell you that we
; Won our battle harida down, Merely to confirm this, our

Executive Board 1s having lunch dn Washington with Allen
and Bedell next Monday. This will be a general talk, but
I am gure that policies will come up for discussicn. .
Happily, everything seems to be sailing along in good
shape. .

I checked down there regarding any taboo con-
cerning your help on the Crusade for Frecdom campaign. I
think there was a misunderstanding here. They have no
thought of providing a complete tahoo, ‘Their thought was
that all other operation should not stop and your time be
devoted wholly to the Crusade, ~

Actually, we will call upon you for very little
help, When Dick Walsh comes out to talk with you within
the next ten days, he will give you a complete fill-in on
what assistance we would like to have. I am sure you will
have no-trouble in giving us this assistance.

With regard to the wording of the language by
which we transmit the money to you -- I am going to try
to get a Board Meeting together on Tuesday at which time
the necessary action will be taken to clear our forward-
ing letters to you insofar as capital expenditures go.

My very best regards.

Sincerely,

3 fn .
Oy,

H. B. Miller

August 1, 1952 A _

fr
4

~ 20? /67O

}4

nyt

PRIVATE

HBM:mlm le . a Et AND .

| CONFIDENTIAI

ne

Patel agi ey Rha hen, cas. Rae AD TIE _lheemt


--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

ORMATION te

7

- MANAMLOM FOR: Chief, ID Divioton
"  sUBIeCT + Mist of Rightiat Rumentan Refugees,

1, In accordance with a request of Mr. John Ioich for
information ca any questionable nenbors of Con, Redesou'e
Leaguo of Yreo Ruranians, transmitted horevith 19 a list of
@ nusier on whou inforsation 19 evnilablo, Information on
others will te forvarded to you 66 received,

2. Yost of tiove Listed haye been conncoted with tho
Ircn Guard groups, either as menbors or a8 follow trovelors,
or with otever groups whore Ideology is in conflict with U. S,
policy. Tne newes proceded by sn antoriok aro considered .
unsuitable for ewployment in any /merican orgenization,

JOHN 2, BARER
Chief, 8E Division

Encl,
List

S8/S/Luevsozfe (13 august 1952)



--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

hee

MEHOVANIN FOR: Chief, FE livislon
Chief, oi Division
Chief, “F Miviston
Chief, PY. Division -
Chiefy turret and An:
“ntof, Operations TMivision

SUBJECT: = TPTONTC budget

1. Attached ror your specific coments and evaluation |
1o the TPTCUIC proposed budcet for fiscal year 195. .
2. Tt will bo nooeznary to have your ‘comments and

initials on the cover aheot by Tuasday noon, August 5

THOMAS &ySQADEW
Chief
InternatLonal Organisations [iviston

le EF

. 1-8
1-8
1- PY
l-AL/aD lt
1 = on/co
tec.
2 = Loftoile
au RE



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

Lo > huslt

MEMORANDUM FORs DEPUTY DIRECTOR UF CENTHAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECTs NCFE-CIA HELATIONS
le When this Division was dologated the responsibility of
; conducting CIA relations with NCFE it was immediately apparent that
, a variety of problems existed which made effective action on the
part of IO Division difficult if not impossible. ; These difficulties
may be yenoral ly summarized as follows: ;

. (1) ‘Satisfactory mechanical procedures to provide

: _ information to CIA and to insure effective
cooperation and coordination of activities by :

CIA and NCFE did not exist. This was trie not
only in financial matters,such as the orderly
submission of budgets and financial reporting,

as well as security, but was also true of atterpts
to give NCFE policy guidance and to insure that
NCFE's activities did not compromise CIA
operational -eetivities.

(2) The attitude of the responsible officials of NCFE
vas one largely of non-cooperation in terms of NCFE
and CIA efforts being joint to achieve the same
objective, Indeed NCFE's attitude was that they are
4@ serarate organization with the responsibilities
of a corporation in the State of New York ast that
the role of CIA's representatives in dealing with

. them was one of being their salesmen rather than
partrers af bate Kees Genel Otlivinteln be:

. OG at Bed forbade hen Mipsve hebolee, z
, A were (othebtcK


--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

GQ) NCFi has not only failed to provide information
about its activities, but had generally expanded
its Felations with governnent agencies in an _
effort to play one agency ‘againat another end,
indeed, in many cases play tho personnel of one
: agency ‘dgainat other personnel in that agency, A
general feeling of suspicion and distrust provaded
CIA‘a relationships wth NCFE.
i LO 2. In a® attempt to properly discharged its’ responsibilities
Io Division has attempted to solve the above problems by 3) preparing
an agreement or directive which xtates sets out the Joint responsibilities
of CIA and NCFE and 6) which clearly states NCFE's duties and responsibilités
to this Agency. To implement this agreement IO Division has, or is in the
process of, creating orderly procedures by which this agreement will be put

into effect. . . .
3. I£ 10 Division is to suceed in its task, which in our opinion

is well begun, two conditions are in-ourcopinéen essential:
(1) That there be a single point of liaison between NCFE
and CIA and that CIA act as the sole official governmental
liaison ‘with NCFE. It should be said that this does not
mean that officials ‘of NCFE will not consult with higher
authorities. ‘in cla, but that when they do, those
responsible in 10 Division will be fully informed.
* (2) That: NCFE clearly understende with whom they are to deal in
oO - CIA and that those with hon ‘they deal on a regular basis

are responsible officials entitled to respect as such—


--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

-3-

officiala whose responsibilities are to lend thoir
Cooperation and’ guidance insofar as it ia necessary to
achiove com:on objectives.

oe THOMAS W, BRADEN

: . Chief wend ee

i : International Organizations Division

:

i

, :



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

” SUIJECT: CLA Investigation of Relations

STOUPITY TEDAR MATa

22 July ws2

mo, j
Fant i

MPMORANDU FOR: DEPUTY ULRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTFILIO ax

PROBLEM

It ie likely that at a mooting you will hold Monday, 4 August,
with members of tho Board: of Dircctara of the National Ooanittoe for
a Froo Europe, these Directors will maintain they do no® wish to olgn
or to accept a dirootive anifor agreement as to relations betweon
NCFE and CIA, which has bee approved by the (IA acministrative otaff
and the International Organisations Division of CLA.

DISCUSSION

At the tino responsibility for CIA doalings with NOSE vas trans-
ferrod to the 10 Division, a survey was undortakea by this vision
with the help of the CIA acninistrative ataff undor fr. bolf. Tho
following was found to bo the status of relations bstesen GA and

NCFEs
1. Budget and Financlal Relations.

a. No orderly subsssion of budgatary roquirmenuts on the
part of NCFE has over been established or practiced. For example,
the CIA approved budget for tho fiseal yoar 1f42 vas substantially
different than the budget upon which NCFE based its activitics.
Bad cummundiscation has oxtsted.

b. CLA has mot exercised any form of contrsl over NCFE
expenditures after initial approval. for exanpie, NCE hao been
free to match funds allocated for one project to some new
project or to pay for extending an old one wthons Derther
reforence to GA. © : :

0. Monies raised by NCFE through the Crusade for Freedon
or monies advanced by CLA and unspent at the ead of the Mscal
year have not been considered in the granting of funds yor 4

new fiscal year.

ao,


--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

d. Whon budgets nave been presented by NCFF, they have
not boon presented with reazonahla tioroughness or accuracy
nor havo they indleatod expenditures Wiich aro masonally
certain and those widch are projections of possible activities
for witeh NCFE has nevertheless aaked for. funds. . r .

e. In certain instances, teas ‘grants to certain national,
councils, NCE makes expenditures for witch thorn io no adequate
accounting to Net and on which the Comilttee has had little
or no information on how the monsy is spant.

2. Financtal Reportds

a Itla unquestioned that tho internal bueiness and-
asocounting proceduma of 1 arn excollent, Howuver, adequa ta
financial infomnation has not been presented to CIA.

>. Security.

Ag the rocont case of Leland Stow indloaton, RCFE haa
disregarded essential gecurity oonsiderations in the hiring of
personnel. Neither tho Socurity Off.cor, CIA, nor em other
branch or component of CIA, has anything but oxtronely inadeo
quate Information as to who ia on the NCEE payroll.

ce. Policy Control.

In its relations witi omigroa throurh ite National
Counciis Division and in its radio broadcasts through RFF,
NCFE has in many casos not received adequate guidance from CLA
end the State Department and in some instances not followed
tho guidance provided. CfA is seldom infomed by NCFE of its
proposed activities other than in its over-all budgetary
presentation,

d. Qoortination of CIA Activities with NCFT.

NCFE's activities in radio broadcasting, which account
for throo-quarters of its yearly budget, ore almost entirely
transferred overseas. Tho action of its 100 or mre oversoas —
personnal often cut across CiAts own field operations. NCFE
has not accepted coordination in this field.

3. 109 Division and Adcinistrative Staff Proposed Actions to
Solve These Dirricuities. oe

The IO Division with the assistance of the CIA Aduinistrative
Staff has prepared a’ mesorandum of agreemant to sarve ag a guide in

seen val


--- Page 102 ---
14-0000

the conduct of relations betwan CLA and NGE.
_ vides the followlozs .

by the camients 94
by Sveneer Fhenias |

Tals agrecront pro-

. Oe Adenpiste budvet information upon which to avaluato
the purposez and probable success of propored NCFF activities
as well as au adoquato financial reporting syoten by NCFE so
that this Acency can at all tines do awary of anc insure the
approved expenditure of funds by Nore.

bd. Adeqiate escurity arrangesonts so that every exployee ee
of HCFE has teen jiven.a escusity clearance necessary for tho .
Proper protection of tails operation. .

@. Tae 2) Diviaton is te be the sole channel of liaison

“ty NCFE to @4 and the State Devartment. tho rerposo of this

provision 4s % insuro adaquate preparation and consistent
policy puicasce for Cre in ail its varlod activities and to

afford a single polnt of Matson and coomiination with, State
Departaent aci tho aroa divisions of CLA. It is by no.moans
intanded to prevent officials and directors of NCF5 from dla-
cussing probiess with higher authorities and in fact the I0
Mvision eaxnt give policy juidance without reference to
higher auxssritieés. In the past, however, NCFE has comficted
liaison wit zany of tho araa Avidionsa in CiA, wt tne State
Departaent ami with various oftictals in CIA, and there has
doen a resultant: ‘eanfunton.

ad. Te acreasent provides Sor the subiLeston of montily
roports by HoFE ao to the states of its substantive activitios.

he Attitudes of NOPE.

The baste attitudes of NCYE about themsolvee is simmed up
the: first draft of tho aboveomentioned agreenant

a. "ur friends can ratuse to supply funds for disap reved
activitios bat cannot legally or vroporly bo riven the ‘right
to disapprove or modify any activities or req:ire abandonment,
modiMeation, or Srange in. enphasis, in any of the exdsting
programs’. a : . :

be. Again, no agreenent betwean our friends andi ourselves
fins ss Shain wh our corporate right to. spend our corporate

See ot:

SECRET


--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

he

‘e. .It 4e unacceptatle that private consont of GA
should be required as to the appointment of new irecwre
- ond officora. oO

a. The money given to NCFE by CIA is given first to
tho 1518 Foundation and tids money is then donated to, ECF.
CLA therefore aa no right to inquire ints ;olletee or
expenditures altnough "normally wo wuld consult cur friends",

5. Marte Attitude of CfA.

CLA hao a duty and responsibility to ineure afsirmativoly
tne conduct of the NCFF progrm in accordance with the 4 rlzston
and with the DCl'e responsibility to -dgher authority. & cores of
action based upon tho view that NCFE's autommy is mch treet it
- cannot accept t:e above-mentioned ogreamont, o soa for: tmervol,
might under conceivable circumstances, 1.9.. a.chanze in tie view
point of tne German Covernnent where most of HCFE's explayses aro
‘located, the poesibllity of high-lovel changes in NCFE, or tas
growing insistence on tie part of the exiles for arsed literattion,
lead to action not consiatent wlth the DCi's reopondltility. At
pregent a situation extets in whlch CLA and tho Divialor esurged
with CLA rogponalbility cannot oxerolse that recponaibility.

6. Reoxamendation.

_., Tro PRC has reviewed this agreament and has refused to
avprove the budget of NCFF until this aurnenent or a vedi Scation
acceptable to NCFE is adopted. Tho Director nas apsroved tis
decision and it Ls ougzested that he stand ton it.

L. K, wHiTe

Acting Desaty Director

(Adin stration)
CLO: TWB/eh
Orig - ADD/A (for DDCI)
hee- °
1 ce - I6/™MNIC
1 cc - ClO
2cc -



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

*SONTDENTEAL

Security Informatica

bry

ER=3-1369

_ 29 July 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Catef, International Organisations

FROM: . a Qeputy Director Central Intelligonce

Attached is & memorandum which was handed me by
Spencer Phanix covering a confidential report made by--
two NCFE people with regard to NCFE's action in connection
with refugaese : Zt have not read this in full and would J:ke

your recommendation and analysis 30 as to spare mo thle if

possible.

Snele

“GGkesia ital



--- Page 105 ---
14-00000 *

July 15, 1952 :
Revised July <0, 1952

PUATESH

Raduced to 1% sinpi-et terns, the suc pean refugee
prodvlea can be re#olved, sevin; liboration, only by the ussi-~
wilztion, or at least the integration of the refugees into th
countries which receive thes or by thoir emigration ta countries
better eble to co co. Yettenul and internstlon:1 pr ans vast
in Bcos8 und cost «ro re reé for these purposes, : it is
obvlouely not within Revet’s power or intore t to.angaze directly
in tuo, But, is wey, Wille po ying atta tion only
to Ate direct ond er interests, NEFE can contribute $0
the eucccess of both tyo:# ef progruns, ut least. so fur au they

“ eoneern rafugees from the ten “UFK countries. |

The first step is, ef courag,, for NCFKX to analyze ite
porition in relation to tne Europe refugee situvtion und to
formul:te u policy accordissiy. PE has been a constantly
ang regidly -rowins orgenizetion, trully occupied with tne inmme-
dinte problems of expansion #nicn hive contronted 4t. lcPFE
ize been ceprivea of the opportund to pause und censider the
Coneenucnees of ite exp.saien in eh:
to ae¢.1 with these consequesccese:

ned situation, much less

Several basic f.ctora neve combined to alter tiCF's position

4n pelation to tnd Zuropess: refugee situation. while 1R0 .

° operated, NCFE wae in a pogiticn to wate a distinction between
the exile elite anz the meez cf refugees, wio were under the
protection of tre IkO dn curcpe. Ib, nowever, caanrd to exist
at wie beginnins of 1952. i#O's several successor organizstions
nave yet to prove their abiiity effe ively nd completely to
perfors its functions. Durt

ng th rly yeure of HOFE*a exis-
tenee, the frontier ccuntr , Gertsny, Austrin, and Italy, and
the internediury receivins ecuntries, France ani Britiin, were ~
absorded in post-war reconstruction or sudjected to milit..zy
occupation und hence were generally not in u pouition to tske an
active interest in tne refugees 18 sn instrument of their fcreign
policies. GFE in the U.S., therefore, could afford to ignore
moet developments of exile activity in rove, re:.sauring itself
that the headsuertors of aczt of tne exile Hetionil Councils wore
in the J.S. under nozin: 25. control. Bormally, of course,
eucn of theae ccuntries hue epecific interests in Zastern furvpe,
wrier do not necessarily coincide with those of the J.3. As
conzitions spproach the norzsl in -~keh of these countries, NcFsta
grounde for self re-ussurssce becoze less eolid. Until its Spy l,
1951 initiation of eatur-tica srouccasting to Ceech:oslovacia,

which marked ite uppeers:ece ag an instrument uctively affecting



--- Page 106 ---
14-00000

vunnalyzed and the concluaions crwan therefrom, Tae

-2-

the countries whence the refugees flee, RFE could wlso ignore

"the presence of the ref.zeea in the ect. This, however, ia

no longer the case. ; .
Fundacentally, eny NCFE interest in tho “urope.n refugee

Bitustion is an aspect of the gener::1 NHCFS relutionship with

exilea, Inthe chunjed Huropean situ:tion in widch thio inte=

rest tu :nd will be manifested Crs siould reconsider ite daaic

Adnstruments for such rel.tionsiica t tha intion:.1 Councils.

Thoir exceptions, gaps, and shortcoming: should oe carefully
inudequacy

ie Instrusent ia the eed - -
Bitustion in Surope will be in ated in this report. VCertain

ad ptutions of this instrament .nd th: cre:.tien of nex ones

will be required if NC¥S is to c:rry out its functions and

re:lizoe ita potenti: litiles,

of the-iiationul Councils as 2

-~Ill-
ren

A. Tao Batant of WF2!a Concern to Duty 4

In the past NCP! hus net directly concerned itself with
trem behind ghe Iron curtzin.

the over-all problem of refugees {
This policy of ACrk hus munifested itself in the following ways,
CPS hee consistently aade it cleur thet ity enfef interest lies
in wh:t 4t regarded as the politieal and intellectu-1 elite of
enigrations froa the various Iron Curtsin countrica. Certain
elements of this political ani - intellectu.l olite, nosevar,
realized the necessity and the faportunce of channeling sone

of thelr uctivities towerd th- cases of their respective emisra-
tions on « ya nol basis. This reulizgation was dictated either
by suecniteurian or strictly re_listic politie:d principles, or

by a combination of the two, accordinsly, these elements of the
elite epproscned ACFE with their proposula for NCFZ mnterinl and
mor.l eupport ef such .ctivities. Tiese propo g divtrered widely

and were izpleesnted at vurying perio over t lust turee
(@ura, with the result that presently CPE ies in drectly supporting

b:.Sis at cn annusl agount of:

refugee ectivities on u neotion:}
£ , ana with the furcn.r result that these activities

ure confused, hoghagurd, erratic, tll-coordinated and unjustly
and inexplicsdly disproportionste. ome nm. tiOnslity groups,

as for instance tie Hungerians, have been rec-iving relutively
lurge «mounts for refugee uctivities, with.other greups, as for
exacple the Foles, who have s large emigration, receiving notuing.

. The vaticles for the chunneling of this support hive also
differed widely, Originally, NC?3 'a theory in providing sup porty
for sucii activities was bz ed upon th existence of Netional


--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

-3- |

Councils or Committees, the tue: bein: tht the liatdonal Councile
should themselvoo Undertacea auch sctivities in orier to gnin for
_ticeselves the neceusury standing in their reapective enf@erationa,
| Thio was not: altogether inconetatent with ViCFS%s policy of emphasia
~ (| > epon direct -89iS5t.nce only to tne intellectuap and politienl elite,
m7 but. was a subsequent developr-nt thereor. :

. The most ambitious. and long-lived of these Hationat Couneile!.~
refugee projects has been the “Refugee Service of the Hungarian”: .
Nationul Council, which ia-the beat und ulnost sole surviving -~
Oxmple of Nuvi's origin 1 theory. The record,. however, even of.

‘this prize Oxsmple, ia an extresely spotty one (detalles to follow”.
dn a deascrtptiva report to be cubsitted sepurutely). sore ce
Importantly, the re.sons for tie apottincss of the iC's record
ure not all attributable to the HC Ateelf; anny, indecd, ure
due to the situation in «hich the HOR "a: pprozeh to the refugee

_ proble:, which hus provided fin-nei.1 sypport, but little or no

“guddarce or mor:1 support. ® Rifas ates bins bad de optalr Oud ovbtiy

; ak hia to NOKey ; .

‘Inthe Rumanten ease, IC support for refugec nuctivities
was originully channeled through the kumanian ilutdons} Counedl,
which ceasued to enjoy NUFE recognition in 195G. Since that time,
ACF support for Rumanian refugee activities hus been given to
Rumanian selfure, Incorpor:ited, an Organis..tion entirely outside
the National Council cutegory, and which includes Anerleans on
ity Board of Directors, : 7 ,

In the Czechoslovak cage, NCPE hag ehinneled its support gor
refugee uctivities through the Council of Free Crechoslov.ikia, a
Naticnzl Council, which was the victioa of n political oplit
lasting from January 1952 until July 44 1952. The Council of
Free Czechoslovakiu, in turn, ciiunneled some of this Support to
aN orgenizition which enjoys tie status of voluntary agency, the
Americ-n Pund for CUzechoslovik kefuzeea. Thias orgunia::tion, .
, like Rumsnian Welfure, Ine., includes Anerie:ns on ita Board of
Directors, which is chuired by Professor Janes Shotwell. Unlike
Rumanian aelfire, however, thy ifcR in Germany and Austria received
from IRG or HIU@G and U3COA fsetliitea und/or Tinanetal support
as did other larger org nivutions such as the WewWG, the Lutheran
World Pederation, the xorla Council of Churches, the Americun
Joint Distribution Vonnittoe, ete. which simred with it the status
of voluntary agency. There in Ao voubt that Czechoslovak refugees
have been, to some extent, the victima of the politicrlr fluctua-
tiona of their le:dersiip in the @.3., und that, in +: sense, NCPE
must «lao accept som: responsibility for allowing the political
Situation. to hive h:d repercussions of this nature,

X

. In the cuse cf the Ibunians, no specific Sums in the budget
(which has been Provided ‘by Wcrz) of the National Committee gor a
Pree Albania have been e:rmurked for aid to Albi:niun refugees;
although cespite’ thie the NCFA has, it ia reported, due chiefly
to close American supervision in kome, m:.naged to dc more for
Albani:n refu:ees in It.ly than otier National Councils, aa for
instance the. ildc and BNC in Italy. 4

>


--- Page 108 ---
14-0000

- An

use of the f-tlura of the

: In the exnse of the voles, bec;
Folish omiyration to produce a unt national ccuncdi) witen
could be recognised by NC no finsnelal support whatecevor
has been elven by NeFs rofucee activities, although
the roles have one of the sblo onig. ations of «11 the
Maticn.lity groups wit cooparntea, and altnough
tha Poles huva an organisntion, ‘moriean Telia aur Hellef, a

voluntary. gency, which seems to be at leat aa effective, if
not more go then the Amertenun Fund for Czochoplovik Kefuceon
or Mumantan welfare, Ince, orgerizntiona with which 1+ ia

roushly comprrable,

© of the Yugoalavs, whiek io probably tne moet
‘H point of view

In the
: di-tleoult euee of nll, from tho J.3. and the HC:
( as wogl ay from the viewpoint of the ineividued fugee, NCEE
° hus cOnfined itsel? te cuntributing ee-1l anounty to the banevo~
lont ssoctaticnr of Free Cltizens of Yurowlavie dn Lonion, in
order that cobtain exlled le:dernevho rendered Biyn:l services
to the Allied causd during world sar Tl, through their garticl-
pation in the revolt of sareh, 1941, whteh led Yuroslaviz to
rosist toe Hani Invasion ~ might receive anell stipenis. Although  ~
tide aid Le rendered through on orgunizaticn brond, ts exiles
residing abroad, it 4: in Tine rather with deri’s policy -of pro~
viding aaniotance to » politicel and intellectual olite than with
the policy of indirect support through Unationel Councils or other
ergunieutions of refugee activity. No Yugoslav Nationa. Council,
enjoying NCFE reco,;nition, hus ever emerged due to the dalicate
Situution of wastern polley vis-a-vis tito's governwent.

In tha cuse of the thraa Beltic States, although Cr has
bean provided, both in the U.3. and abroud, with. the Instrumenta
waich have most ne:rly proved thensclyes cupsble of etfictent,
just ant honest use cf funds for r furoe activities; n
fund@ have baon placed at the dievoanl of tha three Baltic
Consultative fanels or their counterpart com:lttees ‘in Germany

and elsewhere abroad.

the principle was never cle.rly
Proyent, is se mye

Eesupported refuzae

posaible, to tno type of

dex to its elftizens who

foreign «wcuntrg. Suck ansio-

Ordainally, also, ulthoun
defined or figidly adhored to, and,
from as absorvad, it was felt th .t
ties shculd be restricted, us auch =
assist o whieh «2 consulate would re
Tound themselvoa in difficulties in +
tarce would according to this line of thinking only occestonilly
anc in cases of extreme and immedi:nte naved, be nuterial; essentially

+ would consist of advice, transl tion ana verifieution of
documents and diracticn‘of the refugee to the cppropriate ngency
espable of furnishins him with the type of furtior: zssist-nce,
materi:1 or otherwise, which might be requimned. It haz always
been recognized, however, that the verious Hationsel Councils
acting as consulates for t:eir anti-Communniet compatriots, who
could not turn to the leg: lly-recognized. Vomnunist .embcesies,
leg:tions or consulutes of their countries for help, would have
to provide some muterisl uasiatence for those who turned to them
Tor help, if only « tram ticxet, to allow then to visit the various
int -rnatidnal und locil social agencies wi:o could help then, or



--- Page 109 ---
14-06000

“5

the price of a noal or a night's lodging whieh would carry them
over the necenanry period! of tine which it always t.ces until

the anehinery © f other .gencles cun ve peroundad te atart grinding
for the ucaintanca of thesa people. ilowever, ss tine vent on,
NCP? sastotanes wan also. being «given, directly cr in iractly, to
es whieh gove parttoulsr attention to material uli, as for
ce the APCR and Rumonian selfero, naither of witeh hag

any clear and responsible ralation with a Snttonal Counctl, yet
each of which has been the victim, to vome extent, of the vaguries

of exilo politics.

Son> of tha elevents which seem, olther conac ly or
uncenaciougly to huve been operative In the deveros ¢ of this
Nere poltey of only liutted and indirect concerh wits the over-all
provlem of refuresn from Fantern Surope wore the Yeliowlng 3

1. Xefugenn tn the muss were already the direet coacern of
a largo, well-steffed und well-finanead internatia orsninivation,
the 180, which ce:nt that the problems confro:.ting the vstional
Gouncils and other organizations of the exile elite wero limltod

in ucove,

2. Until the initiation of saturation broad sating to
Ceechoslovakia on Hy 1, 1951, NCSE (through ReE cr any other
tnatruzent) waa not itself an active factor in tha wrusac problem.
{It was not directly ansoclated with the refuges ntuseli, either
Andirogtiy atimulating hin to flee or thre: nis increised

h

value for Information plfQposes,

3. fhe Nation:.1 Councile and Comaittees ware ecnsidared to
be a suitable tnatr nt quolifiad to dol witn the ‘ugee pron
bler in the lisited nanner in whieh it confronted ¢ ring
tho axistence of IKO. It was folt thit any erodit f alotance
to rmefegeos could opproprintely be given to the nati councils,
whieh would .dn turn reflect to th: eradit of NOYN, the .S. and

the Free cest in general.

While IRO operated ;HCTE was in a position to saxe a dletin-
ection between tho exile elite and the mass of refusses who were
under the protecticn of the LRO in Rurope, IRG, however, ceased
to exist at the beginning af 9952, evan before RO disappenred,
eare and muintenance of refugees in nd out of earas haw passed
to the various loc. national suthoritins,. [80's Luactions of
protection: snd cere for the refusee in both legal anc zatertal

‘aspects respectively from arrivi] to emigration have bean divided


--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

-6-

i anong theaa aoverneanta and two internntional ngoneten, the UN
‘ life Commissioner for Refageea and FICS, none of whien haa
0 provided eith the mena ndequete to the verfornaree of
tivity tuoxg aspinned it, and the latter of whien vara only just
beconin,, fully operational. in consequenes of LkU'o closure
the varioun voluntury sgencias, auch as Jes, LWE ond #UC, ete,
hava been deprived of fncilitios which were provide? by IRO in
athe past, with the raeult tint they have heen compelled to
curtcil thelr netivities, Neither of IRO's successors hao
.csumed the vast and vitul coordinating function scarforzed by
Ino, witn tue result thtt the prasent cenfantlon 49 discouraging.
it way davolop thal tno Maw State Department = MSA progeum for
neo-refugoos with ciarify this confusad situation, bu © prevent
dt, dtsole, ds as yet cn untnown tucter and naturally runorg
fesarmiine dt at the fleld Lovell have tius farp only. served to
confound the... oniusion.

“The porloi of IRC'a axdutaneo coinciayud with tho period
of wavs omierution, wheracs at prasent oaigration ponaaibllities
aro ginall nnd uncertiia, with the rayult tant to the hard core
remnent, whieh cannot ve woved, La vain: sag to th ste011 but
steady flow o: new arrivals, mout of whom ure unndle to enigrate
and who wust «Luo tnes tho uppallings employment conatltionns in
tae feontiar countrigs os Germany, Auatria, Itely anu Trloute
(in the oth r fronti yr ccuntrion of Ureace and Turkey tno eitu=
ation ig probubly simil.r) anu the intermediary rocolvisg countries
such aS Franco snd 3Sritain. Cut of tne more slowly moving
recnanls, p.rticularly in tne frontier counieies, tie posoibility
@xists fer the Lortation of wore stable n:tlonal committaes,
whici would sence de mora suacoctible o! ccntrol.

Durin., the anrly yvenra of NCKEs existence the frontier
and intoruediory receivins: countries wore either «baorbed in
post-war reconstruction or were subject te itlitery eceupition
and hunea@ were not in a nomition to amo osetive interest in
the refugees as un instrument of their foreign policie¢e. NCFE
dn thea U.S., therefore, (2 Id'arrord to ixnore mont developments
of exile uctivity in surope, reussuring itself that the head-_
quurtors of t exile national councils were in the U.2. under
nominal NCFR control. Normally, of course, ench of these countries
hus specific interests in Kistera Murope, which do not nacoasa-
rlly coineide with thee of the U.5, tnere ars now atrong indi=-
cations shut the situation is more ripidly -ppro.eching ite more
normal .spoct and that it is still in. the process of chanye in
this direction, . *

In Junuury the Sritish-bieked Centrsl and Hietern Muropasn
Vomzission of the curoyeun ovement held its virst m.-a meeting
ic tondon; da April tsa brenci, Comité Nationale pour 1'suropo
Livre emerged; and in June the Uerming attemsted ta brin about
the emergence of & crntral organizntion ot refusees, which, in
ite composition reflucted traditional Gernan aymp :tidee with the
Seperatiot sovemants of Sustern curope, a policy which ie in
ddrect cenilict with thit of NC#! and RFE... Although the autho~
ritices, p.rticulurly in the irontier countries, grob:.bly lack



--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

fol

‘they «ro prosontly .ble

“T= oa

opectul finenclal menns to engage in .ctivity on an NC¥k-scerle,
thev.do pouneas,: dy virtue of their control of thn legal snd
walfure framework within which the refuged nugt: axiatp :the menna.
to extend or withhold benafite so us to.influencae the: refugee
politicu] aituntion to thelr advantage. It seeco re.sonable to
suppyo.e that us thepe nitlona gain in strength ani indeperdance.

tris process will continue at an increasing Tute.

Au wa result of the fuctors descrived above, tho refugee

finda binuvelf in wn tneransingly hostile environsent, coprived
of an offoctive intorn.tional protector ond inenpnable, alone,
unaided anu un uldged elotaly to aeo hia interesta und defend -
them from exploltation. ne Coochosloviks ani voles in Germany
peovede atricing examples of shorteishted, winless exile
presoceupation with uterile polit 1 manouvering to the advan~
tuge of thelr Garman houta. at the sume time, the voluatury

agencion tn demmuny, whien, rented

after ThO's domloau, wera g:
certuln facdlities by H1COS wust, utter thamtiflention of the
contractual agreements, loox to tho German Governuent tor

whutevor facilitios it may choose to rant then.

Until its Hay 1951 initiation ov .aturution brondcasting .
to Czeechoslovakia, which a reed its appenreance as a:. .natrunent
actively affecting tho countries whence the refugees flee, RES
could nlao ignore the prasence of the refugees in tha vest.

Since that timo, hovovor, the steady axpunoton of Rirk's activity
and itu increasing need of refugeon ag informitional sources have
led to stron, accusationa that RFs Lo evading tts reeponsibig
litdes und failing to scecopt tha’ conseyuonces of ita own effec
tiveness. Althouyh RYE expressly refr:.ins trom specifleally
inciting itu auagdonces to Fleo, its comp:.risons of life in the
vest with life in the Exot inevitably constitute un indirect
encourasenont to esenpe. noge uccusntions ond resentuent are
dll-concenled nnon, the rapresentativas of the various interna=

tion:.2 end volunt:.ry umencles.

Ree'a information service gen, who, of LFE's personnel, sure.

in closest cont.ct with the refu.;cos, sympathize with tuls
eriticitem ant wish that they could do more for the refuseea than
to io on thalr own. nese RPE tat ‘orwat ion

on endless series of rivals
They usunlly present the refugees

@atnerers are in compotition with
seeking this valuable commoulty.
who have been holprul ‘in providins them with information with
presenta of tood, ciywurettes or money. Although they would like’ .
to be ina pooition to 50 Re wore than tuis tor their into. manta,
they e.nnot, for, us they oxplain, they sre not in tne walrure '
business. Une of thoir speciul difficulties is to persuade the

refugeos to come to them in the firat pluce. almost universully
they heve reported that if the refu;eca were u.de to r alize that

Free Surope was dcing something. or them, they would be more willing |
and even eaver, to come to tne R¥S information offices in the canps
to wive freely of their informution. Furthermore, Rrs's propa=
ganda can be d::ngerously wenaxened by the boomerang effect of the

few disillusioned refugees who return to tneir homel:.nis.


--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

~
o

_ | TIFSt “vscuum, tha UN Hien Commlusion, ;

‘trated in one cago that-tae br.

‘to order this ecnfused eituutL

~B~

. the closure of InO and tne absence of —

any uuthority enpable af Organdauing nd controlling the refusee

hatlonal coumit toes a-Gouble vacuum oxisto. in reavect to tie

to Wik, the voluntary

agencies and the State Lepartwont brogran have yout to prove tnotr
in respect to the second vacuum, the Bribion,

the. Fronch, the Ttaliunn, tne Austrians anc the Sormana have

tie possibilities ot filling this Vucuume Uf these, the Ver an

interest is nost likely to provide the wout direct and fumediste

conflict with WCreeRge= Interosta., Phe foe at the Cor ang

have dezonstruted an interest ia these eommt bao and particul: rly

dn oupport of the Yoparatint elements Anotesn unit those comule

ttees are not wlthout POLLtL end importances Beenuedy of tie

Politdic.l ambitions Or nest desire to rerve OL tusic leaders :

4rd of the nend -of the refuges for spokesmen nnd Yoprescntatives

in their deulinze with Leeul authorities, auch comzittooa will

always exist, @hotnor or Gut. they oro controllad ar supported.

If these committees re to be euntrollod ot mid, dv Lis obviounly

to Horsts advantage that taey be controllod by NCES. It would b0

dungarous -to usauaia bint thle control coulu bs axercired BOlely

through the "leudera®™ rasiging in the J.5. an tie Opportunity

exists vor theue loadara ‘uns for those in turope to gluy off

one Seatern Power ugalast another, It has vlreudy been denong~

aneh of a nationul eouncil, with

1 6ue to the axigencies of tye local

deh 18 cuite contrary

In consequence of

wbdlity to £111 it.

headqucrters in the U
situation may ve obliz to follow a policy wit

to the interests of NCrz.:

. In addition to the. wujor vouble vuouum Geserived above, our
Survey has disclosed tia existence of a nunbor of thnor vicaums
in exile represeatution whici: uve been filed by unecrupulous
self-appointed natlonal represeatutivos whowe presence nis been
largely responsible tor the skepticiam and elstrust wits which .
exile representatives ure frequontly regarded by the internitionel
and voluntary -asencios. Tris anfortunate fsetor may be traced to
the lack of recognized necraditation for such ‘represar: tives, to
the absence of nny reuponsiole und ¢ nsetatent field Supervision,
control and backing of wortry und qualified representetivea, in
this Yogard, ropresentativas of the CHU itd<-ch Coumissiog and the
voluntary agencies nave expressed u definite interest in offorté
to order the chuctie situarvion of the nation.1 representaulvea,

As we have shown abova, it in to ores interest to attempt
on, and if the uttompt is to be nade,
careful consideration ust oe wivon to the Selection of the tools
wi:lch ure to be used. - Tha Division of tures which has hitherto
dealt with NCritg relations with tie exiles, und Aincirectly with |
the refugees, h:e been the Netfonal’ Councile Divisions, This Bivision



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

hus ubed as its brete instrument the National Councile and

Ss

Committéos which h.va their hondquarters in the Ua.
oxporlence Over the pust thrae yeers hog served conclublvely

‘to modify the initial view of the Habional Councils as sultable
Anotrumonte for tha creation not only of =n .tuouphora of posi~.
tive end constructive cooperntion, but oven for the effective
dnplementation of NUR: polley ind purpose. .

‘The divisive factors of exile have resultod ing

\ 2. The absonce of any Polis: lutional Council which enn
t qualify for WGre Peecounition; .

i 2. The absence of any Rumiadan dational Gounell which eun
: qualify for Nurs recognitions .

‘\3. A prolonged split (a year-and a half) in tho Council
: of Freo Cxochoslovukiaj .

4. A precariously bolunced sungarian National Council.

Other factors hive produced « Gulzurlun National Committee which
is uns-tinfeetory from alucst every point of view. Gonuina and
productive reform of tha BNU will uoubtlous prove. a prolonged
and difficult process. Thin leavan tho NC: with a tational
Committee for a Free Albanin, which could stand reform and
which, nevertheless, ias olwa-s been cdosaly supervised by
Ameriezne and with the three Zaltie Consultative Punels which

were established entirely by NF in tho firat instance,

ie mingle nations] council during its exiutence, with the

" possible oxcoption of the three Baltic Consultative Penvls, hag

of avon reusonubly offlelent

demonstrated itaalf as dein; espable
ifudrg. In cuth cause

and just adodinistration of ite own
NCFE his been obliged to step in, .t first exercising only
cursory sup-rvision, out at present -ttempting to introduce
ayotemo of closer ajurintatrautive ond finuncinl cantrol and
Supervision, which, unless ude auffictently rigid, will doubt-
less prove as ung:.tisinctory as they have been in the pust,

where national councils do exist branches or sections of
these ccunclls which have deconatrated their effectiveness can
and should be used where Practical to isplement.on 5 vecondury
level try projecta anu policies. Yor tie prima:y inp] -menta-
tion of these projecte ad policies, however, s.more perminent
ordered .nd controllable apparatus must be found, ono not liable
to the natur:lly disruptive tensions of exile life. sven where
unity in o national council ean be produced, experience has
proved that its continuity ts at best tenuous -nc unreli.cble,
with the result shat tho council: becomes: u delle :te und cucbrous-
apy.Patug whieh muat subordinate the vehLevement of pructical
Souls to the maintenunce of this ‘taeporury nd elusive unity,

- . Furtior fuctoro diacdised by our survey reinforce the
conclusion fhat 17 NC¥2 18,”as we beliove it must, effectively eo


--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

“1u-

Furopaun roefuyer Liel4, a new inatrus
wetors 2190 taad we dndiente roughly
fuss :ossess,

develop tts interest in the
ment must da found. These
some of the qualiltloy while. tia instrumant

oe 1. No: oingla exile ofgaudeation 6ng.79% in refuxee aeti-
vity, including those recolyin. NUTS Support, 2% consistently
food in sll-of Lta looul brinches. ‘Tits observation applies
wt, ‘ ulsuo to those organizations recalving HUF, Ruyvorts waieh Jo
“ not f£.:11 into the nattonul council c.tevory ( the GR and

Rumanian +elfaro).

° Conchusiong 's
In its xctivity in the Surovean Taluree
munt ba completely trea to welact the org.
Cvadiusls with which 4t may consider Lt ornetinc
on any level, HCP! must therefure nob va 65:
or to cooperite with any orgentsation in wll |
mugt ba free to uevar conn-etions .t uny tine any orgunie
astion or its parts (individuals or sections) + which it
finda At no longer pruetical to couperate., SCF cust be conple~
tely flexible in this operation,

cd, NOFE
og ang indie
Le COope rata
to support
taound

2. The rofuges ia Suroon fa contronted ¥ a Bituction

which {9 flutd in’all its sspeets. Ho fices & the closure
of IRO, « multitude of uncoordin: tad agoncioan, continued
existence of acme (the. voluntary agencios) ts uicertain; the
Operations of fotners (the Uil und 'IChE) remein t% ve doveloped

fully; the scope and activity of anothor (tne ttase Department
6, Buspicious

Progrim) ‘is in the rumor atnge. He 18 uncortni
and retyful of tie now atatus and intentions of loe 1 nutio-
nal authorities under whose dmscdiate juriadict @ uust live,
‘ite fuees the after-effeets of masa onigration, » although
it coused some time 4 » %.8 deprived him or tz Bt qualified
oY his comp.triots urd. honca of stable Nation.1 icesersiiip,

For himeel!, the ligited, uncertain and uncocrmicasted euderation
on om individual busis whieh etill exiets offer. cat faint hope
for depurture from tie frontier countries. dis faces ulwost
impossible employsient conditicna, cvependin:: upon ice:1l situa-
tions «nid geisonal work whien often requires si2@ G2 ¢ mhifted
from plaice to olueco :s the employnont
mujority, however, must stay in the enmp ne
faces shifting camps which sre often moved or cigeclved by the

loc .1 uuthorities. Thesa YecLors comodins to grocuce 4 demorae
lising teelins of impermunenea and insecurity. Zsey aro, in

turn, agsr:vated by the snsynpethetioco attitude of 2 countries

in which the refuses > himself, on attétude & Traquontly
“approuches hostility on hich ig net isprovec ty + presence

in these couatrias of end. eared expelled ethnie grinurition who .
were nee the citizens of.-tha refujsoa's.homelsnd. | 7i9 nonelinders ur
1a a deplorable foelang of apatyy, hopelessnesz, {a0lation and
abandonment ani & total lack of any sense of dirervion or purpose.



--- Page 115 ---
14-0090

having tiuese insuppressible, refusve gro.

-ll-

Conclusions :

HF "oe uppro.ch to the refugee
Droud in order th.t it may impart a ree
tion, ccntinulty ond aecurity. This ro.ch cust. have an
abtractive uxtilonul flavor which will-urpe.l to the refucee"s
dugire to belong, without encour sing? chuuvinistic tendencics,
and, indeed, should provide no positive substitute for then,

To implesent this approach Ne & in usent dn the field must
“6ain be suprewely flexible but suBC gle of close and régid
control. This instrument Must be c er conveyin;: an
japression of scriouoness, Vesponaibiiisy and cenetructive
dinterent, bhus ingpiring + fealing of c¢ dence on the part
of the authorities and ugencies a8 we§l as the refugees,

4 dn the frontiers
wleage of Ne £ role
elatively negligible

his problems nust be
of purpese, atrec-

Zein gonersl it may be observee
countries there” a not..bla Ll:
in support of t udiittedly 1
refugee .ctivities in widen it is t; rf indlroetly engaged.
RFi is, of course, widely knewn uns + Widely criticized
for its fuilure to accept >: Onsibility ror its part in the
refugee problen, ¥2UE ig usially «now, out cnly vaguely und
secondarily, and in Many casea the piccure of ity scopo, actia
vities nid gouls is distorted. There is a din awareness of
F2J2'*9 co:nection with REA, but a senerel ¢_iluro to draw. any
concluaions therefrom,
G2nclusion :

To engace in rofuvee activities of any nature or extent
without clecrly Addentifving and labelling Scere ao the organiza=
tion ultinstely responaible gor these setivities is a needless

“

- ano genselass failure to exploit a poseidilit; in tha form of

ennanced f@73 pre:tige and gre.ter Sympatay ani cooper.tion-
with the work of RFS and velE on tne pa uotn refusees and
Other active agencies, © Yarticulargy fr peint of view of

R¥S's essential relationaship to the ra: sees it in a serious
mistake got to do go, Thereiore tae instrusent Whheh HOPE

ado for ite wore in this field cust oa ddcntifiuble only as
; Operation, cle-rly related to RYT and PEUE,

4. It haa bear mentioned Previously thet tie internetional
@nu volunt.ry sxencies tena to rezird tha exile represcutatives
with skepticism anc tend tu held tnez at arc's length. This
attitude seengs partd.lly to result fron ¢: =” ignorance of exile
politica ane their unaerstund:bie reluctance to tecome involved
therein. Their fenorence and gisinterest s:3 in seve: sl cases
led then to choose refugee ussisiants 54a aavisors of unfortunate
politic#l bsekground and tendencies from tee sure point of view.
Araln, however, as mentioned above, the represertutives of
several of these &cencies have expressed -a ce linite interest in
PS BOmeLOW Orgunited and

econtrolled,

Coveluslen ’

- Responsible and -direes Americ..n control would therefore


--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

~l?]=

d6 ouch to ¢ivpel this negative zt
.e€ @ core positive ond productiz:

ge und sculd pave the way
pration between the nation
stive in their behalf.

ares

y

i refuges groups and tne agencies
tale cyntroi would ulso it le reaacn.ole to supposes, helo to
1421 vacuuna in exile represeriusice Oo: tne “ind descrived ..bo vee

zations surveyed in the
verg.l tonioney in gre:ter
fdeally or ;
42 nd compurisen between
ni unnettled atmosphere
wl environsent of

nea anu Britains In

igtribaticn or
extent oF 4nd

ustice inination, d rita oppor- -
loat throagh furs saly to attonmp)h to win ~
less.nirrow assis sleznatse (sucu oy the Czech

and ‘the ba)

tiuta, Huagar
3e tne poli cteal and

now 95poz2 or inthe fut
Ravienul etructures which lc

4%

& maidance
reducad

A. SC¥E's acyrosen

If ACKS 48 to modify ite prea
wend fess ita inserest in
7 it sac: viret formulste ‘ged and comprehensive
esarcecn to the res ‘ugea as: t-pe co? person in wiiom uns in whose

prosiems thie interest is to ve arovn.,

Tals xpyroech will, by the nator in the
vefacee, uifver sarkedly irom these «2 otner orgaundvationa -etive
in the fleld.

Al these organizations, tne tavell ig: “nee egencien, the
locel national governments, the JS 22 eo Corniseioner and the
volustery agencies, ure interested is the Urechoslovuk or
Ruzenian or sole who cronses the serier secause, respectively,
he sight be a Coz-untst agent or nay2 infcrmation, he ts'or night
be a politics1 refugee or because ze i2.2 guman being in need. .
Bore <8 interested in sin beacause ne £2 2 Czechoslovak or Rumanian



--- Page 117 ---
14-00000

o@i.ply in promotins tho existence of cortain :.ttitudes,
und setivitles whic: will ono u:.y contribute

-13-

or Pole -~ a citizen of .. country whose people were promised
at Yalts certain rights and, privileges witeh they have not
received’ bocuva@ of the violont ‘interforence a Communist

\Ru:.sia. Tiis is also the fundsmental theoreticnl rexzson for

RFS brosdcastea to tha Czochoslov:ks in Crechoslovukda,. the

- Poles in Yoliund, -t@. Tio fundamentsl practical reason in of

course the interest of the United Stutes in these nations and
peoples us Evrope:n politic .1 fuctors.
RPS obvicualy ennnot create is eAlbtory unchine e-guble of
liberating tha nations of H.etern Europes It ds interested ghite
interesta

the successful

fulfilla:nt of th: promises tide «t Yalta. RK is intere:ted
bimt mothers ehculd te.ch thedr children cert truths to
counter Comounist lless that workers should resct in certnin
ways to Comaunist pressures; that students should undoretand
tha fallacies of the systen w h they are vbeias seduc or
forced to serve. In short, RFK wiohos to direct Czec lovaks:
in Csechoslov:k1in, Poles in Folund and Hungari ns in ilusgary
to act in the enlightened self-interest of their ressective
nations. Tie fact that tits enlightened sclf-interoat, as
supported by RYE, coincides with our own and other broudger
interests serves only to underline ito importslice.

se have tried to point out in tid: report the ex.ant to
ne presence and retivities and problems of the refugees
countric septern Gur:pe cunnot but be of interest
Again, UCES need not concern itnelf directly with the
feeding, housing, exploywent anc eudi:ation of these people,
any more thun RFE should ituelf undert:ke to riise an s2my.

Thiv ds not to ow WES tiers may not .ini it auvivudlo 60
continuc to uae linited welfare funds in ita work with :¢fusees.
But its prineip.1 tasks will be to protect its interesta by
attecpting to produce some order out of th chaos of refugees
activities by givin;: to the r:fujee «nd his representatives a
sense cf direction and belonginy, which the other agencies actkve
in the field ure admittedly unnble adeguately to provides. Without
it, the rufugee in Europe .lmost inevit:nly sinxa into . etate

of hopeless «nd isoluted apathy. Ha belongs to nothin~ bat the
tense :.nd quarrelsone fr. ter. ‘ty of his fellow abundoned. Sitting
unoceuried ull d:y, nio only uctivity soon bacozes the éndless
intrigue of the politicsul parties. «sith few books anc less comnu-
nicetion with the outside world, vad perticulurly, without
constrective leadership .nd ;judd.nce, the purtias dbeconc ulmost
the only orguni:ations with oe ne ‘tional fluvor open to tue rofugee.
In this «:taosphere it is not surprising thut refugee nationalians
become chsuviniatic .nu ideus, of nitions: interert, sucordinnted

to the narrow and petty goals of the politic. 1 parties,

The voluntary cad other ugencies and the loc 1 national
authorities can hardly proviie a constructive sudstitute since
they only spproach the refuyee as such, reentorcing his epathy
by their cuch needed gifts, unable to ¢fifer allegiunce to anything

other than the Churches, opposed or reluctant to underta:e any



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

“Slovaza in Germuny no

na

-l4e

tenconelesa. Ina
w current

e agencies ts a
e exaggerated and

altezpt at support or #uiduneo of his nutfone?
ell felrness, tt akoulu be noted, however, ¢
Bpronch to the rofugeae on tha part of nll t
ecractous ond eonsidernoloe laprovowent on wh
lecentive-xilling IkO dole system.

. But if NCP approsches tie naw auc pac, as wetl as tie
Older Di, not na a nsady "refugee" but usp a citisen of his
ountry who siuply finds higeelf in a difricult-position on ;
¢ Blue of the Iron Curtain eth r ton oa the ether alse, ~
249uls be posulbls to appenl to hio desive lor-antiona:
ecatinulty anu than tc some axtont nppa:l to nis tdeaa ¢f Hie
O-e snilghtened oalf-interast La much the sige why thet auch
Opy,enis are providod for tis ase ‘as compatrists at none

by HYP.

Tails approach woule alno tike into account the siinificaunt :
1C% thet many of the new arrivals, (estiuates run as hign as

Ey

a are not rezl "politic:1 refugoes". They lesve thelr

coun.ries for economic reasona or Gecuuse they are fac up or

ai / want to try out the conditions in the » ast when are
in their hose-

deserited to them a3 no much superior to those
lenia. Amon: these poople tu:re ure of course many uisfits,
laccgscetent a and undeosir.blea. Ho Ono yhoulu delude niugel?
with a pieture of all refuneas. un worthy, deserving, Lonast
p2ozle persecuted by «u Communist regime und fleeing for tneir
very lives, : . :
#CKE interents, however, override. thts unfortunate reality:
no fectvidual who lesvee in satellite country isr any resson
“Whatever should bea allowed to -f11 into such a ‘eanciition of
dieiilustonm nt that he should consider roturnin; or even consider
seriings work of his discour.geuent hone. One such return or
report of personal Jisillualonnent con produce a zost unfortunete
eointere? lect to RYE ind otiar. “estern prop:ginis. It is an
ucespied Lot that there have becn’ sue): cases 2: they are in

fet regarded as one of the f..etors contributing to the prarent
lower arrival rute of now escapees, .

Granted thi «pproach to the escipes end the old refuvee

and Sr ae a eitizen, und tne: desire to proviote vzony these people
tre 1lae. cf concern for thair roul gelf-itnterasts, the L @hich
wost adequately describes this apvrouch is that of the "conculute",

The functions of a consul..te ora to protect the intereets
of the citizen ubroad. ‘“utorial assistance is provided only in
cesea 3 emergency -= thea consulateb principal tusk is to texe :
an tctive interest in guiding tne citizen to tnose loenl agencies
beat asie to satisfy his wunts and to Suggest asprosicies and
attitudes cost lixely to benefit nim curing his stuy abroad.

The eset glaring and urgent example ar tie Need Yer such consular
galdarece may be found. in the neceosity tor proteetins the Czechoe
*t Only from the politicanl opsosion of the
Germans, but fron their own senseleas, destructive snu snort—

sighted politic... “maneuverines,



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

-15-
: . : . \
3, sodificationa of Nersta preoant ingtrunent.

Ae indiented adeve, it will of cours be useful und desl-
rable to incorporate is this asprowen und in the new inatrument,
sont it, features, (iadividusla und

(Fr ), designed to implee
orgunis.tionn) of the pransnt Lnotruncnt which hav: demonstrated

their effectiveness, ‘lowever, :lao an mentioned e-rlicr, in
order to .aaure the freedom of uction and freedom of civica of
the new inotrument, vertndn modifications of these, fenturoa gf
the srasant instrument will be required.

1. It will first of all be nocensary that those Teatureg
(individuals. und orgeai tiona) of the prosent instrument conole
dered suit:dle for incergor.tion in FECS be separitad udminlae
tratively and financially’ Crom thelr headquarters, since P35
will operate on the Basia of the following prededuriul approach:

Such individuals or org. nivetions wlll ve incorsorated in
PUGS cn one primary dsvbs -- thoir proved effectiveness in the
pust and/or their prozise of offectivenass uncor ae woidances
their retention will de dependent upon their ability auccossfully
to continue this perferaince. This 1a of course vaele: lly an
adaptation of part co: the uopronch whieh has enubled RE and RYS
to make offectivo use.cf qualified sxile persontiol for the attain=

ment of their own goals.

26

for the undirected and uncoordin:ted exystem of uluost
complete lack of control which his hitherto generslly prevailed
in NCFS's ralstionsiip to refugeo activities a: exile organi-
sationy, will be substituted a system of cortrol which will
preserve at lavat the illuaion of freedom througn the incorpo
ration of qualified exile orgs: lantlona and dndividuele ond

tho welection of otiera to fill gaps which such o :tiong .
and indivddu:.ls Lave proved unuble to fill. The f: ol thetr ,
ultimate responsibility to NCrE should be made .bundantly clear.
Thet tilda ia in no way tneoapatidlo with the atrogphere of an
illusion of freedon in wideh FsCS's axile enployees will be
working 16 amply proves by the success of R¥S national deaks.

It will be made clesr to these amployeas tr:

-t they should
conaider thenselves te de Korvine a5 consuls 1nd consuler
assistants under 4 civil service progr ie They’ should be given
tho is.pression that ¢ responsibility for the success of Fuc3
in ite attempts to .ssist tre refugees lies in tiedr aands,
und that its failure fer reasons of favoritis= or aisnonesty
would constitute un evasion of their patriotic responsivilitye

0. Functions urd potentialitias of FEUS.

The unie ins purpose of FYCS is of course to serve the
poligies und basic interests of NCFR.. ve have tried to indicate
the extent to which its work with the refugees would be directly
to thease interests, Other interesta which PCS would have the

purpose of serving might be 3

1) The prevention cf oicunderstandinga on the part of the


--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

“-lij- .

refuvees xad other agencies uetive in the flold regarding oll
phases of HCFE work, and particularly that of FUUS and RFS.

En Suropoun Neprasentative

2) The uttompt to keep the ¥
and the & Politsen] Advisor informed of extle politde:1 dave=
Lopacnt: Kuropo whien micht <ffeet their operitions nd to
control une i: 9 thene d@ velop: aa wherever ponsible te the
edventare of Eoand RF. For ox le, HUPE, adesisned to
ware volitien] varfiere on u brond Mont, wae recently. almost
outflinked in Gernmuny. Some organtyod mouns of preventing
Buen occurences, Or at leash of ravorting thelr davelopasnt,-

whould ba provided.-.

le The prtmiry ranetion of recs de to pppranch the refugee
aga citizen and by eo colony to try und set up conddticns and

Jntrod @ apirit which will make it posslole tor the -vefugee
to geresp: from the .puthy which Lo Ata trouitien.i Lot
waste

bacone a pocttive factor in the atrugsle of the
with atbeapt to perform toda runctdon in yeverul ways

a. Norwal conrulur setivity. SECS will engage da tae
normal consular setivitley of anterventtons on behuis of refu~
geoa with the lo¢:l suthoritien, voluntary agencies, inverna=
tional «ygenecles such ag the UN Nigh Comumiualoa, or wierever elge
At mdeht effectively «nd usefully do so. Lt will provice trans-
lations, verify documents, advise refuxoes on 12 relevant watters
in conjunction with thesa other agencies and genor.lly iaterest
Atuellf. inf. all anpects of tho refugec's life ina problaca.

be. Katericl cavistanee. white materdul asuiataunce should

be kept to a ninkoum, Lt must be reedsniszed that #WUS sill be
required to provide more help of this kind thun the nereul congue
lites, since the phyndes] condition of the person op i
aasistance wlll olmoat invouriubly be poor. Other or;
are better uct up to provide such material neada,
o! course attempt to coonerite with their alre
efforts to prevent dupliention. Sut FxG5 muay nave av
euergency welfare funds in order to eseape the aceusscion that
it {a a festh rbed or :nother oparation to “use” the. retusea.

1 tarset of
see morale.
of nind

‘ee Refures sorale The fundamentul practic:
@ll PCS operatians ghoula ba th: inproveuant of
This mor.lea depends on two f.etora: the refu;jee'a ©
and the utuocghere in which he lives. 7,

The refugee'y frame of mind should be dmproved in several
ways. Tne tirst of thea Lo tia citizonanip sapproseh ch ia

to govern all 22C3 oporationa, It should be wanifested ag sgn
aneca, k2 only .

ag possible after the refuee's urrivsl and eles

in the tera of a sreating and oriefins frow sumeone nar interested
in ailxing the-ralugee cf infora .tlon und an-ing hin questions.
This briefing ciuht include u deseription of tae volunat.ry xsenctes
which wlght useist the refugee, a deserfption in siiple terss

of his legal status and, of courve, of tue FECS progruz, including
the nines und addresses of its representatives in tho e-mpe or



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

‘areuc to whieh tie refuges mieht be cont.

(AU ghould be noted that BPS. publ Lentions
rafuseen, amone wien our survey has indie. ted thoy woul’
moult selcone and ore guci: nocied.

/ On the one hand,

, interests of the mfuree,
‘voluntary

iby'one of
suspicion

80 doing,

-17-. .

fhe refurcea night

aloc be gavac consiecr.ble distllusicnmont if at thie tise he
wera «liven A carefully wordod ferdiption of the Gitficult

econcale wituatilon in wnieh ha will bo oblaysed.tor some time

to reolin. . Por exanple in Gormany, the ruiugee should bo told

vresonce of large nunberu of refuyeos from the Kass Zone

of tie

and Of tu: Germun goverozent's anturnd desire to woulst tiem.

A repracenttive of one of the voluntary ugenacios suguented
thet they

to us tL

are ioittally accepted inte evuntrion rucet
econcule problagu.

tae refugees uca rorely mada to understand
with unupually savere

uecondly, the refuree's frome of alna might bo iuproved

y anutalixntion of reudins rooms containing publicsitongs -

dn the asthon:) langusyge5, some of thom goured aopepel sly to

the refuges ond hin problems. ror oxngip] fone: OF the ueoful
exdla-organ wed refuges ald Committees such as the aac&o-Rumantan
dn Lonuon the dung .rlan Office in bunten prowuee royal .r

‘bulioting containing Locsl legul unu Oaploynont news or interest
‘to the refusee. Su

bulletina should rocuive a wider dlotri-
tiem theuld be crouteds In this conneetion,

sre not reaching the

be

Also in thy ronding roomy,

Tadlos aiGulu be provided 4n rasponse to the voulra, frequently

oxpresped to uo, of hearing HE and other broudeasta in tho

haution.s l.nguares.

bution uni others LL

onatructive meetings, discusetonys and

! The org nisution of

naticn: celebretiona would provide un outlot Yr refugec enthuse
Yiauns Lf they wera supervised by competent Llewdersh dimt-

Lariy, 2400 gavuld etinul.te und poastbdly provide the/weans
for unlf-isip work projeets, such is the padatiago of barracks,
tac phlanti f gerdeng ona the organtration of souwlay clrelan,

roLlYg
dunguage oc

uczes or discusalen sroups, otde.se.

: Pane wegone fuector involved in the yuautican of reftugoa
won.le 4a that o aavironmant, the atmougnero in which he
lives. To Largs extent this-etmoupnerewoultd—o9 Ltaproved—-in
wodch-4livas, T.a large extent tains utmosphera would be |
idaproved by the orgurizition, ui. noted dOvG, Of Constructive :
cutlets for ta: ensrvzies now Aiesipatea in chuuviniatic ind petty
politic 1 Anversal ant internot ai strife, both of which n.ve
at ties leg to wurder in the eumps.

Pucd major effert in this direction, hovever, should be
GQlrectéd toward brid¢ the cup in nm constructive manner botween,
the voluntary and international agencios and .
authorities, and, on the other, the essential national
Cecasionally repreacntutives of the
ugencies have mentioned the fuet tiet retugees sometines
with them bast wien the situation hus been ex, lained
thelr aational -representutiveds or the regsona of
on the purt of theve agencies cited eurlier, this- 16

$s eould provide a responsible inatrument for |

the local

cooperste

not alvays cone, ¥:



--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

“ele

i
i

he principal g.p which exiatr ut prenant batween the varlous.

nuthorities and ths: refugees 13 over tie yueution of asuiallation,
or, ax it to usu:lly daseribed, “intexzcstion" and ®adupgaitlLon™.
thera lu aon.turck feeling ‘on the port of tuace agenctos and ate
thorition. tint in view of th rast fetion of ealgr.tion posutbi-
lities, thy only alternativ: open to muny of the refugees in to
edeot themselveg to thelr antlronent., ‘tna refugee, ie, howaver,
quite unierstung.:bly reluctant to Go so: He plann‘to return

to nie country. when it de liberated “nett .aur"s ho Le sura he,
will enterate snortlys pourticularly Lac “eruuny, he uw trongly
dialice or dletrust tha lonal populstioa. Thorn L of course

the aralning fuctor of onployment ponsibilitien - of the
napacta of th rafugee problem «with whleon FuCn CULO.t neod
cot directly concern itself, se ‘

i
PECS gan cantrioute to ith r-solution.
fone) selools, which
compromise, Mh
4 vatlonel schogls

dnulrectl,, however,
for example, ln Germany, the provlem of
how been a feore point, suscents a aud tub
refugees have utrugglod to maint in faull~ti
tor their cndluren, sometimes aucceediny with i und other
avtern:1 support, wadle tha lee Lo ond Snternathonal autiorities
have inoisted that refugee cidleren .ttend Gorman achoolnsa. The
refuvzee must oo made to underotend ti: dt Joo ote his ehildren's
Anterest to «llow them to adept as lem: op the ongentiol elements
OF national culture cin be praverved, This requirement could be
ung in some dastenee Lu alrocdy vedas mot by extru-cu. ricular
dnutruction La the national L.nguage, hlatory ond culture.

In the siune way the refuyes mut aise bo shown thet by
rofusing to ».jupt, he gay m.ve of his naticnal “Prony an ingrown,
Geupised and distruated cinority. If on the ether hund, he shows

‘willingnesan to ndept to the situation in ubdeh ne finds hinself,

ho ie much more likely to obt.in not only physic. 1 bat peycho=
lowic 1 benefits in tie Sor of brouwder Erocticul @experienca,

wita the powetboillty that this experience hay one d.y be of use

to him in ais own homeleund. This do a ¢iffteult point which the
maes ot refugeeso will be reluctunt to ernop. of lneir nore
intelligent lesvers, hovever, -- the sins which 8 henes to
emplpy == might be able to expluin ita inportince. algo, the
expenience of one «..mp direcicr in Trieste hee proved that it is
rut impossible to vot results through healthy aatlonul compatle
ticns 3 4f the xunandan aint vheic barrecig, tha iu rluns feel
hore oolisad to paint rg, «while prot tly ineffective among
tie hurdered older refugees, sheme cizht succensfully be used
anony new urrivaln, a6 for exunple, "I" you say you inten. to
return after liberation, whist will you tell your friends that you
dia for voland in emigration ° That you hetpad creste friends for
Foland by xeepines tho neatest barrucaa in farmenny --- or thet

you git around a pigsty all a. y doing notning ? That you refused
to tue a Job in . conatruction comp:ny deceune it was veneath
you, or that you helped to build « stronzer anu aora pronperous
wout to hasten the dey of liberation 2" ireumenta of this cind
were nut wnolly without efreet on sirliersa, smi shircers, during
t war. Doubtless they hava been tried by represontativeg of
tne voluntary agencies, ete., but FlCY representatives should



--- Page 123 ---
14-0000

-mational and international guthoritias,

-19+

have additional authority for auch arguientsa by virtue of their
wexbership in one divieton of an organization actively working
in many ways. for the liberation of tne refugecs' homelunds,.

Also, just sa tue presence sf extracu riculac schools, ~
by their peruntee of the preservation of the esnentials of :
nationol culture, encouruge attendance at German schools, so
the manifestativna- of NCFB's oimilar Latercat on the. local
level through PEGS might liberate tne refugee from the anxiety
for waintnining his traditions within nia azaller eroup and Bo
diminish his reluctunice tu attempt aose seavsre of adaptation,
fa this connection the citinenand; a;zreach applies parcticulariy,
since FECS must demonstrate that HCFE 1a not only sgenorally and
broadly inter:uted in Keaping untellite cuiture alive(s the

* DYO and fea at FLUE), but aivo in zeaping the individual refugee

1a touch with hin compatriots and trudi-=
tions not only through sarsonal contaet out ty waking availoole
to hia publieations in his lengwuase, Gte; In %.1a way tho
refugee miy t de encouraged in his slow precesa uf adaptation
to strunge and in many. Cases valle environwent. ,

living outside a cap,

This 18 aguin a vayt probles affected by wany tactors
far veyond the scope of FECY or i FE. 1t t# aiwost cebtai-ly
true that £f more respectable and a~ortawhilé joos were availa-

“ble to refuvees, much of their apparently nationally based

averaion to adaptation would disappear,

But if FEC3 makes empnasia on adaptation one of ite
major points of pol cy, and makes thie faet clear to the local

and then activoly imple~
it will wlnost certainly

mento this policy, ne suggested ubove,
ded oy these auth ritios,

find ituelf cost sympathetically regar

2. These ure but a few of the functiona which FECS should
be able to perform; anyone regularly active in the tield could
probably yguggeat many tore, There are, ncweve-, cortain broader
potentialtties for the develo;went of tuts instruzent which
might be briefly suggested wave,

In the first place, Lt should de pouBlble to gain
Home advantaze, beyond ghe fact that they cuce to us, fron
the presence of the refusecs in the West. FZC3 aignt be able
to produce auch an advantage. ,

To brand this approzch ag hopelessl7z idealistic is to
ignore the oxtraordinary practical reusits acciaved at Camp
Vaika from July 1951 to January 1952 oy the Geraan cap commander
at thot time, von Howeyer. When von Homeyer, with no previous
experience of these problens arrived, Yalke wag in terrible
situation, inifings and riota were fre.uent and tne Nuremberg
police were not only on constant alert, out a force of 28 men

was maintained at the camp.

Von Homeyer began by calling the national representatives
together, and it took hin two weeks to Het them into one roons


--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

, upon the refug es ther

220=

Finally, when they hed .ssexbled, he snve them hell :.nd explained
it would be a waste f tine fer them to try to vlter er ingl:

the situsttion in their ic trien from Valka. te told them
he believed the ¢..use of ‘ficulties wag the personal
interest of ony of the la.ders in prop.ring tho way for dig
roles ot hone after iveration. ‘Ne then vresentea his ides

of rormin: t first Hurope:n community ut Valka. He told the -
national repyresentativea he nud no support from jiunich — he
was on his own and usied ror their help nnd cooperntion. Cre

by one they came to his and agreed.

Von Homeyer's technique of making Triends with tir peeple,

with whom he seen .cquired xealicnt reputation, was on . .
effective instrucent in Swinging their nution.1 conmittess. ee
to nis side, for aware of ols populurlty, they hesitated not . :
to show setive cooperution. as a me.ns oF delesuting self
administration of th: camp to elected representatives, yen :

Homeyer was :bsout. to astublish mall prirli.ament when he was.

reculled by renseong or » Germin inistrative snafu in whieh
favoritism playd a part. dust before nis departure, tie

“iuromberg chicf of police appro ched nam and.asxed Bhat he

request the withdrawal of the peorzunent squad, which th: chief
felt was no longer required due to the enormous pro;raas in

camp behaviour.

Aftor von Noneyer's repl: sent by an unizuginative
burssucrat, the situntion at x relapsed into-vi lence.
Yet his influence lingered, ond delesAtions from the national
eroups visited him, be cing him to return to tw: camp. Later,
when the situstion became even worse, delegetas from tae
Germin eduinistrative sersonne] at Valka lac cume to urge
that he return. This was. j.st befcre our talk with hie, and
the exptoyees brought wi then tules of the lutest Kniting.
Gbviourly ven Homeyer's fdeslistic und far-sigited approsen
to the refugee problen tu.d Se. profound dupression aca only
lves Sut on Vermins usso¢iated -ith

the problem in s peetical WAY «

Von Home: er's Surope:n community oppro:ch aight be borne
in g.isd in connection with NCPS's espousal of the policy ef
Feder.lism. Similarly tne ACS od izensi.tA approach aisnt nave
the potenti.lity of being > dened tc proVade grass-rects

emphusis on this aspect cf s policy. ‘he ide: uf -urcpe-n
citizen Pp for‘refrusees is not orisgin:] or new, but it aiscat
provide FE and RES with « useful propag nis weapons

Yon Honever's realistic smi productive ide lism pern:ps

‘also indic.tes the neopsity fcr at least trying to-uncover

and support more. positive elomeats than ihe usu:l exile poli-
tical le:iers, even tho it is ovelioved Likely th:t the
l..tter will be uble to reg-in control of their politic.l
machinery .na return tc power .fter libration. Yor this
ra.so., nit to atterpt the procuction of core constructive
le::derg nd attitudes nore amenable to NGFiJand US interests
ie un exauple of infatustion with °:..rd-boilcd"reslism for ite

own sake.

wistasatorepe


--- Page 125 ---
14-0000

Coat

=?la

H05 might be in conjunction .
by intdvidunl RFP sturf Hen ork.
uncing bourde for group

another potential use of
With certain propoualsy advance?
Taese cull for tha use of rofugees an ae
re-cticns to new bronde:.et themoy nd ap o ple groups for
tosting oasic stiellite country attitudes, Refugees helped by
EC3 might be sore interested ‘in contricuting to such projects;
conversely, FuCS offorts to reatore their feeling of belonging
te the strugsle for liberation of their ecuntries would be
dume:.curnble ussiatod by thio Opportunity for them to seaist in
the sh.rpening of thie potent "alater FOonponm,.

Sk Rel eat Sood Beat . -

CFS and RPA exile ouployeea whe by ane large form a
privileged clase .mong the refugees usu result of being relu=
tively wall pald, should be oncvursged to contribute amall but
regular anOcuts of their as ables cag voluntiry deduction basis
to refugee welfare. Some % @aployeesa huve nlre.dy done this
on an inforwal bisia und have expressed «a veslre to do go on
& rogular deduction basis but have been siscour:.ged by the .
Ainformuticn thet thin would involve .. vLoluthon of REO regulae
zions. In view of the success of a Bioilar weliure fund insti-
tuted by the rolish Lubor Jervice Conp.. # attached to the
Je3e Avay in. Geruany, Lt 1s recommensed at thio possibility be
inveatigated. KFECS might prove a sure seins of channeling such
aid to the refugee,

bata rasegengn

Tho form for refugoos in Turkey establls.ed by the Qazi
Zoan Bessolt Comittee which han
Yon domoyer's approach would qualify for inclusion in the FEC3
progran, althoush ns specirie proposal cun be made until a
a detulled field survey,

D. Proposed org:.nis:.tions of: ICS.

2. PECS will be a service section of cre under the diree~
torohip of Uurs's General hurope:n Repranent.tivo.s General
policy headquarters will therefore be in reris as wed) as the
oper:.tion.) subsection responeible for tno aduinistrétion of
tne FACS branenes in Englind .nd Yresee. This will h:ve the
advantuges of renovineg &ener..1 policy nandguirters from
‘tae imsiediute tens_ong and pressure: of the frontier countries,
Toe wvirector will h.ve the tusk of genor:1 policy cvordinition
of PECS with otusr NCYS divisions und of @-inin; on a high
level the .cceptance cf and coover..ticn with by the nae
tions] -nd internitional ..uthcrittes concerned, per:ups by
6npncsis on tne eontribution whie. F C3 could m..ke to tneir
efforts’ °9 resolve the refugee problea. :

2. Operational heudjuurters under tne direction o: a PECS
yeputy Director will be in hunteci, the point closest to the
refugees’ geozruphic::1 center ¢ rrom “union tre Germ:n refugee
reception center .t V.lka and the austri 1 equivalent at vela
are each within half a day'ea drive, or lesa,

aa internaticnAispact resenbling ;


--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

-22—

3. The Deputy Director will be responsible for the imple=
pentntion on the opor.tlonal level in all srecs of :ll the
functions of FACS in line with policies eaty shed by the
strector, The Deputy Yirector will be responnible for general
eperutional policy coordination witi: the national and interna=
tions] authorities and volunt cry AQsencias -loc-1lly uctive.

4e The Deputy Uirector: .1]1 have six Aras Baaletunts ¢°
1) North Geranay, center Bonn or Hannover.

Scuth Germany, center cunien and Vilka-

2}
US and French sones of austria, center Salaburg und wele.

Britdial “one Austrian ani Trieste - poasibly two assistants

)

)
5) It.ly, center Xone.

) Paris, London said Sonolux, center ruris.

) Greece and Turkey. prodably will rejuire ona area uasis-
tant euch. However, no field survey of tho refugee
situ:tion in these two ccuntries i:.6 ua yet been possible.

. The dutias of these Aarvistants will va te provide guidance,
insyir tion und cloge administrative Tinuncl:1 supervision
of the various nation:l seeticns of SNES in ti ir reapective
AYren’. These Ape: Assistants must have cons aole udviniem
trative and finined2 latitusa in order that S may possess
the iigh uegrae of Tlaxibility essentixl to effective ex-
Ploit:ition of the fludd roruceo sttusticn. they must be fully
informed of 1] euployaent ind emigr tion ponsibilltes, projects
of volunt:ry .gencies, ate. Their cooperation ond relationa with
lvocsl authorities and wetive ageneles must bea close ang their
relstions with them always excellent,

4. PaCS will, tn each «ren where it fe to oper.te, fom
Natsenel Secticnas. These National Sectiona will ba recruited

ant sppointed by PEcS. @hey @ey or may not ine Jude individu.l
represent..tives of org.nisntiona ress loc. lly wctive, In
fare cases in the frontier ecuntries, bet alrost entirely in
england uad Fr:nee, prove: exile-orgunized refugee ais Vorsittees
will beccza the loc..l ‘ational Sections, In casau where no
proven exile-orgunirod refugee sid Comsittess exist, the FECS
Ares aAvsistant will recruit: with tr help und eapprovel of the
Te.uty Yirector a Mational Section Uhier, wo will in turn,

wit: the asproval of the hres Aveistant, recruit his own puid
essiatunt cr associate where neceoSary, an. usp m&nay as local

voi eer eection camber-representatives us bay be rejuired

by the amount of work, s40gr..pideul distribution of the refugees,

otc.

5. Possible organization of FSCS national sections ¢

Enslund

a) Albanians : special case



--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

b)

e)

gd) &

)

f)
&)
h)

3)
a)

b)

ce)

ay

e;
t)
8)

4)
4)

Germany
tm)
b)

e).

a)

eo):

-c}e

Bulgariane ¢ fimo araatoy:novn ag Section Chlef
Czechonlovaks 3 Angho-Ceechoulov..» kKoiief Committ-e
fotoniuns + -spoclution of isteniine in Greut Britain

Hungarians t Section Uhtef to bn reerulted and eppoznted
roesibly Feather Horcoyailaig

Latvians t Latvian selfure Assceintion
Lithu niuns Lithuantan Assoed tion da Sro.t Sritain
voles $ Polish #x-Conb:: tants Association .

Rumanian ¢ onglo-kumanian Refugen Cone Lttaa
Tugoc!ava 3 Bagoslay welfsre Vonmittce (syeciul ease)
Albantans 8 szecial cage . ; :

Asseceiution des Réfugiéa Bulg: res en #6200

Comité d'Aide Zociule vux Réfugide Tenécoslov.jues
Comité dtintr'aida xstenien ,

Comité des K,fusids Hongreig

-e80cintion d'zantr'side Letton @o Pro ine

Assceiation 11 $uantenno de ‘Bionfuigince

Polion Section Chitof and ‘probe. woly two Padi avilat.ats |
to be recruited and wy ipuintad,.
CARGHAR ;

Yugoslav Section chief nnd ofhe pnadd Balstint to be
recruited and appcintad (4 special casa),

oo 1

Bpacial cage
6 recruiteu Bs oT) appointed.

Bulgurian (Seetlon Chier to!

Czechonlovi:k . Seetion, paid: Aesvvinte = ‘hs one podd
assistiunt to be recruited aac Appointed.

Estonian National Committee 0

Hung -ri.n Offiee, plus jiungarian kelief Action


--- Page 128 ---
14-0000

_ ft)
8)
h)

4)
4)
Austria
a)
b)

e)

a)-

e)

t)
8)
a)

1)
j)

trieste
a)
b)
c)
a)
e)

ft)
8)
h)

ee,

“24.

Latvian National Vonaittes plus Latvinn Red Cross

Lithu.nion Nationul Comsittee

volieh Jection Unief «nd two puid agaiats:nta to be
recruited and appointed.

Rumuninn Section ghiet to bo recruited end app. inted.
Chief .

Yougosluv Section/and one paid asaiatunt to de recruited

und appointed (Special cuse).

Speotal enae- A\varsaua:
Bulg:rinn Seetion uhlef to bo recruited: and eppointed. 4

Cuechoslov:.k Section Chiat to be recruited and appointed.
Estonl:no - none ;

Hungurian Section ULiof and two peld useiotants to be
recruited and appointed.

Latviane ~ none

Lithuanians = none

Volish Section Chiof to be uppointed. vorsible use of
APWR Salzburg reprusontitive, .r. Knilaki. :

Rumaniun Section Chief to be recruited und appointed.

Yugooliv Yection Uhlef to be appointed, voswuitle use
of Yolonel Bojovie (Special case).

speciul cuge- Alban. an§
Bulg.riun Section Uhief to be recruited and appointed
Cuechoslovaks - none ;

Ketonians — none
Hungarian Section Chief and one paid absaistant to be
uppointed. rosaible use of <rof. Terni as nalf-time
Chief with Tull tine asaistunt.

Latvians ~ none

Lithuani..ne - none

Polish Section Chief to be recruited and appointed


--- Page 129 ---
14-00000

uS—

41) CAKOHAN Erieste delegate and staff (ur. D1 venutrio)

jg) Yugoaly Section Uhief ‘to be rocrulted and appointed
(Speciiil Case). ; :

a) ‘Special case- Abeninns
_b) Bulgsrinn Soetion chiet to bo recruited and eopointed

c) Ozechoslov:.ka = none

a@) Eatontens - none

oe) ilungsrian Section Chief to be recruited and uppointed

f) Lntvians = none.

g) Lithuanians - none

hh) voliah Section Chief ani one paid eeptetant to ‘ba
recruited una appointed

4) Rumaniun Sectio: Chief to be recruited and appointed

3) Yugoslav gece yon Chiez to be recruitea and suppointod .
(Special Case .
Note : In cases where no national section is provided due to the
ineignifie:nt nusbers of refugeos «prau-at or probublo,
it fo assumed that the are. Assintant ccule heandia the
needs of special arrivsls or cusesa if esiatents

SSLEUROP., COMA: Dei b

1s Saluriea
aj Americana

1) Deputy Director B 12,060.00

2) 5 Areu Assizt.nts at
£1,500.CO par yeure . 37,500.00
(tha duties of the aixth Ares
Aseletant, covering Prance, Yritain
and. the Benelux countries mignt be
performed by a mezbor of tha ate ff
of the Paris office). .

3) Bxecutive.Secretary to Jeputy ULreetor 4,900.00


--- Page 130 ---
14-0000

260

4) Bookkeevnr (possibly locully uired)
5) Quurters and ldving sllowases
(35% rough estinate 1 819,775. vo)
“Total. Anerie_o Salaries
b. Exile Salaries :

1) iva National Section Chiefs and:
Associ.tes ut £50 per montz °

-2) 10 paid uneiatonts for dattonal
Sections ut £150. par mont...’
fots1 salaries Exiles ana -merican

-26 Travel in Zurope and Hatntehanee o2 exre at.
8:00 wach for 7 Amecricun start bensersa: =

(84460.00 per month)
3. Two Annual Mound tripa Usa. = fariope

4. Rent, stationery, telephone, etc. fore oy

Deputy Director’s office

Expenses (travol, stationery, postage, ete. -
for 24 1/2 Nations] Section Vniela as £50
& month per person).

5

6. Monthly subsidies to ExLlecOrganized eefugee
Aid Committees .

Refugee Conaittee - London
astoyanova :

“Anglo~Crachoslovu's Relioft Comcitte: (London)

ae Bulgarinn

Ce
ad. Letvian selfare Association (Londons)

e@. Lithuanien ‘welfire Uoumittee (Lonion)

f, volish Sx-Conbattunta ‘asociation (London)

Anglo~Roumant..n Keltef (London)
h. Yugoslav welfare Vounit tee (Lendoa} through

Behe Pee Ye.

i. Associ. ‘tion des ) Ré fit oe Bulgares. en France
(raris)

EBtonian Consul.te ~ velf.re Diviaisa (London) :

2 pele 108
96,500.20!

195 775.00° :
8 16,275.00
83,500.00

12,000.00

ATT, THS.00

16 , 800,00
2,000.00

6,000.00 -

3,820.00

3,000,00
3,000.00
2,000.00
2,000.00
2,000.00
10,800.00
_ 5,406.00

2,000.00

4,800.00


--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

rw
je Conits d'Alde Sociale aux héfugiée
Tendcoglovuques (varia)
ke Comit d'4ntr'aAide éstonten (saria)
1. Comité dea kéfugiéo iongrota (varda)

sagocd., tion d*Entr'aide Letton en trance

De
‘(vPuris)

ne Agwociution Lithuontenne Hientnlaxunee
(Parks)

0. g-HONAR ‘(vario).
pe aptonian Juttonul Vomnittee (Germany) -

qe Hung orien Offiee and iungurian Moliof.
Action (dermuny )

re Latvinn Hutional Comaittea and Latvian
Red Crosz (Germany )

"ge Lithuanian National Connittees (Germany)
te CiRGEAN (Trieste)
he Aatérial costs of Inplanent.tion of F203
Frogrom (axtra-curriculiur achoole, re.ding rooms,

meetings, Gubseriptiona, chirts, poatera,
pudlicity)

8. Welfare Fund

Total Annus] Budget for Yc

a, purchas:: of » cars at fl0U0 enue’. for use
of 5 areus aasiatants in frontier countries

be 16 one-way tripo J,S.-Murope for transpor-
' tation to job of scerdle.a p. ruonnel] (and
wives .nd childreqg where they oxint at.
- 500 each)

th
@. Furniture anu aqudpaunt for Deputy
Director's office

Total’

(sted atatntetetetate

4 4,8U0.00
3,000.00
10,800.00

3,000.00

3,000.00
4,300.00
6,000.00

20,000.00

7,000.00 | -
8,000.00
1,200.00

50,000.00

50,000.00
See

417,695.00

5,000.00

5,000.00

wo 120.209
# 10,700.00

“ary Augustine . Royer 1, gull


--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

i
\
i
ot
t

‘sfuarination

29 July 1952

2

MENORANDON FoR’ chief, 10 Divieton

SUBJECT» Report of Ex-Iling Kichael's Interoot
' in Rumanian Refugee Unity .

ol “‘Tranmitted herewith 48 a report which will be of

interest
to tho NCFS in 4te curront. Negotiations with the Rumenian r

CLUse2Ss
2.. The views of the King with regerd to the Iron Guards’ and
others listed,are in ayreoment with those of thig Diviat one.

3. Itds requested that arranyenents be made
of the NCFE to. meet with pereonnel of this Yivid on
negotiations’ and utilizing this recent informations.

for representatives
to discuss tie current

GRATIAN He YATSEVITCH
Deruty for Folicy Coordination, 83

Attachment

yrs

Fe
_


--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

SECRET

24 July 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR? Chief, IO Division

SUBJECT # G. Popesou.Botosanis J, Redovany . —
J. dron .

1. Thio office has no objection, with respect:

| to seaurity, to tho employment of the three subject

-Rumanians, vho have requéated State Department
asoistence in getting on the KCFE payroll.

2, Hewover, it 1s recommanded that no agtion
be takon on thoir bohalf until the present attempt,
to Settle the refuges situation is campleted, in
order to avoid any appearance of KCFE'g favoring
ono faction. .

GRATIAN HM, YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, &&

4 Attaohmonta
Blorraphiocs

SECRET =a



--- Page 134 ---
14-0000

SECRET ;
Tor _ George Lofton
Fromt ~  —s- Leonard I. Stamm

: For your infomation I enclose a copy of
cur contract letter with Leland Stewe, I. send
you this because of the considerable discus< .

Sion of the case, - _

T can't tell you how much I appreciate ;
your consideration and hélp in this whole ar-
fair, It really pulled us out of a deep, deep
hole. My very best, 7 : .

Yeonard I. Stem

yy th is)
io Ae pe
ro ,

i at wm
gle
/ seen

Security!”


--- Page 135 ---
14-00000

|

22 July 1952

i
i
H

MEMORANDUY FOR: DFFUTY DIREGIOR OF CLYTRAL INTELLIGENCE -
SUBJECT: = HMatonal ‘Committee for a Free Europe

Attached 15 a morornndua which it.is sucrosted be show
t6 the Director of Contral Intelligance in time for a scheduled
meeting of the Director, mombers of CLA, and renbors of the
Board of the National Comittee for a Freo Europe on Monday,

L August. :

“LL K. NOB
: Acting Deputy Direotor
Attachment (Aczunistration)

As stated. -
ClO: WB: eh"

Orig + Addressee
1 ce = ADD/A

1 ce - 10/MNIC
lice - Clo .
2 cc - RR

Beas *



--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

to

chard Mente

a “Ny
we :
21 July 1952
HeMORANDUN TO: Der ~
SUBJECT: "Study of Working Rolations Letwéen NCFE and CTA by
. IO and as/s oy : os :

r

1 Followins v upon its assumption of recymuibllity for the NCFE
project, I0, aided by the AS/S, has umlortaken over the past two months —
an investigation into tho NCFF/CIA rolations, It hat sonely that these
relations havo deteriorated to a danjrerous extent anintt Agoney has lost
control of the NOFE activity to a dogree it can mo longer ignore.

2. In general, tho fundamental defect in the relationship is that
“the NCFE has refused to recopnize tho legitimate duties and responsibilities —
of CIA for the policies, financial administration, and security aspects
of the NCFE, and the latter has persisted in reg marcing itself as virtually
autonomous. Tho secondary woakness in the cituation has been the inadequacy

and confusion of the procedures which wero developed to maintain control

over ard aruation of NCFE's activities,
3. As cxamples of the consequences to which these weaknesses have

led, the following are cited: (here should be déccunsed illustrations of

specific problems such ag those in your para. a,)

kh. The remedy which is beiny developed az a consequence of this
investigation is the re-definition of the recponsibilitdes of 2A and
authorities of NCFE and the development of new rreeedures for the conduct
of relations between NCFE and CIA. Thes se definitions and proced: :res have
teen reduced te a Memorandun of Agreonent whick bas been prepared by CIA
and subritted to NCFE for study, A cory of this Aerecnent is attached as
Appendix A. ‘The Senior Vice President of the NCPZ has xeon reviewed

this Agreenent in detail and has nrepared his comments theresa, a copy of
; SECRET

Serunty lofsemation


--- Page 137 ---
14-0000,

which is attached as A Ppendix Be In oricf, these coments boar out in

instance after instance the the ass ertions sot forth above s. s to tho fundanon~

“tal aimculties with which wo are faced in the adninistration of this.

projects .
Ss. The PRC already has reviewed this Apreement and the 1953 ‘fiscal

year budget submitted by NClhe The Wormittes Le so convinced of the

woakness <2 the prec ent situation fat the need for its inp proveront ‘along
the linos sy sgosted by tha Nomorandunm of Agrocment that it has refused
‘to approve the peer 4 ody Mg GFE until a saticfactory kenorandun of

: dnd the resubur ded
Agreenent Ss nnd ithe, be ee Manner prescribed therein

6. Ter is, ¢ vit, & choiea DeNA USL Artematives, vite, ,
: CIA either has a duty ani msponsibility to onsurey af fl rma- uo
tively the qeatuet of tho NCFE progrea in accordance with CIA's own: special
mission ani general responsibilities 8 a Government agency, or 7
The NCPZ is an autoncmous organi zation operdting independently
of any Govercnent direction and contred, i in which event this Agency should

formally EXicate the resronsibilitius with which it has teen charged in

this connoztion,

SECRET

Security iniys



--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

| WB July. 1952

Dear Mr, Least i
T would azproctate it if you would doliver
tnis envelope to Mr. John C. Hughes, hO Worth Stroot,

Mew Yorks

Thanks,

J) Tow, Bnader.

ly


--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

‘come and help me or to the Job that I an sinesraly and

2203 Foxhall Road, Nw.
oe Washinton, D.C,°
_ AT July, 1952

“Dear Johnt

T was gind of our macting das. b<fore yosterday and
I ar looking forward to seeing you soun agains :

Here is a memorandum I addressed to Ae a short time”
ago which J would lika you to. read breause Lt may give you.
soe indication of how we are trying to get to work hero.
Tt is fer your ayes only.

T talked to Min on the telephone thte morning and he
seared in an extremely bellicose mas This ballicosity,
replete with references to "little peorle wie get in his
hair’, “from. now on I'm dealing oniy with the top", and
"otherwise there are going to be sons resignations hero®
te dirficult for me becauso I ax ps Ieleh, and as ablo
to resign as the noxt mans Ihave eded, nowever, in
maintaining my Scotch heritaga tc wv so far, and
since you assure me that none of th ereonally directed
at myself, or people Like Bil] Dir weon I persuaded to

honestly trying to do, I will try tr keep it there. It wag -
nevertoless awfully calaing to have a chance for such a
good talk with yous

Siacerely,

Enclosure

Jf t

Kr. John Hughea |
McCazpball & Company
LO worth Street

New York, New York _



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

_ SEPPET

Security Infarmation ye

; foe
AMES NIV

1l Decomber 1952 -

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE —

SUBJECT: Crusade for Froodom

"1, Admiral. Miller will call upon the DDCI soon to request
more funds for the Crusade for Freedom. At the prosent rate of
expenditure, funds will run out on 31 December, :

2. $488,992 was budgeted for the Crusade this year, We

have told Admiral Miller that since the Crusade was unable to

live within this budget, wa were certain that the Agency would

appropriate more money to wind it up, although we have explained

that his request was embarrassing because the PRC had expressly.
approved $445,991 instead of a Yarger amount in tho boliof that
less money. should be expended this year. We have naked Admiral
Miller to provide us with a financial statement of the Crusade

cost to date as well as a breakdown of the further amount needed.. -

‘ .
3. The Crusade this year has so far cost only a quarter of
last.year's expenditure and half of the amount exponded in 1950,
Receipts are up, 140% over last year at this date. On the whole,
a much better job hag teen done to date than w antlclpated o«=
and purely in terms of the amount raised the performance has.

been superior,

lh. There is a good deal of gossip about the use of Crusade
funds and 1. think you should be acquainted with it. Because the
Crusade is a rather public enterprise, the gossip has occasionally
been sounded not only within NCFE and this Agency but also among
“seml-witting” private citizens who have been enlisted for shorte
term fund-raising on an unpaid basis. The gossip is that a good
deal of money has found its way into the private hands of local
Crusade chairmen and workers. In one instance, it is said, -
involving a local chairman in Minnesota, the amount which reached
private hands was enough to build a new home, Another story I have
heard repeated by different people on different occasions is that
in the state of Nevada and ‘certain other locales no money received
by fund-raising chairmen last year was ever tiirned in to Head=
quarters, and no report ever made, Another item which some



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

of the people in the New York office talk about is the payment of
$37,500 to Fred C, Smith, who worked for approximately one month
in drawing up a Dimes for Freedom campaign which, as you recall,

.Was rejected as a basia for this year's campaign.

S. No accounting of Crusade funds oxpenied in the field has
ever been made, and in a fund-raising campaign it 1s perhaps
impossible to do soz: Nevertheless, records lnvolving payments
for expense money to private citizens ongaged.for the duration of
the campaign are chaotic. You will recall that Spencer Phenix,
Treasurer of NCFE, refuses to have anything to do with expenditures

for the Crusade,

6, Since we are winding up the Crusade thia year and will
attempt to-place it ‘on a more reliable basis through the Heritage
Foundation, I augzest that you assure Admiral Miller that funds
sufficient to wind up the Crusade will be forthcoming and that. you
Ainstruct the 19 Division’ to expedite a project granting these -
funds, I further suggest that in view of the allegations above,
which I repeat for your private background information, you keep the
position of tha Agency faultless by requesting from Admiral Miller

“a budget in as mech detail as possible for the amount necessary to
‘liquidate the Crusade.

Theses (eau
nord! W. BRADEN

. Chief
oa International Organizations Division

ate


--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

17 July 1952

FEMORANDIM TOs Acting Doputy Director (Adainiotration) — —

FROM: Acting Chief, Adniniotrativo Staff (Spocial)
SUBJECT: - Conforence with TPTONIC Management re TPONIC/CIA
Agreamont © ; : ;

1. on 9 July 1992 Mr. cholo and T conforred with tho Precidont and
the Treasurer of tho TPTONEC orranization regarding the Mecal portion of
‘tho proponed Agreement to bo reached betwoen CiA and TPTONIC. .

: 2. The purpose of the conference was to oxtend to tho TPTOITC manages
mont an offor.of aid in the intorpretation and implementation of the fiscal
phaso of the Ayroemont in response to TONIC's request for asoistanco in
this connections”: . . .

3. Our statement of the Agency's poottion nay bo ciimmartzcd briofly
ae follows: . . . :

@. The Agoncy io insistont upor. obtaining tho detailed in
formation royarcing TONTG's activities which io essential in
order to fulfill the Agency's fundamental policy, fiscal, and
socurity responsibilities. Tho great sizo to which TONIC has

"prom makes it necessary for tho Agency to take a gloser interest
in, TONIC's activities than it has in the past. :

be Although final concurrencs in an Agreement has not beon
reached by TONIC, it £9 necessary that: revision of tho financial
budret be commenced immediately if PRC budcet approval ts .to be -
obtained as soon.as possibile after a final Arrecment has beon
Yeached. The budyet dociment muat be expanded in orvor to pro-
vide reasonably detailed information not only as to proposed
changes from the previous year's activities but also reparcing
the continuing activitics as well, “1thout this additional in-
formation there is lacking sufficient data on which to base the
approval of any allotment of funds.

he The Presidont assured us that a revieion of the budget would be
undertaken immediately to provido not only the informetion the Agency re-
quires but also to eliminate incomrletely planned, vacuely foreseen require~
monte. ‘ie assured us that tho revision wouls be corpleted in tine to perx
mit a review, prior to its presentation to the PRC, for the purpose of
determining that the docunont attains the etandards set forth in tho Agreo=
ment. The Treasurer concluded that he was sufficiently faniliar with the
tems of tha fiscal portion of tho Apreement to be able to satiafy its
requirenents, but promised to call upon us if he should desire further
clarification. . : :

“is SECRET
Security Iniere.0 94

O77760/


--- Page 143 ---
14-0000

Se In ordor to avoid later misundorstandings wo sot forth briofly

- tho concept of Mnancial control contenplated in the budyot soctlon of tho
Agroomant. wo noted that the Agency must have confidence that tho propranas

of the various TONIC divisions arm carricd out to the aprro:dmato oxtent
proposed-in the Arency approved budczet since other Ayency plans must be
synchronized harmoniously with TONTC's approved prograa. Accordingly, tho
principle of establishing an expenditure coiling for oach of the TOUIC™

divisions is recorded by tre Aceney as fundamental vith which intor-divleton

transfers without Agency approval, vould be incompatible. We assured the
Prosicent it pocitivoly was not the intent of the Agency to lift managerial
responsibility from TONTC!'s own hands, and that the controls contemplated
by the Agreement aro aimed not at oti fling manonerial activity but rather
to tho attainment of the. mindimm chicks which tho Avency fcole it must -
ineist upon in view of the scope and importanco of the TONTC progratin™
the. fulfirtinent of the Ageney's own responelbiiities and misauions .

6 Tho President e-procced hie appreciation of the Agency's viowpoLnt -

in the mattor of financial control althouch he did not cxpressly comalt
TONIC to its adoption, Hie did, however, promiso to undertake a point by
point review of the terms of the Acreenent immediately 20 that tho opocifie
areas of doubt or alsagreencnt may be. localized andi disposed of in: further

negotiations. s

% This Statf fcelo that thore is in reality no miswxlorstanding of.
the Agreancnt'on the part of TSNIC nor any leck of technical confidence
to carry out ita terms, The problem of attaining and understanding, thoroe
fore, comes to nothing more than a determdnation by TONIC managenent to
accept, the minimum of control upon whlch the Agency 1s insistent.

: ; Frederick i. Richards ~
: _ Acting Chief, Aduinistrative ©
i . a . Staff (Special)

Distribution:
Acting DD/A ~ Orig.
cece -1
10 Division - 1 -~ ;
AS/S Chrono ~ 1 a ‘

SECRET

Securny letoer atta


--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

SECRET :

Security Information BR 0917 Ly

15 July 1952

MEHORANDUM FOR THE RECORD: :

SUBJECTs . National Coriittee for rroo Europe; proposed
. . employment of Mr, Leland Stowe. :

RiFERENCE : Nemo from Security Officer to oe dated |
12 January, and attachments, :

1, As the result of an extensive considoratdon of the problen
creuted by the NCFE offer of enploymont to Lelend Stowe, and in light
of the adverse information concerning “r.Stowe's paat connections and
_affilfationa with certain organizations, it woo dectded by the Director
upon the recommendations. of Mossrs. Dulles, Hedden and tho undersigned
that Mr. Stowe ehould not be employed by NCFB as Chief of the RTE :
information collection precran, :

2. When Admiral Willer was informed today of this decloion, to=
fether with the reasuns upon which it was bared, he ond his staff ime
mediately procucded to re~exanine the entire problem and within en
hourear:dsone-half communicated to tha underaipned an entirely new
proposition concerning Mr. Stowe, of which the following were the prine
cipal clementa:

8. In linu with the Director's decision, Mr. Stowe
would not be employed by NCTE aa Chief of the inforaation
collection activity of Ren,

be. In lien thereof he wovld be offered a vontract
as a "consultant and contributor of Infornation" for a
Bixemonths tarn,

Ce Ha would not bo ‘offered a salary but would be
placed on a feo basis, and said according to the amount
of work and matarial which he contributes.

d. Thus he will not-bsce-o an official of RFE or
NCFE, ond will not bo in such a position a3 to enable
anyone to zaintain that ho guides the Policy of or con=
trole the flow of information to Radio =reo Buropes

SECRET

Security Information


--- Page 145 ---
14-0000

SECRET

Security Information

=26.

e@. Subject to prior aproval from our security office,
Admiral Miller and Mr. Lang will endeavor to accuro the sere
vices of aither sr, Cy Burgin of the Tine-Lifo orpantzation,
or “Mr, Ruseel] $431 of the New York Nereld Tribune aa Chief
of the informstion eollection activity of Radio Free Europes
They are both rerarded 98 co.potant and experienced indivie
duala,.and Mr, Rhuryin haa already {ndieatad hia interest in
thie ponttion Lf 1¢ were open, :

3. The preponal dener ited in the Preceding prra;roph vas submite

ted to Mr, Dulles and to Mr. Rraden by the undornipnod, and they both

exproased thetr approval, Mr. Dulles sald that, on the basis of our
diecuasion vith the Director, he folt certain that this arranenont
would be acceptable from the standpoint of CIA. The Adwiral was 80
advised by the undersitned and oxpressed himsolf as bel ng entirely
satisfied and very pleased. tie undertook to check through Mr, Praden
on the acceptability. fron a security standpoint of Messre. Burgin and ;

Nill,

‘le One other aapect of thia matter ia worth recording for ficuure
reference: Mr, Haddan hae atated that he tins been woll acquainted with

. Mr. Stowo for many years, having known him in colle;e and having fole

loved hio carcer rather clopoly. On the basis of evorything he. knowa
about Mr, Stowe, Mr. Hedden ip convinced that Mr. Stowe 4a a loyal
American citizen and that there would be no real risk in his cane on
the issue of loyalty as mich. In the opinion of Mr, Nedden, ser,
Stowe'a pant proclivity for tecoming involved with leftewing moves
mente (sono of then presently rerarded ag subversive) ig not a cone
mentary on his loyalty but rather on his judpment. At timca before

-and during the war he ¥aa prone to-hop onto Popular bandwayons and

to take a line in hie writingea and broadcarta that S8oened to be
Populer at the time. In other words, he in an Opportuntat by
noture and prone to take up causer which apoeal to bim aa having
wide populer interest and support as of any ziven moment. This prose
pensity on the part of Mr. Stowo 16 not wi thout its professional and

commerctal aspects.

Encls . Oo . 2
References, ,

DD/PePct!/b jm

Distributions :
Orig. = ner, DDCI, IG = with enclosures.
cer = C/TO ~ 2 ow .
Security officer= 1 ” SECRET
m+ TERN
DD/P chrono 1

Security tnformation


--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

nao SECRET

SECURITY iF ORKATION

Lh Juby lyse .

TELLIGE. CU

“IOI OW TRAL Ih

HANDUM POM: DEMMIY MDC!

Transaittal of Papers on NCrE Hows on Yuroslavia-

views on Yusoulavia which you asked for.

i)

1. Uera aru NC

2. Tam worriad about iten qd) in particular. ‘The other items
may be justifiable on:the srounds that we have to take care of

ward steps.

3e 2 you os ad, wo have asked the State Pepartuscnt for a
reviow of tho entire national council policy, and I am sure we will
ret State's views on Yucoslavia at this tine.

i wot! ‘AS os
c

Intornatioual Orgs

nen Division

2 Attachments
1. Ltr to Allen Deb

>> wo
e = IO/iONIC i
c= RI .

oplo in this country, bat dton a) may seca to bo taking unnecessary


--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDUM FOx2 DIHECTON Of CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT! Briefing of Secratary of the Army on VW December
on WCrZe and CFA

1, On 17 December, 1 briefat Secretary of tha Army Paco on
the subjects o2 National Comnittee for « Free Europe and the
Comntttee for # #ree Asia

2. The srLeting covered both physical assets and concepts,
Secretary Pace atzed many questions, for example:

a. Few.did NCFZ handle the problam of Yugosiav exiles ~
anc at the aame time use the Yugoslavian defection
at #o argument in (ts broadcasts to Iron Curtain.
eouctries?

b. Are much did the State Department have to suy about
tit dey-to-day operations?.

ce. Tae duties of the President?

In addition, ke expressed great enthusiagm over the conceot of the
tvo Committees gcd in general for tha concent of covert psychological
warfare, Ha teverrupted at one point to talk at some Lenth about
his bolifef thax weile it was essential to continue to draft boys as
soldiers and srviuce rifles, it was just as essential, and in the
long run more senciucive to ultlmte peace, to s wage the argument for
democracy to a ning world in a covert manner. He Indicated
that he though= very little of the sovernment!s overt propaganda
program and tras. from wnat he knew about the povornment!s covert
program as conducted by CIA, Lt was the effective means to the end.

hossesto fat

: Op THOMAS W. BRADEN -
Up Chief
ye / International Organizations Division

Ai



--- Page 148 ---
14-00000

DUILOING

REMARKS a. q- . 27 a4’ 1s

Uy Judy 1952 Tox nal dia & te *
——————

a

XEXORANDIM
, . _T would certainly be inclined te agree with Fr’ on the importance

ef a dimified "worthy cause" sort of campaimn, Moreove- T world
serepulously avoid any activity whic> nicht eas: doubt on the Food
“faith of the Crusade (ove. "Ha vave eur money for balloonz at Christmas —

rab

there are they?”)

SECRET

Security Infarn:anay


--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

SECRET -

Security Information
Security Inlor aR 26722,

4 duty 1952

MEMCEAS ION FOR - Nemty Ufrector of Cestral Intellirence

t Canvsien of

SUESIATs - Propos frusade for Freedom :

EH 23

@ inguiry ?r.m To. Braden, in which

3, Fleare note thea

he rafaes two questions wv! thee auect to hatiocne, The following are
z qi : oe .

@. J see no objection to refers the Freedom —
Cs. gece campaipn to the use of balled provided this. —
4e hendled with care. hy this T hear Lat would he
32° ripht for the Cruside to refer te former use of
Sveness of thiz -z¢e, aid also to
that, the National Connittee for a: *ree Lurope will,
Bo aopropriate occagion and at th it time, wake
i: 2 of ballcons, Tt would beivrenre and unuise
many reasons to make a Plat g@ to the exact
tine and content of further talloca oF ‘Acns, Thero Je
go potnt in thus telegrashing ovr pundh the opposition,

enc it would ret ua fits trouble 4% we to ke too
of any new

Eoecific about the t4msine and sw
ReTE]vem,

t. I would be very much oopobed ‘te the stunts such
cad sro Ovping Christmas leaflets out. of tet ns over packed
421 etadfums. i oyant publice
tris year, and |
. we were in the

ntelly wideh inst
chess wit. ey we ys sers or {ff

‘or both

dtd 7 nly

: Distribetions .
: ° Crizs - esse,

ae Peete terenere watt SECRET
lec -

$ hat
D/P chrono Setunty information ,


--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

SFCURITY INFORMATION

7

7 July 1952

ainr
SERE

ra

MEMORANDA FOKs DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBIECT: “Request for Decision as to whether Crusado for
Freodom Campaign Boginning 15 November may use
a Dropping of Leaflets Theme in its Propaganda.

2s. Le Admiral Miller’ ‘of NCFE has appointed a new ; head for Crusade
“7 _ for. Freedom, Mr. Richard Walsh, formerly of the State Department. Mr.
* Walsh bas subultted ‘a‘new plan for. tho Crusade for Freedon campaign to
begin. November 15. - The campaign: Will be based upon the idea of send=

ing Christaas ‘wessago- leaflets behind the iron curtain with publicity
that the Crusade for Froodom will use balloons among other methods for

this:purposé. It was originally coritemplated that the Crusade would

“4 fact send balloona-as it did last year. Bearing in wind, however,

the DCI's warning about using any propaganda device which might give

the Soviet a weapon in its bactoriological warfare campaign, we have

instructed ‘the Crusade that. there wn be no actual transaiseion of

balloons. a

. 2. will it bo permisaibie for the Crusade to publicize the use
of ballsons, to employ such stunts as dropping the Christnas leaflets
out of balloons over packed football stadiums in the United States
ard to give the general impression that balloons will be one of tho
“ways to carry messages from the American people behind the iron curtain,
even ‘though they will in fact not be employed? ;

J. You will apprectate that an immediate decision is essential,

[loses heii,

THOMAS W. Bi
Chief
_ International Organi zations Division
Distribution: .
Original = DDCI through DD/P
‘cers AP -1-
cIo -1
TO/TONIC ~ 2

RI-2-

SEGRET


--- Page 151 ---
14-0000

SECRET.

PE tATION
ls duly 1952

Mii MALDUM Fue Mite Td. 7 EK YUKU LER .
Offieo of the General Counsel

SUJET s Policw-up on your repert of 26 duno 1952 ret Captain
Stanislaw vakiorkne

1. The following regert of 2 July 1952, 1e a rovly to our
asentarion to the aAdatrul of the suvjoct reports

°L hava que:tioned Tom avout the matter cited Lh your letter of
30 June 1952, File Harteri-3C39. Tom states that the facts are aa
fe lowss , . . . :
le Sy letter d.ted-March 20, 1952, Con. reoszan Kobert Trl. p
Rone reque:tod consider tion for the eaploynent of Captain Usklerka.
tne latter was intervleved on several occasions, and prospects of hig
enpluyment wero. fully exacined., After carefil consideration, it do=
voluped that Osklerka was not usoful in any diviolor. of our operation,
and there was no job far him. ile wes personally cv informed by Ton .
in a subsequent interview un way 6, 19b2, in which Csklerka expressed
hig understanding of tie situation. - .

2. Unter date of wey 23, 1952, Conr-renacin toss agaln wrote us
stating tnat Usklorka tag contscted hin again aswut the pes .viltties of
@ job with us. 1 wrute tim Concresaman under date of June 5, 1952, -
tolling hin thit, altnough wo hid made overy effort to ;lsea hin, wa

‘ware unable to offer Usklorka a positions

3. On or avout June 25, 1952, Conpresenan uss! local secretary
telephoned ny offlee {nquiriny about Osklerkae &: secretiry referred
ter to Tua who then talxed at some length with Con-ress:an kong!
secretary. He tol¢ tho latter that we had no pesitiun fur vaklerka
and that we had su inforced tne Con: ressuan by letter abdovo Cited, In

.tho course of tno conversation, tie sevretary inysired aa to Bhat
a)

feetions ws could ofor relative to such @ position for cskierka as
world be useful in procuring an extension of mis visiWr's visa. Tua
stated tiat he mizht suj;est to tne Conuresszun that he edint mke
inquiry in vekterza's besalf. in various voverrment a.e:cies Ln

Basia ton, stating that vexterka sc red to nuve vurious useful
talents shioh might interes: sungone othor than use : .

‘

SELar~



--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

a SECRET

be Tus has | never talked with Conzresszan Koso.
otate to his secretary ur to anyune else that Conzress.an Hors!
candidate might be able to cet a pusition with you. Ton states
that ne knows better for obvicus reasuns thanto make any such
suggestion tu anyones

For your nore complete infornation in this matter, a cory
of an internal memorandum is enclosed.

Slveeraly

/af He 8. ¥iller *

2. We should like to know if the information you obtained
from CLA parscniel agrees with this repurt. .

. THOS #, BRADEN
Enols-1. copy Chief
International Organizations Division

IO/MNIC + NBV/hka
Distributionsr
Origr- Addresseo

2 co ~C/lo-—

2 ec = LO/TUKIC
2ec -RI



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

sec

ic
fo
i
ited

We
Fax
: SUsJicT®: Captain Stantelaw Uskiorka

There are no prospests for utilizing
Captain vaktorka's services by the Funde

i must oay that I do not like the behavior of
Oskiarka “in again trylng to pressure ua vila Congressman
bogs. Ags the attached f11o shoss, he has baon most
courseoualy treated here; every ef: ort has becn made to ©
place him and he das expressed himself as being pleased

“with tne troataent and attention accorded nim. I persone

ally inforsed him and explained in yreat detail that his
background mido Lt impussible for ua to use hin here.
He stated to ne that ho thoroughly understood thic ani
that he was quite satisfied that we had examined the pro-
position thosoughly.

- 2 dontt suppose that it can be told to Gongrose~

BAR Roa, but Sernie Yarrow has taken his sholo atory to

: certain of our friends to explore the possibilities of their

posoible interest in him sinec ho stated tv me that he is

Single and willing to ,0 anywhere in tie world to get into

tho fighte

SECRET


--- Page 154 ---
14-6400

SECURITY INFORMATION

7 duly 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVIB108/0FC

FROM! _ ac/rap/ote ©
* BUBIECT Evaluation of New Type of Air Leaflet
REPERERCE: (a) Momorendua for RDD/TSS Gubj: Request for

Appraisal of Welos proposal to IWCYE of  .
ney type of air leaflet ata 21 June 1992
‘(b) Tolephone dincusaion between ¢/rop/or:
; and AC/mDD/OTS on 3 July 1952 :

1. Subject proposal bao been recoived and will be estab-
lighed as RDD Ad Hos. Project fo. 236 :

2. This project will be carried out along the lines ‘Gis-
cussed in Reference (b), which will require a nunber of field
experiments; therefore, som additional time will be needed for
the complete evaluation. Information vill be forvarded to you
on these trialo as it becouco aveiladle. .

3. It te noted that tho samples attached to Roferonce (a)
aro approximately 24” by 6". It 10 requested that you advice

whether or not this ‘Leaflet is large enough for applications.
you havo in mind. In the event that it io not, trials will be —

conducted vith larger sire leaflets of the sams pattern. —

L. R. DAILEY
Acting Chief
Research & Development

LAD :sheg

x

SECURITY INFORMATION


--- Page 155 ---
erica nhl ot

7 Ce RECORD MATERIAL

1. THIS DOCUMENT 18 CUARGED TO you,

ats

2 RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO W/ARCHIVES: :
DISPOSITION SECTION, RM @f235 ON OR BEFORE a 7
DATE INDICATED, CH SO i. (orcreeeeeeeee : j

3 IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER © |__| a
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION 23°70" ——— BE |

. ba oo — i j
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM TT :

$2 1790 use rnevious eoirions. unt

bo NoT REMOVE ANY TAPERS OR
MUTLLATE FOLDER.

apd
9. Geuirits,..6 Apo | PN
_ "a6. ZG fe EK. po _

. oe | 7 ~
a pp — ‘32 7 3

oO INTERNAL

USE ONLY ia UNCLASSIFIED

SION

ESET soquaveq-€S6T Arenma,


--- Page 156 ---
14-0000

of .SSIFIED : . P 4«ICTED . CONFIDEN: SECRET
GO 2
: ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET~

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should bo weed in the "TO" tebatnth Under each comment a line should bo drawn across shat
and cach comment numbered ta carrospon with the number in the "TO" tahun, Each otliver should initial (heck -marh insutticient)-
botoreturtter touting. This Routing and Record Shoot should ba returned ta Rogistry. A H

t ad

_ Tam sorry that through an -
oversight the 10 Dec 53 memo to
DCI attached was neither routed
through nor a copy sent to you.

‘Dd [Pw

Covenuarar vereting orvice

[P-0. SECRET CONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED” UNCLASSIFIED
. .


--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

Acs fad -
as i .
Ly
: a 31 December 1953
iT .
1
~ : ASMORANDUM FOR: . DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
- SUBISCT: Gregoiro Gafencu :
; . : REFERENCE: Memo to DCI dtd 10 Dec'S3, same subject

1. Both Whitnay Shepardson and Bernie Yarrow were une
i able to persuade Mefencu tu: remain in the United Statous
: “. He left fur Paris 12 Necomor 1953. oe

2. Ae a result of his owm decision, Gafencu was in-
formal 1t would not be possible for NCFE to contime support
cof him so°long as ha stayed in Europe, as it ia now a firm
NCFE volicy not to give stipondy to anyone oversoas. Pay-

eek to Gafencu will, thercforu, terminate as of 31 March.
195k.

3. All the meetings botwoen Mr. Shepardson and Gafenou
ware entirely conidial. ,

’

THOMAS W. BRAD)
Chief, : :
Intornational Organizations Division



--- Page 158 ---
14-0000

SECRET. nits

Security Information

- . oe
oo . 19 Locexter 1953
HEAORATIUH ORs LIRECTOR OF CRNTRAL IBTILLIOENCE AGENCY
VIAs Acting Chiof, Intermstional Organizations
Civisiona
SUBJECT! «=~ «= Grgoire Gafensu

“1. T have just spoken to Whiteey Enepardson and ha reports
that he and Bornie Yarrow have been wiai-le to porsuate Gafensu
to satay in the Unitad States. Cafenes gave zany reasons for
‘wishing to liva in Europe. Ho is leavyize for Farte this Saturday.

2. Ao 8 rest of his own decision, Sefencu vas informed that
4t would not he poorible for NCKE te eectinos support of hin so
-long os he ctayed in Europo,as it 12 nos e firs CPE poliey not to
give atipends to anyons ovursess. Fayrexte to Gefencu will, there~
fore, tersdnate as of 31 arch 1954.

: 3. Mr. Shepardson etated that aii of ths nectings with
Gafencu wore entirely cordial. .

SELLIAM P. CURKEE
Chief
10/Branch 1:sFsJb 10/braneb 2
Distribution: .
creesee - orig 4.1
10/franeh 1 - 2ce

a= aes | stu Ue, (2 Dec Halla choad
eA errs oa brulle as Mov ss c
d : Zon,

t

an



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

UNCLASSIFIEIY ReESTHICTED NFIDENTIAL,
(SENOER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTON) ee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING ‘SLIP

7 pprrova [7 inronmanion [1 senature
(77 acrion (——) oinecr erty () netorn
(J comment (77) PREPARATION OF REPLY (7) pispaten
Co coneuarence (—} RECOMMENDATION Cone

Remarks: The Director has noted the attached
‘memorandum, He indicated to me that he had seen
“something else on this", Do you know what he
refers to? .

ae

oS
Jstarman

a .

CSECR = CONFIDENTIAL
Om | ean ve
yorena 30-4 Head U8 coveanaunt rereties oon

RESTRICTED UNCLASSIVIED



--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

. . oo _ . 30 December 1953

|

i

uo . TRMORANDUL. FOR: Director of Canteal Intelligence

. SUBJECTs Report that Sensitive Files covering Buigra
: Activities: may nave Leén made Avallable to
. Senator > MeCarthy :

. 1, Tas Foliowing report | wag made available to us by Eugene. Lyons,

: former Fresirter:t of the Anerican Catsittee, wha still actively particle
pates in Committee actlvities ae a colicy adviser, « lyons 1s-a men-
oer of the © of Directors of American Frienis for Russlan Frees
dom, end he outsinei this report from an unnamed source in the Ameriean
Friends! orgertzztion,

“2, A man neared Vurbltsky (feu), Miri. in vunich, hag somehow
managed to obtein 1 personal files cf Georgi Pueller, the NTS safe-
house keeper w0 #8 arrested 28 a Soviet agent last fall, These files -
contain, among ctier things, a nusber of letters to * eller from Gregori
Klimov, an infiventtal enigre who ig head of the enigre group known 45
the League of Fort War Deflectors, These letters involve Klin
Muellec's activities, ant. implicate ming otner enigres. wbiLsky
: attempted to tr these documents ever to unnamed authorities in the
i . fleld; when he wes Lgnared by these suticrities, he mailai the entire

parcel to Senater. Joseph MeCartry, .

rican Soralttee naturally considers that this corres-
if it exists, no dount contiins a grest deal of that
unfounded der: dation end allegstion which is so typical of emigre
expression, Lavelve @ Ameslean Committee as well as other matters
of particular concern to the agency, :

3. The
‘pondence, whi

4, The Crief, SX Division, has been made aware of this report,

Th.

Chief /I0



--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

BENTRICTED NFIDENTIAL SECRET Y
(SENDEA WiLL CIRCLE CLASSIFICA... TOP ANO BOTTOM)

“CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL: ROUTING SLIP

(7) approval (ST INFORMATION (7) sienature

COo™ ation _ (77 onneer reper (7) revurn
(5 comment ‘co PREPARATION OF REPLY [DISPATCH

(——Teoncusrence (—Tieecommenoation © ([—_] ne

a . Maue. “ bl
(uid
+ Tuva : Ik to - 5G (C

ete
i ta CAAT ay oN O jet. 4
at Agee teen

mglodt be eo
rh

2 an
, AN Le ot
ie ve

ct
Lotes ~ =

1O—O5248-1 8 & eoveneeser routine ovrice


--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

“know, under er. Stetsen

vc
Wk

eo Unive 3
i shudy of tt

arg

ie CG
also, I believe,

3 proup is hei
ch is,.ns vau

3. OT
chased by

& gerks has no definite -plan for the publication of
Vanifestly, the kind of be
from his researcna would have to receive somo sort of subsidy,

As you kr 2 this sort, if Uiey ore considered innortant
enough, are publiched as loss leaders by university presses.
Also, < 3 tless know, university Pee e-in pretty
vances se days, if

oO

hy y
his findings.

ht be able
vould run ;

% te book, it mi
stance, The Pigur
22000,*

were ta co
it only with

yaifrot
8 yereral field
he turns cut will Le about as ycod us

ds one of tha most compet

the United $ in

at any of this. nost r
. te t
some dees

atellites.

wously v

I us
ane eritical

nthe above, and with
? :
i five the



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

SECRET Bo
Secwily trlormaton . .
:1 December 1953

MEMOHANDUM FG RECORD
—— eae

SUPJECT? Current activities and behavior of Grigotre
“ Gafencu. 7 4 .
REFERENCE? Paris 0615 (IN 37959) dated 28. Noverber 1993

1. The reference telegran frou Paris contains a recommendation
that NCFE do what it can to Preval] upon Gafencu to conmu back to the
United States and engare himself in certain activities wich may be”
of sone use and value to NCE The following information was obtained
yesterday fron Yr. Tyler who is fantidar with the backeround ef tie .

reference messare,

2. Mr. Tyler stated ‘that “lr. John Huphee has become sonewhat -
cencerned about the activitius and behavior of Gafencu in Europe, and
more especially in and armund Paris, and although he does net believe
that a major issue needs to bs made of this matter, he ig firmly of |
the opinion that Cafencu is not doing anything useful for the "CFE

‘in Lurope and that the net effect of his activities is somewhat to

the disadvantaze of the interests of the United States. Catencu is
bolleved to be maintaining a rather close association with Guy de la
Tournelle (sp?) and his wi fe, who are described as "very sour avplee
and bitter opponents of LDC," Cafencu is also reported to have been
involving himself with certain businessmen in France in a series of
questionable o11 promotion schemes, He is also reported to have been
engazed in organizing. a kind of information center in eaipre circles
and to be selling this information to Agence Irance Presse. Moreover, .
Gafencu has been selling himself and "throwing his weight around” on
the basis of representations and strong intimations ti:at he is a close
and intimate friend of Mr. allen Dulles. lite utterances in this re-
card are regarded by Mr. Hurhes as highly indiscreet, the more so
since he appears to te living and entertaining on a scale sufficiently
lavish to suggest that he is being provided with substantial funds --
well above the allowance granted to him by NCFE.

3. Mr. Huphes,as-weli as the Paris Station, fully appreciates
that NCFS is not ina position to force the return of Cafencu to the
United States. At the sane tine, he believes that NCP should do .



--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

an

all that it can to, got him out of Paris and he recommends that a 1 strong
invitation be extended by- NCFE to Cafancu to return to the United States,
and that this invitation be coupled with a stitement to the effect that
in view of budyotary con: iderations and the very marginal value of
Gafencu's activities in Europe, it will not be possible tet NCES to
continue his stipend unless tie returns to the inited States and anyAgos:
hinself jn activitivs: more useful to the program of. NC! : :

Hy
FRA G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)

Originals c/to~ ;
ces : : : 4 .
‘ CME .
C/SE

P. S. Since dictating this memorandwa, | have received a report from
& well-informed Rumanian source to the effect that Cafenew has
roturned to the United States hin the past few days for tha
purpose of remaining here indefinitely. (The fact of Cafencu's”
return to the US has been positively established, and it is —
possible that within the next day or so confirmation will ba”
obtained concerning his lenger-ranse Suture intentions.) ‘ty
Rumanian informant has told me that the real reason for -Gafencu's
retwm was an urgent request from Malaxa, why feels that he re-
quires Gafencu's present in the United States to assist him :
(Malaxa) in povernment circles, etc. My Rumanian sourca.is
prejudiced against Malaxa, tut has maintained contact with
Cafencu notwithstanding this, arc is convinced that Cafereu
is still on Falaxa's pay roll and subject to Nalaxa's denands
for this reason,



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

29 December 1953

MEVORANLUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOK (PLANS)

SUBJECT s Tho League of Free Rumanian

1. Correct title: The League of Free Rumnnians.

: 2. The*Learue has no offices but Barbu Niculescu is using :
the late General Radescu'n addross at 47 Rant 6lot Street, New

York; tolephone Plaza 9-5540. -~

: 3.- Its officers and executive cormittes are attached under
Tab Ae .

4. Barbu Niculeseu is Secretary General. |

: 5. Tho Loague now has no offices and insofar as wo k:owlao
iddecontinued publication of ite bulletin. It 1a generally rumored
-that the organization 498 supported by Malaxa and it is presumed -
‘by knowledgeable people that in particular Malaxa supporta Niculeseu
‘and Mihail Farcasanu, the two most active Learuo officers, as woll
‘as Malaxa's nephew veorge Palade, who is a doctor in scientific -

‘research with Rockefeller Institute in New York.

7 6. Attached is a letter from Panuch to yourself dated 2 Noven-
‘ber 1953,-your mono to Chief, SE Division and his reply, which you

ipequested, ao Tab B.

“~@HOMAS' We ‘BRADBH ..
ne . Chief
So -. International Organisations Division



--- Page 166 ---
14-0000

fe oni The
ae Tf" oe we EY
3 eretdss oe ryote
wae SEG I Ak nek tenth
Ror bande. i

conver 3953

MEMOMAADUN PO, TET bs

SUSJECT Convarsation wlth Fdwan! WwW, Sarvete

1. Thad a conversation with fd arretts on rriday,
Li Beconber, who call to tell an aboub recant develosents
dn revpect to aon Interenurenean Kadlo [ress Conpltiue, ite
deseribed the latory of Fang Calurssenis participavion, with
which you are fraztidar, and he wnt on to aay that the twoelold ¢
Onjucbive at prevent lo to fret gor of cooperation aminz -
ropean nationp for bronmleasting a frank dieouas, rfon of £ reign:
affalen in euch ovier's countries, avi eveandly, to enliat the
sace core oF cogporation for a caluunn whieh would appear in
varl-s3 countrios, perhaps inclidias thie ONT, weltten by
different peonle and d. WILL ch weox fom agpeet ot Lorelyn’
polley differences whieh nheht exist betwoen and among countries,

2. Tho idea aeons bore a prebhy sood ons. 1ts principal
noget in that it wiil allow tia alring aid discuasion of doses
amon nations other than by diplomubie weans,

3. Garmitt polnted oui tat ne Ls now. puttias Conresen
deflattely in a bick aunt, ttat he will seon enna to us witha

Hood Petpoisible board of direstorn and wffleiain. He gad
that he had enlisted jiod Lais's sunsert ant fob had ou,
to him that XCrs sive the Institute a grant. iarrate a:
{navituts neada 25,000 ta keet it pot cwhile it finds suttadls
loadorshi;. I suid thav f would eLacuts tig above with you 1
“I would loox forward to hearln; dvoa rr. Lang. .

. PAG he!
1 . Chier
International Srcant sationa Pivisdian

ClorTvB/eh ~

Orig & 1 ~ Addressee
lec wel, C/Iof/l”
lec - clo

lee -R



--- Page 167 ---
14-0000

Pennington, formerly of +
National Auericantun Coavigalon of shoe Amecican Lecton,

we

te havi writhen WwW the mauherz of vne Americaaten Carcia

Leyton in witch he el
ou an utisce by durt iluser, Tan arguceate he used in
he hawt cram from briefings ay tb.

wilt

the

mentioned ta him and sous wilen
moat of it faine, Ve had bem izder
gomatiize woo with tt out tn
ee wore Leventivatini. AL Une
that

3. £ wok this opoortuntiy to orler An tbat
‘orig Yeverans Yederatisn wiles vie itrector had

Ui Pecerier 1702 «

DRLTtOK E Cet,

Lust Lis

TG CAs

Conversation with Loe. ¢

Boing born

i. Gn erisay 11 Lecesher, 7 had a conversation wita Lea
CSL ates Ve cently aprelnimd clreewr of

2. fennlngton wak most corcial, He showed saa

ainst if. based

B56d tharces a:

Nie trings

i be’ the end of the matter arzi
ao zonrer press for invezriue

n litsle
wiprestion tia
at sania Jeft-.day oi
ee convernation ne toby say

a f vave nist

hea wan taorou:hly antlerie! sits tne inform

4. Ke would nowlty wae vord foundation tns
Losec upon the Worle Yoterans federation as
OutTit and would certataly not eriuieisue che -
Lt were 14 eake o gran oreankuad .

L684 organluation,

b, He sald he would yrevent any alta
Lon coming from Leglon reccers he beta
elderavion, ‘He gnid thay v.La
Pererruy; all such absacsa vo tne Anerleanisn
etudy. 7 a

cere af by
aision for:

Og AL
chlor me,
dn perma vonel wyantces: ona rsieten
CIO: THE/ en : ;
Pde # ‘lL z 4 ae pessece
‘lee - cAk Vf. :
lee - C19 an -
lee - it


--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

BEAOHANDUL Pie

Th OES 195,

AILEY, ITERATIONS 2 OQ ZATIONS “Db VISLON

ae Cumnary ieports
“ocomndun from c/lO, dated 17 “ovenbor 1953,
Subjeeb ap above. :

Tho appropriate £5 tranches and Staite havo read the sat Cusmary
oper’ (ar Gotvber 1953, which you lorwardad to this idvision aa an
attachsons to reforonced merorandia, e Rave found the report woll
pmpared and useful, both for $y Ueadquarters and Yor our Meld
pervennel working on propaganda projects. be would thorefors appreciate
your sending this idvision two copies at: subsequent KIL monthly reports,
ong of whioh wilt bo mewuwd by Lh, while the othar wild ba sont to --

_ GuP Athens Station,

JORT H. HI CHARUSON
thier, ik

Adimause, 2

4



--- Page 169 ---
14-0000

& Decomber 1953

MEHORANDUM Fore CHIFY, 19 DIVISTON vee Z i

SUBJECT: *Hews from Betind the Iron Curtain" « Mail .
. . , Subscription for Mr. Arvo Tnominen . . . \

REFERENCE: . &- 03SA~163%, 29 Nov 1953 . :
be Merorcndun to WE/PP=L from IO/Branch I, 8 Oct 59
“+ Honorandun to TOD/TCKIC from WE/PP=1, 28 Sept 53
Gd. Memorandum to IGD/THIC from WE/PPel, 6 June 53

1. A recent -dispatch from the Stoektoln 8tatton (referénce a)
reports that Mr. ‘Tuominen Ag not recetving Subject publication. . In
light of reference memorandum by which states that he has been on
the matling list eince June 1952, it is apparent that there has been
some slipeup in the distribution channelo of this Publication, A
‘chock of address indicates that Mr, Tuominen's address ig the same as
given in reference 4, .

2. It ie requested that appropriate measiren to taken to insure
that, Mr. Tuominen wilt receive thie publication in the future, Please
inform WE/Pi=1 ‘of the action taken regarding this matter,

PAUL BIRDSALL
CAIE


--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

es

River inc, x, sodarts Lane-
H. arlington, Virginia |
4 Vecember 1653 ae

Doar Dareys:

Thie 49 in reference to your telopnone call of this afternoon,
To havo just had a ull report on tho natter of the seven visitors,

Tan afraid you hava gut yourself on the nock on tile one und
noliing can be Gone about it except to gO through with the bargain
you made. This bargain, the documents indicute, was to bring the
seven Cuecho over here aixi take the responsibility you assumed when
you siimed the seven doclarations of supcert affidavits.

Now having gotten tha’ bud news off ry chest, $ hasten to add
Mist I co not think taie is soing to be burdensome to you. You are
doing a rend public service,.as I shall axplain in a moment, and all
of us will do owr level dest to heln you. m.

T realize thav you did not think you vero agsucd & the responsi-
bility Yor seven peonle. It is cloar, Sovever, that everyone alse
thought you were, and J think it 4s maply t20 lata to chanvo 1t now,
The Csech rezime is attacking the United “tates for its nandling of
enisres; it 18 attacking tra cannes which you have seen; it is pointing
ua the general hopelessness of an emivre's Lot ani wie dullness and
@rvariness woien you have noted at first hand. vhis Litcla trip of
our seven frienaa has ret all- the refugee ciroles in Geramy gosolping.
It 18 exeltdng news, itis tadoubtedly know behind tre curtain. To
Sall it off now would rake a real difrerenca <= not tust in torre of
the Crusade, bit in teras af & Polazeen think aboys tha United

States and united States attisans.

The procedure from roy on sears to lay itesl£ ant as follows:

TAe seven refugeos will arrive sometira curing the month of Pecenber. -
Tds arrival date to imortant. Piscg has. mace every effort to
expedite St so wiat they can come tn Neceher, and

SONS ought to dictate a costzanenent. Trey will se
whatever you, Clyde and Zod want then to do on betaly of the crusade,
After their work for tne Crusade ia over, all sever couotlesa will
wish to remin in tha Untred States. Wa will all thea fointly try-
> Lind jobs and placas for then. The visas are yoo! ratil next
Anril, but if they can find $5bs here it wiil prodarly bo cossible
for us to secure special legislation for the: to stay a Ladcefinitely.



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

on

Now as to the uwasv.one you raise in your lotter of hovenbar 2hth.
The National Cormmitces for a Free Eurove shoud gervaiuly look after
thepe pecrlo a they arrive and wills they are ire except insofar
as they ars dirécuc by you to take un certain activi ules Qu behalf of .
tip Crigade. The National Comnitteo abould also cooperate ir. trying to
help you in your effort to find jobs dor tien wien thelr tow 18° over,
ami I an sure the people there will do thelr best. 1 asa sanding a
cozy of this note to-wnitnsy and. 7 know that he will cooperate to
uns fullest,

As to ¥ wind question, 7 trink tho expunges of all seven
ought to ba pata for aut of Cresacie funds, They are ovr here on
vehalf of the Crusade av you aru the one wao asked thes to coma,

On the third question, as I indicated above, 1 think it would
be a grent blow to Uuliod States policles in this field if they were
. 2 turn nround alter their cuties were over anu dimp back te a dusty
refucoe carp, . : :

IT tnink tile ig tne way the wholo tt aught to rest now and I
62 moet earnestly urge you not to ba too concerned ubout your personal
rezponsidilities. Ne wili all be lucky if we have ow tackle no tougher
problems, . ‘

Sduceroly,

Fe, Davey Brophy ya
Aser.cac Heritase Foundation :
WSL, Luh Sureat - :
hes York 17, New York

ct: br. whitney Ssepardaon oa
Ci5:THB/eh

Orig - Addressee

Lec - Mr. Shepardsm
lee + 10/arl

lec -cio lce-R


--- Page 172 ---
14-0000

2 4Lt199e

_ NEMORAXDIH FOR: Dopoty Director (Plang)
SUBJECT 1 Munanian Enigro Organization

REFERENCE ! Herorandun to Chief, SZ from Deputy Director (Plans),
dated 5 November 1953 - Subject: Rumanian Hattonal

Council

. 1. Ts agreezent with Mr. Willian Durkee of International

, Orranisatiocns Rivision, I ehare your viev, ag stated in paragrach 3

' of tho referenced msnorandus, that “iz, Anthony Panuch should disenga
the problea of the orzantration of Funanian rofugees with tho BCFZ

- vather than with this Agency, We were inforned by Mr. Durkee that
Rr, Panuch ie fully aware of. the ECFS position that the refugees |
showld resolve their ow differences beforo presenting a solution
_for the consideratica of the HCIT, Mr. Durkee also inforned tha
Roranion Braneh on 13.fovember that he had discuseed thie matter
with Ar, Whitney Giepardson who concurred in the view stated above,

2. With reference to Hr, Panuch's atatemont that the "League

in ite present state 1s a uecful operational vehicle," namo traces
_Teveal that fourteen cembers ave Iron Guardista, five are suspected

-Communiat agents and four admit that they are on tHicolae Halaxa's
payroll. Because of thig unsavory comzosition, it appears wilikely
that the League ‘as presently Composed would. be useful operationally,

JOHW B. RICHARUSON
Chief, SE

ce: C/pP
C/to/pe
I0/PP (Yr. Darke) 7
General Counsel o oy,



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000

SECRET

tity lofertcation

 Iebq

ee,

io

b Rovember lyS2

MOPURa chtef, Southaastorn European Division

1 Rumanian Nalional Council

1, tie attention of tha "& Divindion and Measrs, Braden -
and Duress is invited to the attached curvy of o letter :
Ihave Juzt recoived fron J, Anthony (Joa) Venuch conceming
certain recent davelopments Ln the } aion entyre situstion
and with ‘partioulsr foverence to tha "Leagues" You Wil nate
Urat Br. Panuch has incicuted thet if we ara interested tn ‘the
Leagne ome Lte Possibllitins, he would ve plaid to talk to us
about it, - :

%. I believe thit the adureavees of trie aenorandua vil
recall tne elinificmee af tir, Panueh maxi the role wate he has
Played recantiy, 6-vinit-to ma of chout txo ar threa
Rontha a9. (f wa d by and considered as a minor breach
of conficence ‘the ference teh wos mace to my nane in the
material wilen was published concermin: a connuntestian as. Messed
to King Hleisel, altho.wh I dtu note that tris container no .
Popresentation that i had taken a poeltion ce way or another
eonceminy the Learue or tha eVopoued Yorsula for rerolvin;
difterences Letweon thu two principal Rumanian emij.re Tactians,)

3. As resords the proposal of further conversations
between Kre Fewcici: aul either myself or uume otter rah
or representative of this Ageney, I continua to te inclined to
the view 24st lnese 4 mat E shoulda be taken up by
Mr, Fanuch with Ar, i6t uursolven, If after
cansuitation Civiei and [J Divistun it is
agreed thant correct position, £ uhaukd - reclate
Ae aif Mr. iraien or Curkee could talk siti Shepanisay
about tris letver and obtatn his views ror ay benefit. IT vould
then be in a better position to reply to kr, ran.en's istler ~=
presumably tellin: ata shat in line wien my enrlier acvice to
hin, I etal} wouic recon send that he raine these watters with
WCPK. and not Cra. 1 could also add that i bad ceen troubled
by the arcesrance af iy fate in -the published material relecred

a:

~ SECRET:



--- Page 174 ---
14-0000

Rap an axasnle of why I would prefor
atler Jirectly.

to above and cite
to stay out of the

he A Cony of thie meaorandua to fumtehed to Mere Houston
becauce of ALa kmowladye of tho backeround of the ols :
allegations, and the difficultina wich alas
Crenting for the Aceney in the fubure, It «Lil be reeslled
asa has charyed tit Cia nas injected iteelf into the
matter of his. 4 tration etotus;s thet | pave uronyfully
finvalvad myself in hie offairn <= including somo ‘riditeutour
charse that 1 kept hia fron wetting a lugrative contract wlth
the Collfomia Steel Conpany, etes, utc. -= nome of etiich naa
any foundation fi truth whalsoaver,

Signed) FRANK G. 4

FRAN GQ DET
Repuly Director (flan)

Attachment (1)
Letter to “r, Gisner fran
hr. fanuch dated 2? November 1Y53,

cer C/PP : od
Crrapos A . :
0/Pt (urd Durked) od
Genural Counsel 7 4



--- Page 175 ---
14-0000

aq

Acceptance wv rejection to "iny off" vigavi
et al, Thin vas done. . :

GO . Law uffices of ; on
Pe. J. ARTHONY + ANUCH ;
Y -  G@) Fant Gerd street
: : Now York L/gteYe

November 2, 1953

Hon, Prank wisner - :
Central Inteklivonce Ayenoy Cunfidontial
Waehini ton, U, Ce

Lear Pranks
Re: Honuntan Ketional Cncit

This isto rin; you up to date an the ofternunth of our .
conference af June ‘1/th with respect to the abuve, Gn my ratum
to New-York Y took tha following stepar

1, Perstnally wubaited the settlenant fommsla to
Hics Georvesou for madiation with Visodanu and Crotedanu, sand to
Larry Deleufville for the information of the NUFK, ica, in my
opinion unwisely, took the position thst the furmula was not ¢
nop: otlable, .

26 Alrected. the oan to tranusalt the fornula to
King MUhatl for his inforantios and action d, ponding: final
Cratalonu, visolLanu -

3. Summoned Malaxa and the of fieials of the League to
(a) inform-tiea of the false char ‘es mrde tu big snite Houre by
Malaxa ovainst you in°1v51 end to sanani their formal reblractiong
and (@) inoist that Malaxa taaediately make youd on dls ¢
to General facescu that he set up sn indepen: ent "no etrinis attached"
budzet for ibe Leave <= an undertakin;, tnen ula montha in defeult.
Meloxa ayrees to comply whbi doth Ceaan aad auxed Tor tige to. the
berinning of Yeptamber when be ld be releanad of the
otrain and nents) eangutah incide ehrante Ln: at dot
procee:iiniz. halaxa defaulted am both promises,

Le I desued an ulttaatua to the leaders of the Learsue toa tha
effect that trremectivn of ay friendehi whtn General Radeceu,
unless they disassociated the ves coyletely fron Hulaxa and
any seatlmnce of nis influence <= cirect or indirect -- | would
Poaipn as tue Léscue counsel, thls severance of thelr relationoidp
witn Halaxa hag teen accoa; fier a storay ah owd ow sensin
betueen Parensanu and Siculeses and Nalara, a



--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

a
nm
ty

y ; “re Frank Wiener

’
@mrational vehicle in ony fiaaanian sltustion in «len
tion of skilled anc aznerierces parsonnol (nobably rarer.
Niculancu) of cotuervative wd nonearalot peiitizal «1
An Mnidicated., If yuu are at wll interosted in it xz 5:

>be gisl to talk to you about bt,

The Leazuo In ite nrevent atete is in my opinion 4a ureful
the utilina~

yu and
emtation
Hy L Biovld

- with beat reierds,-

Foithfully,

fef Son %



--- Page 177 ---
14-00000

no by — ra aoe
sMunoeasy President wetko Vice Wresent Rerretary Beorecary-Treamrer ADUIIURT COUNCIL
MULE ERICH. 2 Rascovic ad -
eS Ce rrescovte image STRAT oat SNnewe 2 wenn vi
Proausent ei Cleveland 4, Oto tusbureb 37, Pa. Nathowal | President
THUD AL HRORAK ne joveiand & Purmorab ¥, First Catholle @lova
roa. Doe ihe an ‘ . Cates ef UL 8. AL
Middistown, Pa : HELEN KUCAN. -
Vico. beadhtent Nauicoal Preetdant
. _Wiret Cathoite. loves
Ladies Volos

7 MICHARL BINCHAK
Laas Behoanm: ave. . . . :
Mor . FRANK BORUS |
Nattoaal President

“rpc come The Slovak League of America =U.

AIU Montuoth Birest
Witteburgh 10, Pe. soy A Cuttarot ond Cite Federstwon' @ Amerwons of Stovah Descent Weana. Slovak Untoo
GABRIELA E. VAVRRK

. sueKrit @. PRUAA _ Organised 1997 0 Cleveland, OMe, : Naltonel President
ye Ladies Pennsylvania
Mowat Union

JOHN ROLPORIL
National Preaideat

. OFNCE OF THE PREMIDENT ;
. : . ‘ . Gicraa Catholle
DR. JULIUA 2aNcE PHILID A. HRODAK Cadet Uaton
. all W. King Otreet~ ETOWN, Pa. .
Owosso, Mich. . _ a -
STEFANIE 0. HUGEK : : . :
: Octuser Sl, 1952 ‘

Lakewood, ™. ‘4

har, Kurt Glaser
LL? -noth Ste, [eli
washington 9, D.C.

Dour My. Glasers

I havo rend your artiole on Radio sree kurops >
! Ti, "RUGSLA PING" iwYs Il Ravlo "ridin MURUVE" =) and Io wust
oO . ger that it ugrees with the tats as I know them. It is
regrettable tut sueh knowledge or information cannot get
to the masses of the American public. I nnve visited the :
Stute wveonrtnent ond t.e Nutionai Committee for a Free Burope :
noverul times during the past two yours to o,vrize then .
or the situation, but Lt. seems they do not choose to do much |
about it. I nad, my infor.ation direotly anda indireotly from: j
Slovek rerucees in Gemuuny ana Austria....and London. :
. In December, 1951, the ASSUCLATLON OF SLOVAKS Ih GREAT
LEDTALN Bent ua Mid sorindum" to the Nat'l Committee Yor a .
Free surope in hew fork stating, in crrect, tie very things |
your article Contains. tte personnel of Rrk in wunien was
i t time Sl program editors wore employed
sloveks (renecades). OL the 29 Czechs

: Gergen Court College

{
: TEs or one brand or another! The :
‘ yw ‘To ostiJl hove tint list. |
ShouLa you went “to use it, you 4 care to-Lte :
; To heve long been eenvineed they it’is not in the keeuwwowem:
sta of wieriea or other free countries to em,loy oseudo= i i
neevs in the EFK, the Voice oF anerica pg
rentel agencies. I simply would not trust | 5:
. ve tie arlatuns in Rr or used by od
the hve sha I certetniy « : yc dts publication. I, 4
You one, certninly vould! J Eg
erhetel a
“oy &. Erobak a
i]

i


--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

err t ent.

es i Tovena wlth attention and inte. st the urticle

rone“" by Lv.Kurt Glaser,

"he CHurcta iret’ boys in andio “ron B
it ving no docwientution on hend jn order to vertiy

all purtieuler offirictions emt. ined 4 this ertdele,l enn «x-

“pierce cntive advesion ni to dite ‘eneral lire, 2 lived in Czeecho-

Sloyards vetween 1640 and lyAg nnd I tinoe the policy or the

ral Prone “Goverment in pare U0 wh

1 that tine vron wy oernonalL

” oxverdenes.
: in orice to unéeretonud ne ovxiot teaceuney of
sone ‘present politicians sroupes in the ‘so-erLled "Comnetl. of
Free Czechoslovarie",1t is necossury to point out that the Czech
Rational Scelalist inrty or mr, ben nes ,Lxr.Zen%1,Lir. Hipko ivr Stran-
sky,ete, forned ,on guns 25 5th 21045, the "Front of ovxine People"
with the pro-Corvauniat % Social Democratic Parby of Lir ri erlinzer,
Mr.Lausehman and kir.uajer and with the Conaunist lVarty of Mr.Cot-
twald what “yront" con:titutud the closest ring of roclaltat

Solidarity end common action within the “ational Hront"Ggvern-
ment composed of tyo more parties: the Grech Catholien and the
Slovak Denoerate, /See tie articlo Let, "Booey the truth (", by
Dr.tticnal asbrin, torner Denuty of Glove: Unnocrnitic “nrty in

Prague Varliament, published in "Jednote ",on Uctober 29th ie52,
iAldletorn sFa./inis ring of the three Czech sociulist narties

is responsiule for the evolution dn the policy of Crecho-Llove'-in

until Pebruary 14é.. -
: The Governnent of the "int Longl Vront" of wdeh,

Nefenkl wes then Vice-treclor i'r.



--- Page 179 ---
400000

fo 7 as
‘ ~ . .

3 ;
; .

spbas OF ays In Urcenasulo

“ie,

: mae hdeney os the glove’:
. y .
™ visived : SGM teontoves

evo] ot U0 of

Viges ere

orisonners end

sounl

AV aden

2atbl

» Anerien

versity on for.

ner,a borcy vor

oglovaldu, becouse the.

Mau sree of ve

ve of Teudalisn ond its. denocraey

vruocdi:

ut, there renninded ‘no clcss.

etion could

to tie accentrnce of Corymmism

Chor ¢
i wae “"Letional Front Gov rn-
Gt + t

-pne vnueh uniriots by nostly Comuntst

in "Labor aus". +

roof Comwnisn,

ine to cinucse titeir tone,

eel, Sorewmists ve:

elves ar conwineing

es vouble dealing. the "Council of Sree’ Crechoslovatda"

: i: ih: este Menes uy "Yello. cllere" ii ues been ; roved
ore tie oibeo.witiee to investicete the
i © Taverns] Security Act end other Interne)

Yor: 1ittee: on

clary, United states

Cat: Gos a and Sccond Session on Levionece



--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

4

rT) ew sued

3
es und Copmulates

to

Movi leg oa cerommel avon

prow Soviet doiinetion in eo Lnited stiutes, July vy ld: ve

vied 1092, United btales Gov rreient Beintin; O:rioe,

midi ction Mo2-Mo.e yaae.
Gu pale 7 one cen wend tie testinony of Lr.Josenh {

tatoo. ;

BL of MET .Goeatinc of ire mf icunts, Vormer /

Ignae ..ol)

ionage networ.: in USA,LT Lolnr suid:

"le Hy buni/ told he that wo hud o very-well- orsanuized ‘

ound wovenent witch vas giving then a lot of nendactes,

sree Czechoslova ia with

hore tien tie eotionel Comneil for
its poltiicol urestise end its chalruen, reser “ont),

‘land iis organi-

EAD

"le are not arevaid, "ho said, "or

zation Lecuuge we have there our men who even hold i:icher po~

wisn."

_oitions and we con render ti 16m iiarmless \aenevor Ve wisn,

‘Sie "Council of +ree Uzechos loveizio", against a otron;

i
|

opposition of (anti-Communist vaeche anti Slovars,ias been
recomnized .cy the «ational Comittee vor alitree Europe as
e vepresentetive body ot Um eh and Slovai: refussees,In thig

euelity,it is a vecruitiny office vor the personnel of the

neato ce Burone",

hington ve ova bery1952

| fr cele A. Mi haz

Yorner dinlount of the Cm cho-Slovel .inis tre of Fore
: in brane (1835-19307,
Vorner Chareé 4’Aiteires of lova’iir in fodrid /140- -1yA4/,
former Counsellor of the #re ey oF the Slovai: ational vounei
. in Ly: bisluve Tede-ds40/,

in Afiairs



--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

2 “funich." he continued.

‘Houses Reds’

: Station Got Millions:
. “From Americans
‘By Dr. John B. Crane

Frankfurt. Germany,

"You would do well to make an,

Jwesnigation of Radio Free.

rope.” @ prominent Washington

‘wmaker advised me a few weeks;
JO Ak We were having ten te

her. near Heidelberg.

"IT have just, returned from
where -I
__spected beth the facilities of the
‘aice of America and of Radio!

vee Europe. Yowas much im:
“reased with the Vole of America

‘t-up and find they are’ doing a
snry good job
_ “But when Tealled at the plant
“ft Radio Free Europe [ognt auch
‘ frosty reception I could hardly,
“slieve it. They tried to be polite’
ut Were obviously deligited when,
.U left. I upured maybe they had’
“heard ‘of my. vigorous antl-Com.,
munist campaign when I ran for
te-election.” ij

fMakeo Headlines a

* Withia the past montiv at feast.”
three other visiting American affi-,
cials have tipped me off that I”
ht to investigate Radio Free
ars, The climax was reached

when a Washington investi.
nator auddenly appeared at my
«partment for « chat ond casually
rnnounced he was headed for.
flunich, When I inquired why, he

‘ant to inspect Radio Free-
Europe.”

During the past week Radio
Free Europe has twice made head-
Iines tn leading German periodi-'

“cals, One important weekly paper, .
the Rheinischer Merkur, devoted
2A entire page to the Problem of:
Radio Free Purope.

70 Millions trom Americans

Amenwan rmaders will doubtless
remember with what hich hopes
this radio broadcasting station was
started two years ago under the
sponsorship of ontstanding private
American cituens such as Gen.
Vucius D. Clay. former American”
Military Governor in Germany.

The purpose of the new broad-
casting station was to send pro-:

xrams behind the Iron Curtain to:
Peland, Czechoslovakia and other
satellite countries to encourage
them to hold out against ther
Communist Governments. :
Millions of Americans welcomed
me few weapon in the cold war
t communism and contrib.

70 million dollars for tts sup.
pork: according to the German
press, :

pea :

“AnteGerman Propaganda;
The o wae to be spent not

‘anly for buing and equipping &

Browdeast station, but also for
financing the escape of refugees.
from countries betind the Tpon

<———tortein ant giving them jobs at

the new gtation In Munich,

Now come leading articles in
the German press charging that
Radio Free Europe ts heavily ine
filtrsied with Communists and
that: preCommunist, anti-German
propaxanda ic being fed to coan-,
tries behind the Iran Curtain,

The well-known German weeks:
Jy, Christ Un Welt, states. that
seven members of the CRech De.
partment of Ratio Free Europe:
have recently been arrested on
auspicion of espionage, while one,
Nember, atter working for several!
months, was found to be a Come]
munist agent and fled over the
border into Cerchoslovakia with!
important. personal recorda of,
Czccho emigrants’ families. 1

‘Saw the Light’ ‘ot

The Gero paper names names
and places. For exainple, it charges
that the executive editor of tho;
Cuech Division of Radio Free’
Eurvpe. Pavel Tigrid, was editor;
‘of an illegal, Communist paper in:
19Xleknown as Hallo Noviny. |

It charges, further, that_ during’
the German occupation of Czecho-|
slovakis Tigrid co-operated closcly:
with an important . Communist’
Jeader, Fucik, who had become’
editor of the Communist paper °
Rude Pravo- Tigrid was a cane:
tributor to the Communist Central
Party organ when the war ended
in 1945. .

Shortly thereafter, however, he
“saw the tight” and fled to Gere
_Many as a refugee. Soon he was
executive editor of the Munich:
Fadio station fighting communism.

Demand &' -Up

German paper further men-!
tons) fame five other promi:
nent emplosrq of Radio Free!
Europe who Were, earlier, Com.
munst Party pittpbers or who to
day have clase reatives in im.
portant Communist Party posts In
Czechoslovakia.

The Germans are demasding a
drast reorganization of Radio
Free Europe. This serms to be on
the point of being realized. Tt ts
reported that 25 employes of the?
organization — hav al it.
signed, and that Executive Editors
Tigrid’ takas Paul Dittrich) has,
aubmitted his resignation. .

tt is to be hoped that the”
“housecleaning” now in progress
will put an end to the many ugly" '*
rumors that have been floatng:
ground about Radio Free Europe
for the last several months. ~



--- Page 182 ---
14-0000

Liapepateed der Ehimshlocetoais
ba WY SATS 4
Cine curparratuitrernitma titles.
rast deri encn Eade rats
teh raiwrser ts ered foto
liaspa aa? pe see walt

bet Lady cea Rint 8 Eada NTA:

Sees adhe deneeh Coe a
wikis BEA ead
eeysenaed oo
a

atch aed f eure)
Set eperide nor sists,
caetenny

RRP PEW Oise Ra Are

weno se oy A pre Eate

inieyive
stastiaie

aren eneen

Hie

chk ay at com, wees ats pan epeng ie <
ae ; . vere ay ot z iaabnin ds acted es

Eee Rem oaevtaes, pe Stich ni ta3 2 sf

r peeparde tia
Oe Set tied een rr es
: ik Sigmatel

septs



--- Page 183 ---
g
;
i
e
,
:

e
:

¢

00000

"waters

neti

rete 73
RSL ty!

pea TEE: ye siaeaais BBs OTHE * ay
Sore SAU gomg anlaatr Gy Re,

SIRE PITY
ae e

Rt Pee: hanes esta hae.

PLES Df en ER ae I EET
Da at BP portly Re BER
RIT B ad ttl 8 yl EAD ne
, 2 Eh id RN

Pea ee

Pia 5 : at
EAA eect sd ENE SR NHRD TE

erin cA Ate thekcran ie eat Tihs TH ahs “Pov Hoel 2 tn

ft a OO ey ROT EL Te Sie TIE
% S ped,

ste File Se te"

oan

Te hare Spe
Benn Aaa Asi wet gh
OP ysee Ee Miseerge
ada

PUMA Boilie Boe tN eth
sag ch Poe 5

(icy ott
ar hate

Spt ies Seas, chat mtanag ehh gaa ys at

2,

abi goag ens ate sdb

FOS :
Sothern,
22 Bana

SRE Teens

Depaapeiad erin! eps at

SeRAUE PT en pie sbe beams

; ria ch garineds,
oP aey ag soc Sete tad LAT IN NAT
tint Ys ie
Salt ile Oe SaaS gaa os

QA Mae a Ted esd Sete
as = \gaisiet sanienal

Fee bec gee


--- Page 184 ---
14-0000

“es OStobar 1953

MEMORANTUM FORe » DIRECTOR OF CSNTRAL INTZLLIOSNCS
DEPUTY DIRSCTOR (PLANS)

SUBJECT s . Moneoigneur John C. Kirk -

: 2. You asked mo by televhene for a regort-on subjact, who 1a
domeatio prolate on leave from the Savannah«atlanta diocese in Georgia.

.2. Honseignour Kirk was formerly accretary to Archbishop Gerald 2,
O'flara, 3ishop of the Savannah-Atlanta diocaso, and also his scorstary
wiile Blohon O'Hara was Apostolte Nuncio to Rumania fram 1946 until
O'Mara’s official expulsion in July of 1950. (KEK haa deen roltably
informed that Kirk remained behind in Rumania disguised as a Swiss
tourlot. He viaitec many of the irmrisoned hierarchy but eventually
escaped, This report ia without objective verification.)

3. Because no single member of the Rumanian ‘hiorarchy escaped,
Kirk was appointed as president af the Rumanian Catholic Misston for
Europe, The heacquarters of the Mission 10 sow Passesginta del
Gianicolo 5, Rome, Monseignour irk resides at Via Panama 110, Rome.

4. Whilo in the United States in 1962 as personal delegate of
Cardinal Tiasorant to the convention of the association of Xumanian

-Catholtea in America, Kirk visited the office of NCKS. Nombers of .

the staff rat with him on five occasions and made the following
estimates . u,

Ada prolate on leave in a southern diocese, Airk can
be classified as a religious liberal interested in the
betterment of various classes and, particularly the Noxro.
In kumonian. politica, he virorously resisted the influence
of the iron guard. Evidence of this 1a that in 1952 Kirk
moved the headquarters of the Miasion from Aadrid, where it ©

_ ¥ao located at Calle de Serrano 39, because of continuing
atte>nts of the iron guardists to use his for political

purposes, ; 4

5. A detailed account of the »rincipal purposes and Scope of
the Rumanian Catholic Mission for Europe which Kiris heads is available



--- Page 185 ---
14-0000

—_——

here, Nighitehts arog at
by Day

a. Ro Ly 150,090 peaple under

? jurtadletion,:

be Minston centers have heen
Austria, Germany, ftaly,

SU shed tn Great. Britain,
Armentina, Triente, Spain and vranee, ~

cc.

Kirk La asslated by thirty orfes
areas, .

Sts located in the atiove
i

6. Kirk t+
fn Novemb
ehtef, Av
In Dublin,

i
: 1
iow in the United Statea and i
eo$e visiting 2 i

ntends to return es
ishon *

Lo week,
nd with th

York ne

for Tr

i forner
udoiarte rs

7. State fe by Monselyneur Kirk in'vistts to NCFE
ether with ext: 5 from correspondence are avatlable ££ you
wuld wish me to sean thage und form an estinate or my own.

SM,
Chief
International Organhzationa Divieicn

10/9rT wPn~

Orly & 1 = Addressees
lice - 10/Bri
lice - CIO

lec ~ RI

gop _



--- Page 186 ---
14550000

, Satellites proper.

DRAF®?

19 October 1953

Janaing of western broadcasta to Rusola began oporaaicaliy” fa. ee]

1948, and vao vell established by early 1949, first ogainst YOA then

also against BEC. satellite Language program Jomming began” “firet :
fron Rusetan stations and then ‘from jamming stations located in the
when RFE transnissione began in 1950, the
organisation and equipment vere available for the new target.

At the prevent time, the erganization for Jamming - including
the transmitters, tho monitoring otationa to vatch for the undeatred
programs, and the control network to-direat the Jaimers to the target «

fe apparently integrated throughout the Bloo, with a certain amount

of cooperation between countries. That is, programs directed. to one

satellite. country ney bo jammed not only from within the ccuntry but
fron Rusote and trou neighboring Satellites.

At least some of. the janmers are closely controlled 50 that
efforte to evade them by changes in frequency or schedules are frequently
met by & prompt reaction on the part of the Jaumer -- within a minute
or leas.

fhe extent of integration of the total Bloc Jamming system makes
At very aietteutt + to ‘separate the effort contributed within ‘the Satellites.
However, it io presently estinated that; about 900 transmitters are in
the Jamming effort within the Bloo » and these appear to bo fairly vell
Atetributea throughout the total of the frequencies that are being used
at ony given tine. _ Therefore, at tines vhen RYE is brosdeasting to
the Satellite countries with a considerable number, of frequencies, thera

are undoubtedly. hundreds of. transmitters dJouaing these frequencies.



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

rh DRAPE

19 October 1953.

The effoctivoness of the damming ie difficult to assess quantile

tatively from tho fev available observation locations within the Orbit

.and from the fan mail received. Haeever, in general, it 1o epperent

that jomming 19 most effective in large cities: approaching 100.

In rural sreao, the picture varies trom tima to time and from place

to place, but it aprearo that a considerable proportion of the prograns
to the satellites gan be received. For example, the RFR monitor in ,
Vienna reported that, at that loestics, the medium frequoncy Czech
broadcast from Holzkirchen on 719 x6 vas practically 100% jammed

vbile only about 504 of the shortwave Czech programs wero not intel-

ligitle. The Eabassy in Warsav reyorteé in May that while VOA pro-
grams: wore unintelligible, K¥B prograss were “often intelligible.”



--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

15 October 1953 :

NAMORANOLM FON:  INS@ECTOR GENERAL
SUBJECR:

Salary information on NCIE Paople

1, Subsequent to Mr. Durkeo's memorandum to you of
1 Soptarber 2953, which we Giscussed this morning, I learned
that Hr. ‘ulles discussed with Hr, Shepardson the need for
> - the informacion as te the salaries of NOSE poople. Very
likely ‘this conversation waa held pursuant to your own talk
with the Director.

2. In an: evert
tion requested by

» WO have received preoisaly the informa-
6 October, ant I

‘the Inspector senereal in a memorandum of
have forwarded it to Win Scott,

3. TF think your effort has bean successful,

THIMAS W, BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

ClO: Twa/eh

Orig - Addressse
1 cc + [0/Srl
lee - cio -
lee - 2”



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

, 15 october 1953

MERORANIM FOR: pIREcrot ov carat, INTEL AIOCE ”

“suaJEct br. Francia Kase

zs Letter fron Dr. Karel fase to irs. Mulles

1. Dr. Francis Kase: haa had--the. following relattonship
with the Cantral intelligence Agerey and National. Comalttea
for a Free Europer

He has never been an aent of CIA,- but has been
aged from vire to tie. by G3/soatacts for translations
etc., ani is now being paid- between $150 and ¥200 per

renth Lor aubdsistence hy O/C. .

In Lecoxder 1952, 1G Division referred this man to
the Hid-furopean Studios Center of the liational Comm: ttee
for a Free kurope, Yndorvenavaly, he did not f1t into
their research pattern, but they think ne is an extromely
capable man.

2. Unless the. Dirnotor wishes to instruct NCFe to hire‘
Dr. Kase, I suggest mrs. Uulles send the atvached reply. ~

THOMAS BRAVEN
Chief
Tnvernational Organizations rivt ston

Attachment

Suzgested reply y ro.

to reference. é
19/Brl ¥PD-TwB/eh .

Orig & 1 - Addressee
2c = 10/srl -
lee - CIO

lee - Rt



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

. SECRET

curity Infermation

Uk October 1953

MEHORANDIN FOR: Doputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT — “, Vienna Conferouce with anbdssoador Joseph Flack

le Qn2 September, representatives of RFE and VCA ast with
Ambassador Joseph Flack and solicited his comments on reported
unrest in Foland, and the utility of KFE and YOA Polish broadcastée

_ 2@ with reference to internal disturbances and partisan -
activities, Flack stated that there hava deen Fabsolutely none*  —~
. dp recent weeks, and added that oarlier reports of unrest following
. the Juite uprisings in East Germany vere proved to have been without
foundation as a result of. relatively unrestricted survey action .
: then taken by numerous representatives of (. Se, British and French
Co diplonatic Risstons in-Poland. le axpressed his convictios ‘that
we there is-no eignifieant underground organisation in Poland which |
mipht be eeneidered os an immediate assyt ty tho vest, and enpha-
sized his belief that serious disturbances would not occur as long
_ a6 tho present Soviet control mochanis® retains is power and the
Soviet. aruies in Poland and East Germany so unctiallenged. The
bitter lessons of World War II, particularly the abortive Warsaw
uprisings, and leck.of confidence in the Polish emigration define
itely disesuraze active resistances. Tre Foles increasingly tend to
resent tha action of the enicre leaders, revarding then asse:itially
aa, avadols of failure, and, Flack feels, wilt undoubtedly develop
| new leadsrs from within the: country when the time comes for actions
3. Flack carefully distinguished resistance as an immediate
asset froz resistance ag a potential asset. He expressed the
. belief that the Catholic Chirch atill cffers the strongest ard the
best organised base of resistance in Poland as it is looked upon
@s the only symbol ef continuity and solidarity with the past. To
this he added his own appreciation for traditional Polish spirit
of indepencenee and Christian orientation, and ephasized his
belief that ‘olish hatred of Russians and eommunisn continues to
mounte Urfortunately, similar sontizes*% persists with reference to
Germany. Fear of German: occupation or seisure of Polish territory

contimies to olay a prominent rart in Polish thought and is ’
cleverly utilised by the Commnist overnnect in ite propaganda

efforte : :

SECRET

OS Seeeniy Int oemicion


--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

. preserving hope and be:

SECRET

Security Information

: “he Flock expressed certain alcgivings with reference to the
haraeter of RFE and VOA broadcasts,- emphasising hie cunrviction

e

that Veotern radio: broadcaste should do nothing to: coapromise the .

. position of the Catholic Church in Poland, alvays taking as .
gaidance the attitade and statements of the Polish clerical leaders
‘themsolveoe Ho strongly urged that all possible pte;n be taken te
faintain the present volume of broadcasts into Poland as « neang of

lief in the inevitebility of Soviet comunisats

' Collapses :
as/
Sherman Do Larb
Executive Secretariat, DO/P
‘Attachnent

SECRET

f nly ehee

—



--- Page 192 ---
14-0000

25 Septerbor 1953:

MRMORANOUM FOR: =ASSISTAN? TO DCL

SUBJECT Attached Letter from Wi J1am H, Smyth

With roferance to the second paragraph of the attached

letter, the following information will anewer the question; ©

: Mr. Sayth’s statement before the Houso Comittee on
Foreign Relations was reprinted. by the National -

Comittee for a Free Furone, It appeared in "Progled®?,
@ monthly mimeographed newsshoet, which ta published in

‘Serb, Croat and Slovsie, and containa statements oto.

fade regarting Yugoslavia by prominont loadere, reprints
from articles on Yugoslavia etc. It has a limited

“distribution (2-300) to Yugoslav enigros in this country,

1 ce

and its purpose is to keep the Yugoslav emigration in
thts country informed. It is indicated in the newssheot -
that tho statements roprinted therein do not reflect the
views or oplaions-of NCFE,

eo Chief ,
: International Organisationa Division
Attachment _ : so
Clo: TwB/eh ;
Orig ~ Addresses (Nr. Long);
‘ lee = 10/srt .
1 ce =.CIO .

-R



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

SECRET

UNCLASSIFIED RESTHICTED ~~? 9NFID.
(SENDER WILL CIUCLE CLASSIFICAY —-10P AND gor

CenTeaL INTELLIGENCE Actncy DD P. 0

OFFICIAL ROUTING SIAL

C7 sprrovat (7 information i
C7 actron (<5 prec REPLY : (=) reruaw
[Tl] comment (7 prevanartow of aeety  (<——] oisparen
C=) CONCURRENCE (OTT recommenoation | (Jee
Nemurka:r- The attached reply was received from Mr,
Shepardson in response to my request: for them to

study prospects for Lroadeasts to the Baltics,
Reference your letter of 30 July to 6.D. Jackson,

UNCLASSIFIED

Sortnentar rantis orice

SECRET

sea? 30-4

CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

without dzn-ze to diplor

.ef the Uatted Ste

LL sny

GLI-1

Dear Mr. Hidvoods

‘f short tine

whether LCFE would reco:
tana to the Pcltte
severe s

ation Weg ma
ered for, ind

Following these dis feussdons, the ucrr positicn
is as follows; .

: Erocde:zsts of the RPE type (4. @. the type to Czecho::lo~
vekle, rolend, snd Ing sy dircetcd +t the three Praltie-
ccuntries, “orld be rheinty. cdve geoux to tne.united. Stetes
in terms at CFE's objectives. ‘there ere even stromrer orsu-

t once then there ivere

ments for : rting. such bro: deists
them tvo ye f “P, Now, +3 during the 4
fons, ‘the rrablem ; i such: -broadossts...,
Free Estontz, tstvis nnot -- |
- i

y the Voice }
he Brltie |

of smaric. The fact
never been ed + e Governincnt of the
Ss would an erove the restraints under

fe where the loest vovern-

which tne Yolece of me
ten :eeredited to it.

ment hig en -merie:n dirt

rice cin trinemit Vofces of Free
*, we vould not went-to compete
tbl they shovnld do
wnitlon wolicy
ff se knew for
tesk (teh
7 ¢ e belleve to
ns in the is itie lineurres) then
fons to the lint of unfinished tusi-
nm ORE ‘must Givect its «ttention wheneyar suffietent
come ovell-bla,

If the Voice of

Estondz, Letviey ond wit’
with them -nd woul 2

the Job with the

However, suffiet

aire the needs
srenent veriod of fer-
‘lite -rez, our first
we +lready h: ve
elas ed szeinst
ng. RFE's criti budget for
: S rycrozrem to mint: in present g:ins
ihe three m-in tirgets (Czechoslovz “kic, Folend end tung ary)

ene far from being
t

SX must necessi-rily be
in the free of the elects



--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

~

LY Hous BATION

Mr, Hecwood -

917-1

esodin kuleoris,
The origi a ae

200, ‘000, Treke it’ Gonht eal if KEE
e-roerching can-bilities to L of

Lene melnteinto secnty
indeed,

ath (t) not to exy
nivn brosd

“4h) te pLinins 2 bro:d

resl ond not s
ndditioanl s
tht ineve

To anter ti
veuld (1
spveped times ;
dee

nert lly
eno he
x thefir butwet elloc: tions eniy
tirlly exceed, the #mount needed te reserve e
( inst enemy interfer 2) st their existing
fnd eertediniy t additions

S to consider, < longs
Laity of:

7 (=) Strengthening stiil further the sivnel ta the
cieal torgeus, : .

(>) dnitl tt

to Jlbints us ¢ more ‘Luportant

“)

Cone uslon:

. Unless it 14 ro
tere:t thet RFE type brondess
und , :

to travise such pros “pe 1 5, ind

Unless it ts glen rp thet such developnent by RFE
rortznt thang



--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

Prove 2
« Hi divood
7-1 VISES bes

G1) faddithons] shinck etren
winte,y Polead sad thaarory,

(AL) fdditdoa:t
to Bulserde ind Ronente, vref
ftautellition, ond

Unless on ade:
huse ofer tions 1s in

x

NORE docs not recommend the extension of PTE t: ;
to the three E: ltiec stutes, _ '

Sincerely yours,

. we - a
CECURITY UWeusct oes


--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

/ Soptember 18, 1953

Momorsandum for Moesre. Joseph B, Phillipe
: William Durkee
Thomas Braden a
Goorge Morgan
Abbott Waehbura
Tho attached memorandum ic self-explanatory and
was written to me by Mr. Jackson while he waa
away Of vacation. . ,

Could, somoone--porhaps Mr. Phillips--let us know
when it uaa been decided how David will be handled?

Many thanks,

: 4 _— y) y <

Yfiret MW veer

: Marie MeCra :
Socrotary to C. D. Jackson ©

Attachments



--- Page 198 ---
14-00000

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

September 7, 1953

Miss McCrum:

Thave a feeling that no one on our 9'de is prepared to keep o firm hand
on the Jean Paul David trip. :

David is himoelf a king-sizo {roe wheeler. Although bo is unquestionably

“one of the French "doers," a9 opposed to “talkers, in thia field, he

is also quite a big-mouth and faclined to over -talk, over-promise and over-

" indulge in cloak-and-dagger stage setting. U he hasn't got a guard, armed

to the teeth, with a beret and a balf-burnod cigarette glued to his underlip,
lurking outside the dining-room, he can't enjoy hig meal. So

The plot io complicated by the fact that as far as the U.S. 1a concerned
he has always been strictly covert. This time he arrivea ap strictly

““overt'' 60:no'one on our side will really know how to behave since

everyone will have to-do and be the exact oppoaite of what they did and
were during David's last trip. .

I would suggest that you show ‘the attached to Abbott Washburn, George

~ Morgana, Tom Broaden and/or Bill Durkee, and Joe Phillips (also thio aote) |

and suggeot that they wor: out whe should consider himeell responeible,
I personally hope Joe Phillips will be willing to take it on.

Incidentally, the American who handles David best is Helen Kirkpatrick,
She might conceivably be drafted as chaperone for thia trip.

c.D.J.



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

COPY co

(22 Juno. 1953.

The following is {ram a dispatch written by Mr. William Tyler, dated

1. After a recent conversation with Jean Paul David, at which time he
outlined hie activities and ideas in conncction with the mission with which
he io charged by Georgos Bidault, I received a lettor from him,

2. It will be seon from this Istter that David is most anxioua that the
roport which he will make on his vurvey should reprosent, without committing
any one country, a systhesia of the views and the resources of the Western
powers allied under NATO, in the broad field of propaganda and paychological
warfare designed to build support for Western defenso policy and to promote :
the achlevement of the odjectives of these policies, : .

rs to me that/a difficulty which we-have to face, and which we-

having to face, is due to the organisational otructurs

within which we oparate officially ia the general field under discussion. “In

a country like Italy, for example, it is possible for David to havo oxchangoa

of views with high officials of-the-government and to feel raasonably suro -
that even though such views are not to be taken as & commitment, they do in fact 1
represent the disposition af the government in question, or any government
likely to succeed it, toward these probdlams. In our case, however, it seems

to me that it will requiro careful preparation to determine with whom David
Shoiild consult and to work out a conatructive position which will: influence

his report and his recommendations in a direction which we approve,

3. It ocd
are probably unique in

4. It is particularly difficult for me to make specific recommendations,

“aince developments iu Washington in the last few months are difficult to : ;

keep up with from overseaa. It would, therefore, be particularly helpful
to-have headquarters' views at this Stage on the following points, assuming
‘that David. will go to-tXe States in late September on the last leg of his survey:
a. With whom should he meet for basic discussions: (It occurs to i

me that a guitable body, if at il ia existence, would.>a the Psychological t
Operations Coordinating Committee.) : ,

; b. Within what limits at this time are wo Prepared to discuss the :
problem of concerted action for the psychological strength of the North '
Atlaatic Community. . . :

5. As headquarters iv aware, Jackson knows David personally,
and it would perhapa be ‘useful to Trange for conversations with him and

-any group he might have in mind.:- It is true that the positioa of David

with rogard to this Agency is anomalous, ‘since the survey on which be is
engaged, far from relating to covert operations, is of the most official



--- Page 200 ---
14-0000:

kind possible. As headquarters has pointed out, hio intorests-in his present.
mission in reality pertain more to the State Department-and NATO than
to us, and it scema to me that we should not be in the direct ‘Uno of fire
“except in. the capacity of individual observers or participants in the:
‘conversations he will have, It would, therefore, seem to be all the more
important that we arrivo at'a clear undoretanding among ourselves aa to
. how David's trip to the States will be organised and what is to be the
' respective role of the component elomonts in the psychological effort with
_ regard to hie survey. : . . -

iS} WILLIAM TYLER .



--- Page 201 ---
1400000 *

‘Wy doar Bilt,’

APTACIGNT #2
|
(™ANGLATI OE)

Translation of Latter from Jeon-Paul David

oe Juno 19, 1953

You know that - predably tovard the exd of Septonber - I am
to loave. for the United States on a mission entrusted to m9 by
the Miniloter of Foreign Affairs,

Ur, Bidault is soocerned - and juotly 90, about the problems
connected with ths objectives of my survey; end my desire is to-
produce @ renliotica repert since I wish to avoid (you know my vay
of thinking) tho traditional phrascology vhich gonsrally takes
the place of actica. ,

To date, in Ytaly, Belgium, Holland, Denmrh, Norvay .. I
bave succesuively conferred with the Prime Ninioters, Ministere of
Foreign Affsire, of Defense, of tha Interior, of Education,” I have.
also sometimes mst vith the Chiefs of Staff, and spectaliste of .

information and of psychological varfare.
To all of them, I have saids

ir. Bidault hes requested me to mika this survey anil you have
before you the text of the French note which speaks for itself and -
seems to require no further comment. I want to usk you to atate,
in writing and without im any way committing your Goverment or your

‘particular services, vhat solutions seca reasonable. I wish to gather

all constructive idess oo this mtter. Your ideas vill bo useful,
perhaps, to other countries - oven {f you think them inapplicable in
your own. Then, I ahaii sake a synthesio of the reports so ascombdled «
adding thereto the thoughts of tho French Ninioter of Foreign Affatra
in this rospect. And, at tha (NATO) ‘Conference of the 1)" at the end
of October, ve shall Neve svaileble a program ou the basia of which
constructive action can be taken,”

There, in telegraphic style, ie my argument. I should add that
evoryvhere I found an excellent weloom, overyono accepted this method

and proained mo substantial reports.
But, if in smal) or medium-size countries, I have encountered

no major difficulties, 1 have no idea of tho vay of thinking of your

compatriots om such matters. And this note ie for no other reason

than to ask you to express your thoughts, in view of the excellent

advice you can give ne. o : a ; ;


--- Page 202 ---
14-0000

I vant to. emphasise that, in sy mind, tho reports and - ;
cuggeetions gathered from aj}l the epscialists of al) ths ministries
of.any particular country will sot comait any country in any way.

I W111 maze po one, compronise no cae. I want to gather the sua
of the idgas and resources of the Atlantic. Tommunity in thie domais

and add a few porsozal ideas vhieb soem vorkable.

‘That to vhy, my dear Bill, 2 ask for your contribution ag I
Please

vould like to carefully prepare this trip acroso the Atlantic.
forgive thio long letter. Tell west you think of all this.

/ Joan Paul David



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

- SECRET

SECURITY IHFGRAIATISN

we

MEMORANDUM. FOR: DIRECTOR, CENTRAL INTELLIG

SUBIECT: Whitney Sheperdson Phone Call hos of esterday,
15 Septeaber, Concerning Forced Laber

1, The central facts in’ thie business are as follows:

, Be NCFE had 8 letter sent to the President. of the United States .
signed by various individual exctles exprosaing their gratification

to the United States Government’ for ite "initiative in placing as an
ite for the agenda of the 8th session of the General Assen ly of the
Uuited Nations the matter of "Evidonce of Existence of Forced Labor’,
.

. db. At this Divisian's direction the Departnent of State was

a asked to prepare an answer to this letter for the President's signa-

a ture which NCFE could publicly exploit in cooperation witn the United
States Mission to the United Nations. .

6. Late Friday afternoon this Division exs informed by the De~
vartzent that no answer could bo forthcaming as the U.B. Delegation
‘had decided not to Push the forced labor mattar at this times. MCFE
waz informed to ‘this effeot the same afternoon and again on Monday by
this Divisiun, me _ ;

do Because its letter was not being answared, MC?Z erroncously
Assumed that the work it was doing on forced labor in cooperation
‘with the U.N. Delegation was to be af no avail ani in fact that it
“was. tho decided policy of the United States Government not to force
tats issue at thie or any other tine, :

©. Tho net effect of this aatter is as followas

(1) The Department of State will draft an answer for the
President's signature which will be transzitted ‘to Secretary of
State, Dulles for his personal. approval ater consultation with
Ambassador lodge. The approved answer will then be trananitted
to President Eisenhower for his signature. Public exploitation

eee

Seog F


--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

|

SECRET

22.
\

econ INFORMATION

of the latter. by NCFE wil de undertaken on the giidance of the
United States mission of the United Nations, In the meantine,
ECPE will continue to work with the United States Mission to
the UH... bat the timing and use of tho materials ‘developed by
WFZ-4p to bo determined, by the United States Delegations

Chief, ; : So
International Crganisations Division


--- Page 205 ---
14-0000

3 Senter

or of Central. Intelligence
efen OFfiee uneasiness concerning
rd content of RYE treades to
aan satellites, and related mattern.

cpared by
on:

ched hereto te @ ©.

"oranduna of conversation 3
8, who vat in of @ colversation wideb tocn plas
L Septenber In-my offices with + 3 itob Scolt and & atison of

the Erivish Enbess; (rage ts ReMora bawlean cevers the conversation

gut fliy, but T ‘thould 3 lice ta point out certain inpress ions and
conclusions of my van whilek F Lelteve tis be worlLy of your considera.”

Lions

2. It wis quite evid nat Keb feat, : iwhoy nx
the new Minister, and Watcor, zed receiv bone fafvly stave

frou oir William Strang, and 4% wae couelly epperent that they were
not Particularly well prenar were Somewhat otbarrassed when
aT for epeetficent long <= unable is they were to produce

rev other féatures «2 tie conversation witen Struck me
rather foreibly were the Pollewings:

placed prinary emphasis on

“'@ present time-of k
" Bairchless until such t
f2 piphelevel rourepower
and until such tine as
that the Sevfet Governwent
- fions and otterw!se agent
Tr is isa fairly evident

» The fect that
the absolute necanalty
ut. copybosk cornlete
there shall (any?) have

te, tneluding the Soyt
shali hsve ap
net prepared to ma
a ccreiliatory a apr

ert tish line which idling: ror sete tine
o not darby. rd tonethtug of it while
G ce letter and permitted ta

wonid be that we wo 2y
2" progvan

éessy representatives
2 creating with the Sts
‘ stinks. 2

paertrent about eny of tris
on sy part that th:



--- Page 206 ---
14-0000

Enel (1)
Nemo for Record did

a
3

C/PP: Cony. betis
Wisner, Scott,

ness an
in bot

since if the Fritish Mewes
Le ihonte ind car
er then th tate peo.
lire ag colle dously the ubteraae
, Danertrent o ints, bot
sLaent actionr are 1
vosce of
actions end u
medsa. i report the sus
to ceneral Cabell
ettentien of Dee Hatihe ch ] have done,
the eama bine requested hia to advise us if the
paL hears anyth tay about

edn a oe it te the’

Ce Finally,. fidam VWatsen dragged in hy the teil some
questions about the so-called "Fresdoa Corps", and asked
me whether I could conflam that there Led been a substan
tdel "heating up" of tits old pu :
month or six weeks. 1 repli
wes & Very old ene Inducd in us
reached any parts euler els max rt
was not avare :
State but

Office twiat

thougnt abort
at the Stat.
is questicu tu the Fove
Poretyn Office had replied usd
stronply ajjadust any bread:
wnbil after thé verman elvettons.
Cor bringing me np to date, and t
pure

fal tas net

Septe.

"y Sed by

ANCES»

SECRET :

Security Information

C/pp ve



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000

4

11 Septenaber 1953:

po ; ‘MEMCRANDUM FOR: = -C/pp ‘ :

SUBJECT s Recent convernation with menters of the
- FO staff of the british Embaz2zy re. RFR
broadcasts, ete. ‘ i :

REFERENCES: ae Memo dtd Sept 8 from DD/? to DCT;

. Subject: Pritich Foreign Of fire uneasiness
concerning tone end content of ¥7E.-broad~
casting to the European satellites,’ and
related matters. . :

b. Memo for Record dtd 8 -Sestenber from .
C/pP: Subject: Conv. betw, Magers Wisner,
Scott, Watson and Parnes, -

1. Tan returning to you the ortginal of the Feference &@. memor-
andun. for the file. Mr. Vilaner asked whether you fed shown your copy
at of this mezorandum to Mr. Braden «- he thinks that both Mr. Braden
ay and Er,Durkee should see it.

2. Mr. Wisner asked me to tell you that hte feuspicions of
Mr. biatgon's Sheepishness were rather fully confirmed by. a subsequent
conversation in which Mr, Watson admitted to Mr. Sener quite frankly
that neither he nor Mr. Rob Scott hed -had very much: stomach for
their miesion that day. Mr. watson rather doubted that we would

hear any more about this,

Attached: .
Ref. a. memorandum, i



--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

25 August 1959

“MEMORANDUM FOR: DRPUTE DIRFCTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT: RFE. Coverage of ICF IU Developments

The attached extracts from RFE's Daily Guidance Bulletin are
evidence of the day to day coverage that RFE is giving to ICFTU
decisions, In addition we are setting up an arrangenent whereby
RFF will have continuing liaison with a manber of the special me
comm'ttee appointed by the ICFTU, Through this channel we hope
to supply PFR with dooumentar; material on workers’ conditions in
the satellites and to insure also that the lino taken by HPE-
toward labor issues is not in conflict with the ICHIU position,

CORD HEYTR, JR,
Deputy Chief
International Oranisations Division

OCIO; CM /at

Distribution:
Orig ~ Addressee via Jacobs
1 ee = CIO
l ce ~ lo
lice = RI

"SECRET

Security Infarsiation



--- Page 209 ---
14-0000

SUBJECT: RFE Coverage of ICFTU.

SECRET

SECUKITY INT URMATION

The following extracts of RFE's Datly Guidance Bulletins indicate the :

Seneral guidince around which more complete. coverayes are prepared for
broadoastings. - . .

~ Daily duidanee Soh, June 30, 1953, Pase 24 Paragraph ds

“Coneerning forthooming conference of ICFTU, attention is oalled to

Christian Scicnce-Monitor of June 2h, reprinted in today's Information
Dulletin, and to. Report on America #13. “Amerioan Labor'a Wide Norte
sons" a3 published on dune 26, a

Guidanoy 560, Oy Pace hy, Last two lines

Remarks ty George Meany, prosident of American Fedsration of Labor, be-
fore Stookholm meeting at International Confederation of Free Trade ,
Unions; in addition to expressing the philosophy of free workers toward
tesa daveloped areas, should have a special oignificance to ow listeners .
at this stage of their strugilo against Sovict colonialism. Meany de-
Olared that freedom to colonial peoples and inhabitants of proteotorates
mas something democracies must take steps to insure as soon aa possible.
The Federation (ICFTU) should seo to it that workere in auch territories
enjoyad trade-union organization liberty. :

Dally Quidance 573, July 26, 1953, Page 3, Paragraph 1

As far as East Germany is concerned, most eiymificant news is vote by”
International Confederation of Freo Trade Unions to set up a fund "to
support insurgent unions in East Germany and other _satcllite countries
in their efforts to undermine communist control®, Geory6 Heuny, Fresi-
dent of AF of Ly predicted that:-substantial sums would be made available
but declined for obvious reasona™ to say how they would be spent.

Meany's announcement would seem to be an event of mijor significance in
which all target areas should be equally intorested. a

Latest ‘rezorts on East German purge reosive most of their meaning fron
fact that a faction Presently losing out is said to be composed of com
munists who = - while not at all disloyal to the Kremlin = = are not
Muscovites. in the sense in. which the victors are Muscovites. Chances are
that all conmunist functionaries who did not Spend the last war inside

‘Russia are in danger of their jobs or, as the case may be, of their lives.

Human interest stories on recipients of food aid speak for themselves.
Bowaver, emphasis might well be on fact that recipients are either pri-
marily or axclusively unemployed workera - « and that communists deny
the existence of unemployment. . .

ve REE


--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

oEGRET
-=2s

coe

SECURITY INFURMATION

Dat y Quidance 90, A it 20, Paze 2 Pas ft

Hote that Icrtp followed up on its promises reported here and eroated :
special fund for support of Soviet Zone workerae

SECRET


--- Page 211 ---
14-0000

Siu. £:

Security Infurs ation

Y) August 1953

MEAT Vs DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CuSTHRL INTELLIGENCE

BULdEL Is : Food Progrom for gastern Exropo... :

le tls pryupesed propran supports a plan for linited food
distrivslen w tne peoplen. of Central aad Zastern Furope.

it 4s generally ayreed that 1% is bdvhly desirable honesty
to atwumt fest dietribution throwh reziler oyen channels, before.
utilizicg sexy «mugual method sueh aa cellu:ns, oven though it ta
hdgply duitcs: tne offers to distritate fout will be accepted. It
de fartcce felt tint no food proyraa of ary kind should be commenced
miless 1% is certain to culainate 1a actusl deliveries.

2. Form. Offers “A group sueh as a Comittee to Assist ‘the
Peeples of fasverr Luropa would be formed, waich would in turn make
an oller of 2 definite amount of feud ~w represcntatives.of the
satellire zovermmeuts of Eastern Eurcye. tzultaneously, the Depart-
ment of fete woild be requested to taxze up tne food orfer officially
with re,rezecta.ives of the governzents comernsd. CIA will arrange |
for tie curreaition and sponsorshily of tue proposed conmittee. Tho

" foot offer of the comitteo, takiny nets of rhe official statements

Andleatizg t22% a food shortare exiate in each of those countries,

“would propose the estavlishment of an imterns:tonal comaigaton to
‘euyerrise tie distribution of food to tim neely children of the areas

lavolved, Tris food would cone froa Jf. surplus stooks and through
contrivutions. mae by the spencoring orzsnizations. .

3. Leliv of Balloons: In overt of refusal by tho satallite
regimes o7 the id offer, the comittes miszt turn to the American
Heriteze Pouisticn for halp. The latter would be auked to utilise:
ita prizary preject, the Crusade fer Freesuz, both in raising publis
funds az ¢elivering food by balloons. , . :

Cresede for Freedon (ROPE)
be iit tiess

__, 1. The Crusade oan deliver 1,000,000 to 2,000, 00 lbs.
of foot v7 way of 200,000 to 100,40 balloons into Csesheslovakla,

SEC. ET

Security bitarm:



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

‘and Ieltie areas vould be yreater, due to added -t

Sit

SECURITY

Nunvery and Poland over a period of two to three weekas

: 2. Tho Crusade can deliver 2,690,000 to 3,000,000 lbs.
of food in L00,000 to 600,000 balloons inte Cuechoelcvakia, -
Uunrary ond Poland over a period of five to six weckss

. Capabilities (1) ari (2) above, are possible within the
timo periode indicated only 1f 1.7, military facilities and
equinpzent for the necessary procurement and otandeby storae
of the hydroren ras for. the balloons 15 avatlable. (20,000,000
cubie foet of hydrogen fas WALL £121 200,960 talloons sufficient
to Lift 1,000,000 Iba.) If such storucye facilities, etc. are not
available, the time periods must be revised for (1) and {2} abovo
to two months and three months respectively; :

: ‘3. First, balldon launching could commence within sixty
dayn of project authorizations

4. Zach food packare, suspended to one balloon, would
contain five lbs, of staples. (susar, fat, flour, coffee,
chocolate) Packages Will ve oealed and/or wrapped with poly-

ephelene. i
Be Coates

le Costs of operation into Czechwslovakia, jiunrary and

Poland would be approximately 61.15 per net pound of food celivered,
or a total figure of $1,166,000.C0 for each 1,00,000 lba. delivered.

2. Costs of operation into Albania, Hulverta, Rumania
echnical factors,
necessity of shipboard launchings, etc. ‘ihe unit cost figure
would be $1.55 per net pound delivered. oo

Co Operational Constderationss

1." If delivery of food inte satellite areas is considered
feasitly, realistically sound, then entire operational effort nust
be centered at launching =~ delivery of food in the shorteat period
of time. Counterection to the impact of food deliveries will be
immediate and sustained to include "tanporing" with food packarea,

wholesale arrest, BW charges volstered uy staged photography.

| 24 Launching sites previously used by the Crusade for
Freedom for balloon ope-ations into Czechoslovakla were located
along the Csech frontier between Chan and Hof. ‘For launchings

into Poland and Hun ary, sites in berlin and in and around urag,
Austria, respectively, would be the most operationally satisfactory.

SECURITY 1


--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

Concurrence of the proper Austrian, West Seman: as Zritieh
reprerentatives as to use of launching sites in their juriae
@icticn areas. nust be secured ir21 in advance throu the

svvropriate channels. ‘
a |

4 3, There is no puarantee that the Adenauer goverment
“il be favorably dispoced towards this food delivery yrocran, f
even Af 1t wins the Septenker 6 elections. oo . 4

. kL, For an operation which envisions the levzening of
295,000 balloons (1,000,000 lbs. of food) over an #20rt a period
az two to three weeks, a relatively: large group of teél;enous
personnel must be hired, trained (four or five da;c}? end super

. Viged over a minimum five weer period,

D. _Psycholo;rical Censiderationss

1. Most recent estimates indloates that tie harvest

‘Am Czechoolovakia, Hunpary end Poland. will be fair to average ..

tite year. Consequently, it would be a nisteke to evnd food
iste theee arena: simply to alleviate a “desperate encrtezve"
wich mipht not in fact exist for workers in food etarding.
Feather, o8 a part of EFE's accompanying program exploitation,
the population would be ured to conserve the packaces as "iron
retions’ or "strike rations” arainat tha day when trey mirht not
atieruine be abla to afford ateenteoian or loss of vezes for

otiner reasons.

. 2. Une of the fravect riska to any food delivery
prozras of this kind, eepecially should its launching interval
‘be in accage of two weexa, is the systenatio poisoning of food
ypercele by the com=amists. ‘ihe only really effective way of
gefe juarding against this is by anticipating it ard pre-con=
¢itioning the people, via 2°, acainet contaminated effertas

3. During the tine when, and at the plecee wuere the
fooc 1s packoyed, the Crusa‘e should arrance for supervigion of

Bich packaging by acceptatle humanitarian/religious international ©
‘groups, euch as the Cuakers or tho Red Cross, in order to neutralize

2é charges and aw:ment the Longfides of the conmitiees and Crusade
for Mreedom.

' Ue The initial private avd official offers of food to
ime satellite areas must be accompanied with certain conditions
eusuring guarantees of delivery, in order to avoid eoncuntst
acceptance of a iewe-food offer as such, wisich would place us
an the awkward position of having to m:bsequently recuest.
rearantees, for proper distriiution and delivery.

seeret

Securit: .


--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

'- §. frre of "runainz attack" durins calloon
operation ig well Llluctratet ny the following == ‘Czech
 workera would have to work 6.4 rourn to earn emouzh money
to buy ane averairé pound of fr74 sarceln contents, wiereap -
the Aw rican vorker evald earn the %1,19 ver ney lb, os *
delivered in 1.2 houre.# 2 :

D, Conelustons:
Ree atid

- 1. fi overation 16 large and the masltent paycholosical
zaing and losses. dopentinz on nary ‘srtables, cxiid be extensive,
Heedless to say, the oneratio ehrld not be unierteken, even in
part, as a "gesture? or on a Mruable!, .

"2. Balloona are not the zost economical seanz of deliver-
ing food, in paint of fact, tie mverent of itang gy balloon is at
least twice am expensive as any rogcler means, Yowever, to date,
belloons are by far tha most feasthle way of alffusing a relatively
large amount of food containers ini 2: otherwiee decied area,

oO 3. Planning of the oneration in all its peeeeSshould
include the: irector of HI7, in order vo eneure 4 well coordinated
political warfare proyran, oan

&. Recommendations:

It is requested that shouls eutiorlty be civen to proceed
oa thls. balloon-borne foot prograa, such authorizazian be contingent
on tro Lollowing Feconnendationa;: . .

1. That the coazancement of tre balloon damneching be
generally planned for the end of t:48 yeur.. .

2. That mo more than 0,9 valloona te released
(2,900,000 ibs. af. fo0d) at a cost of aprroximately 22,332,9).

3. That the balloon launehing phase of the sood delivery
oneration inte Csechoslovarla, Hunavary and Yoland, not exceed ten

full consecutits says froa its date of commencement .

. 4. That 350,009 be nade availacle immediately for pre-
paratory work, . . .

S. That food delivertes ints Albania, Bilgarta, Rumania
and the Daltics not be considered tntil after the primary operation
into Czechoslovakia, Hungary and ?olani has proved successful,

10/BrI:8SD/eh : , : PHOVAS Vi. BRANEA | es
Q

Orig = DD’P . Chief - .
2 ce ~. 10/3rt International Organizations Civiaion

dee -clo Lee - RF


--- Page 215 ---
14-0000

22 July 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations

Thad a talk with ‘Spencer Phenix about NCFE matters and
the following points were discussed.

(1), A Strategy Board to guide RFE. Spencer feels the need
for some higher level political guidance than RFE is getting from
their staff people and talked about getting together a board of people |
like George Kennan, etc: I told Spencer that I thought it unlikely
that George would give very much time to this but might be willing
to give them an occasional idea or suggestion, : .

{2) Spencer asked me ‘about the possibility of their finding -
some job for Sam Reber. I told him to wait on this until I had time

to discuss it with FW, :

(3) Spencer seemed disturbed that the allocation of one

. million a month until our budget was passed would cramp their
- ‘operations, I told him that if they had particular difficulties to

let me know, He also asked what they should do about the proposed
allocation of $400, 000 to: help in the. refugee situation, I told him I
was not familiar with this particular issue, an ;

(4) He suggested that it would be well to have ‘a meeting here
with some of the members of the Board and the Executive Comminee
and suggested a date around the first week in August. I told him I

would do it if Thad not already left the country by that time.

(5) Spencer is pleased with the better integration and
coordinatian af activities between their shop and this office,

ce: DD/P , .



--- Page 216 ---
14-0000

12 “January 1953

MEMORANDUM FOKs DEFUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTHAL INT! ELLIGENCS
SUBJECT: . “Proposed U.S. Ald for East German Refugees

I. Last year you testified berore the House Foreign Affairs
Committee in support of the U.S. "iron curtain escapees” care-
rasettlesent program, and during the course of testimony I under-—
stand you etated that the program excluded aid to ethnic groups

such a8'Germane in accordance with PSB recormendationa. .

i 2 a 2. Mr. George Warren (UNA/Refugees) of the State Department
: has proposed that $300,000 be made available from his’ program for
aid to selected East German refugee projects.

- 3. his proposal is being made as a gesture of aid to East -
Germans and inas the suprort of HICOS, of Jares Reber, and of
_ Repregentative Celler of New York, among other Congressmen. John
“Bross, C22, has no objection,

A.) Prank Hand in hivg offlec is the liaison point; is followng
this clozely, and will keep u&thoroughly informed but T thonght,
in view of your testimony, you would want. to know of the projected

policy switch.
Vlene / 24

THOMAS WW. RRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division —



--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

@2 July 1953

MEMORANDUM FUR: Chief, International Orgnaizatdona/Branch 2
SUBJECT: . Coordination or Radio Free Buroye and Radio Titvration

1. Aa both you ond Hr, Slosich agreed ir your taformal voover=
gation of yesterday, the present explosive situation in the saicllite ©
periphery and the iuteria Psychological Strategy Boecd gutcance on
its explottation secesaitate closer couperation between our reopece
tive facilities and branches. I want to thank you for offering to
gmake. it possible for us to gain furtber access to RCFE libraries ~~.
and open sources and for your offecing us further tecnatcel aseis-
tance. I agree that it vould be desirable to exchange a Branch of-
ficer so that ve may bave a vetter understanding Of our respective
asseta aud problems. sR/1 will provide one of your asuociates vith
@ desk and conplete access to our Files at any tine.

2. Yt may be vell for usa to diecuss how ve can beat take ad-
vantage of rurther demonstrations and ricts in the satellite areas.
Should there be an uprisiag in Foland, for exaupie, it may be desire

-able for RFE to placa broaicasting time at th: disposal of Radio

Liberation go that the latter my a‘dress concentrated ani repeated
appeals to the Red Army not to fire on Polish vorkers aca peasants,
wot to interfere in the folish struggle far freejtom, and to consider
the Polish people as the allies of the Sovtet people in their common
struggle against Commaisc. It was this lice that Hacio Liberation
follewed during the East Ceraan uprisings. In the evext of viota

in Czechoslovakia vhere the Red Army is cot present in force and
where the satellite security rorces may te unable to keep order,
close cooperation will be even core desiratile.

3. Corsideration could be given to having RYE allot Radio
Liberation reguler time on its prosccants to Poland and bulgaria
where there are large corcentrations of Sovivt troops 60 that. Radio
Liberation can further build up the idea or o free, doviet anti-
Coumnist moral and folitical authority asi to express the solidar-
ity of the Soviet peoples with th: ol; ressed countries of Central
and Eastern Europe. Ratio Liberation could also allot regular tine
oa ite transmitters so trat spokesuen Of {ree Crechoslovakia ana

Poland could addivss the Soyi:t troops.

kh. It will, of course, ve neceasary to discuss the divargent
approaches of the two stations. Because of its ayorsorenip, ite
identity and its aisston, Railo Liberation cannot treat the Lovis
oppression of the Cestraz. and East European secples in teras of
Bationalist domination and exploitation. Radio Liveration alvays
@istinguishes betveen tha" people on the one hand and the Party
and Police on the other, aad it to our policy to identify the Red

Arey with the people. S--.


--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

Security Informatian

d+ We will salutain close coordication on all mttera relating
_to Rodlo Litaration broadcasts to the cecupstton troops. and solicit

your tomsents aad suggestions on our broadcasta to tha USSR proper
and on all other sattors,

AuDZe YEDIGAROFP
bo /eR/1L

2 = Addresced -

1 -¢/to



--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

SECURITY INFORMATION

SECRET

MEMORANDUM POR? CHIEY, INUAATIONAL ONGANIcadTOns DIVISION

ATYRATIONT Broach Ono
SU SOT: - General Pavle Gruya Pavlovic (201 = 14578)
RAYBIRGR: - - Mamorandun. fron Deputy for Polley Coordination, UB

to Iu, dated 16 July 1952, Subject as above

1, Althou:h not dnitially reavonstble for recontonding thnt
the NCFN subsidize densrat Pavle Yavlavic, in referenced momorandun -

SS Division endorsed the continuntion of payments by the NCPZ to
Subject aa tho bnoia of his ability to ald in research work boing

“done for CIA at tho Pentrcon, as voll as of hie need aa a meri-

tortious exile. te have recently been advice’ by Miow Stern of

your office thnt the NCH wishes to dixcontinue this payment oinoe a
Subject dove not “partlaipate direetly in the NOFu'o actlvitios..

Wo have deen furthor adviced that if 33 Diviolon wishea General

' Pavylovie to receive a regular incone from the HCFN, SS must provide .

the necessary funda,

2. It ta velleved that termination af tho subcidy by fhe HOFL
will rosult in real porsonnal hardship to the tenern), who, at tho

"age of osventy, has no other known source of income, Si Division,

however, is not in'a position to provide the neceroary fundo,
since thia vould necessitate the initiation of what would esson=
tially de a charity project, falling more properly within the
purview of. I0/Branch One. Helther can this Division justify

~ gontinuation of payments on the basia of work verforsed for SE,

since he hao deen vorking-primarily for the Depertmant of tho Aray
during the pret year, Tho urransenento for hio work at the Ponta~
gon are such, however, that CIA can place research requirenenta

on General Favlovio whenever desirabic-

3. In reviewing the anse this yenr, we have accortained
from the ‘Deyertnent of the Army that Sudjeot has worked dilivently
and contributed materially to the work of his office, he has
deen particularly commended for hie adaptadility and readiness
to work, which have e*om theaselvas in his efforts to learn

English and typing.

&, Tt te the o inion



--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

reular atiponda aololy on tho daots of “pres: 1a",

SECURITY INFORMATION
SECRET

~2-

4 It 4a the ovinion of S¥ Livision that tho NOFH decision

to terminate payments to Ganornal Prvlovio should be aoneistent with

Ata polinies visen=vie other Yuoslav enirrog, many of whom recelvo
Goneral

Favievio's setual oontribution to tho «fforte of the US. Covornzent,

tf not of GLA or the HUSE Alreotiy, shoutd bo taken into convidera~

Sion in addition te his very real need before halting pay mente to

hie, We would appresiata your inforning us aa to tho finnl
disposition of thia care,

CHLICTIAS 4. FER
footing Chief, Sz

SECRET


--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

SIEET

SECURITY WiEUAMaTiON Was B 6Ml sun
. ; * ; , hur técisedt
: 7 te Like mo

22 July 1953 Ge
Byye

“MEMORANDUM FoRa “DEPUTY DIRECTOR (74.403)
SUBJECT Hessagze from Whitney Shepardson

le Whitney Shepardson cablod the following. to hig office with :

the request that they im-eciately give it to C.D, Jackaon, This
information and massage was elven to us today by Spencer Phenix.

"Report this morning Mre, Wide Benjanin new Kast German
Justice Minister resoinded ric¢ht to strike “ranted Juno 11

by predecessor,

Seems apyroprinte your boss Naireday preso conference or
perhaps more formally sum up recent Russian inspired communist
actions behind curtains in Czechoslovakia savings wiped out,
Miture bleak, furdlies, clididren bankrupt. In east Sermany
recision of alementary right of labor to strike 45 arain dented
“ars! will be ruthlessly enished by forco. Satellito. states long
doprived of their food and posds by most vicious practices of
colonialism known for two centuries, This ios no paradise for
workera, this is hell. In the United States this capitalist
society so often denounced by Soviet propaganda lines, the
“savings of the workers ere protected in law and in fact, and
the right to strike is protected in law and in fact also,
Aftor almost two hundred years of its national existdnce there
can not bo found in the US one trace of tha colonial nractices
which characterise Soviet rule over its satellite colonies.

Condon asks that if such theme 4a used "FCive our boys a
break so they can Prepare and push home with background and

- Variation."
Islgned) THOMAS Wo SRADIN
THOHAS W. ARALIN

Chief. .
International Organteations Division



--- Page 222 ---
14-0000

2 duly 1953

MESORANTUM POR| DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL THTLLIGENCE
SUBJECT: - .- Meoting with PBB -

1. 2 maretand that two of the ratters that have como vp before .
your PSB luncheso arct

‘as C.D. Jackson's proposal to send rood to East Germany

b. C.D. Jackson's proposal for a monument memorial to de-
put up near the Brandenbury Gate, I tovld like to comment on
those two propoeales for what use 1t maz be to you.

2. It seens to mo food shipment via balloon 1a a meaningless
gesture. It will not do any positive ood becauso it can't xet endugh
fced into East Germany to mike any adfferares., Thus a negative result:

- do fostered; it looks and appears to be psyenoloical warfare of 4
rather obvious kind. The food offers by the U. &. Jovernmont and
‘those by the ICrTU wore, as tha London Tims polluted out last Monday,

=. psyehological victories, but. the Russians are now moving food ‘into ©
Germany in far greater quantities than we can do via balloon. In
addition, there are obvious dangers from tie standpoint of a BY play=
back. aa Hr. Wisner’ sugzeotod., It would be much casier and much more

. effective for tho Rusaians to use the BY these on balloon shipments
than on any quantities: of food that the Government or tho ICPTU are

. Betually able to get behind the Iron Curteia. In sum, balloons aro _
a trick and food deesn't lend itself to tricks.

3. I thins the momment idea is a resvectable one but not on

the lovel that tho 733 neople secm to want to play it. They have in’
mind a world campaign to be conducted in o11 countries, particularly
in this one and in South Aneriea with a distinguished body of citisens
to lead the campaiyn here. I do not think the memorial idea to big |

* enough for that (the best mevortal-oo far erected waa Berlin's ow
decision to change tho nane of the Unterlindan to Strasse June 17).
I think the mescrtal idea ought to be left to the Germans, We can
@olicately sugost 1t and eee that it io followed up with any support .
necessary in this country through already existing organizations such as
weiner roles ae for F Freedom Af thio 1s necossary. These should play —
a ninor role.

erneT THOMAS W. BRADEH
cod Chief
; | International Organisations Division



--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

July 21, 1083
" PROSPERO " ,

" Prolini nary Ruport

The purpose of this oporation was to exploit the -

present oritioal olroumatancas in the Communist emptra.

and in C2ochoslovakla in partleular by brinwing to the

: t : .
people of that country tanglble evidence of the Wost's

interest in and Bupport for their restatanan againat

the regimo.

There follows a brief summary of the saltlont

facta about the operation:

le 5402 rubber balloons and 1212 plastio balloons
vere launched from the primary alte in Ellenfeld,
a amall Gorman village on the Czechoslovak
frontier and from the secondary afte in Son8nnea,

gome 40 miles to the southe

2. These carried a not total (after wastage) of —
approximately 10,000,000 mesauges of throw. typos:

Ho

be

Os

A likeness of the now lecrown noty issued
by the Czuchoslovak regimo following tho
reosnt currency reform. Ths toxt of this
note ts attnchod as Appendix Ao

A roplioa of the new. 25-hollor coin,

bearing the words "All our pecple for
freedom ~ All the free world fur our people".
The words "Free Europe" and the emblem of
the Freedom Full appeared in the center of
the coin.

A leaflet bearing photographs of thu Fuss
Berlin demonstrations on one aide and a
text deacribing recent.eventa in East
Germany and tha.Soviet Union ~including
the Berla purge) on tho other. Copies of
this message are attached as Appendix Bo

S- The target areas, for the operation were:
(a) the tndustrial and mining districts of
northwest Bohemia; (b) the cepitol of. Prague
and the heavily populated area north of
Prague; (c). the city and envircns of Pilsen;
(d) the Ostrava region. (See display map.)



--- Page 224 ---
14-0000

5.

Te

Bo

“lbs. of Lift. The weight of the hydrogen
-oylinders was 102 tons. - :

oy

The operation took place between CSOC Fonday,
July 13, 1953 and 2400, Friday, July 17.
Balloons were in the alr 15 working asaya after
concoption of the idaa, and 3 working days after
final approval, The third (Boriin-Beria) Ty
messago was gent “to the printer on Saturday; on
Monday 2,909,000 coples were at the site and on
the way to thelr destinations

AC crow of 22 workmen was transported from Munich
to the alte. Including guarda, drivers, and -
supervisory personnel, the total payroll for the
operation wan approxinstoly 40. The. crew was
billeted tn 4 small hotel in the neardy village
of Tiraohenreuth and was fed in a Gasthof at the
alte, Working time totalled approximately 3CO0

‘man houra, The operation entailed the use of

7058 cubic metera of hydrogen, representing 17900

Tho rubber balloons carried an average payload
of 2 lbs. and burst at an altitude of from 30,000
to 40,000 ft. They rose in the air at a rate of
10€ to 50% ft. por minute. The total elapsed
timo from the leafleta' point of departure to
arrival on the ground ranged from 2 to § hours.s
The plastio billoons carried a payload.of from
W/loth to 4/10tha of a pound, travellod at an

‘altitudes of 30,000 ft., and penetrated from 60

to 400 miies, depending on the target desired.
The plastic balloons do not burst but descend

to the ground at a polnt. determined by the amount
of gas and weight of payload. At the poxk of tha
operation well over ore miilior. Mességes were in
the alr at the Some tine. .

The wind speod averaged 40 miles per heur and
ranged from 240° (blowing Into Northern Bohemta)
to 270° (blowing towards Prague and Ostrava).
Pllasn asa bracketed from both launching sites.
Meteorcingical data wan obtained from the Neubiberg
air bass end confirmed by radar fuctiitles

locuted 7 kilometers from the afte. These
facilities and the pernonnet necessary to man them
were obtained from the U. S.-Almy. They were

able to track target balloons deep inte the
country. The radar units were also able to Gatect
Czechoslovak air activity and to sateblish that
the other aids was also using radar, presumably -
in connection with the balloons/

Border activity was Intensified during the pericd
of operations, During 5 trips to the frontier
(which was within sight of the launching locaticn),
it was observed that officers had replaced enlisted
men on border patrols, On several occasicns
attempts were made by ground forces to shcot down


--- Page 225 ---
1400000

9o

10.

il.

120

the

= a -
. . 3.

balloons, slthough only two hits ware observed

“by bordor police,

Cn Wodnesday, July 15, at 1400 houra, two

Rigs flew along tha frontier over thu site and were
clearly observed by the working party. Subsequently -
that afternoon the thsodolite was moved to a hiiltop
oint (from which, incidentally, the hills around
Plisen could be discerned) and Migs. attempting to
shoot down baliconapwere viewed by members of the
party as well as by the German border patrol. AS
“many as 7 Migs wary observed at one time. Three hits
were witnoused,, two of which nppeared to cause the
balloons to explode and one of which almply caused

the

balloon to disnppaar. On Wednesday night

additional planes wors reported by border police. |
Ssarchlights were also asens On .Thursday, 5° :
Messeramiths 109Fs replaced the Migs and suczeeded
in destroying three balloons. No air acticn was
observed on Friday, although at 1000 hours a jet
vapor trail materlalized directly above the
Launching site and was headed tnto Czechoslovakia.
' However, it was impossible to see the aircraft or
to say for certain that this was e border violaticn.

On the last night of operaticns (Thursday) a
Processicn of 80 plastic balloons with candle-lanterns

was
the
the
the

The
the

launched. Sinoe the night was perfectly olear,
"torchlight parade" could be easily observed -.,
lights looked like stars marching quietly acress
skys No airoraft wore seeno - _ . oo

total cost of bota the original operation and
supplementary Serlin-Beria mesuage is estimated

at luss than $25,000, or a unit cost of 1/5th of a
cont per message sent, A substantial portien of
this reprasyents transportation and cther non-recurrent

expenses whioh would aot be involved in a sustained

operations

Note must be made of the invaluable “echnicai and
operational assistancs provided hy the two Goneral
Mills personnel, Mr. 2. Be Moore and Mr. Fietcher
Bartholomew, who ware present on the trip. It
should also be mentioned that the help of RFE
Personnel wes exceedingly valuable.

As of the date of ‘this report, regime reaction
includes: :

Rude Pravo editorial read over Radlo Prague
on July. i8-(Appeniix C?, plus ‘supplementary

articles 1n Svobeino Siovo and Mi.ada Pronto



--- Page 226 ---
14-0000

i
i
i
j
i

™ . 4a.
bd, Commontarion over Radto VYoseca-in Ruasten
and Pou A and ower Hndic Warsaw

o. Articles in tho. Fomanian and Hungarian
PresSe

do An article in voacow Pravda.

13. In ascordanos wttn previous Plans, Weatorn
: publicity about, the operation was discouraged.

The limi tee Purpose one "Prowparo” has, so far aa we know,
been substantially achieved. Homover, Pa must bo acknowledged
that an operation of this kind: iis both atrongly provocative
and (because ‘of 1ta tangible form) susooptidle to canyers: not
risked by radloo There is the further complication that it is
launched from German soil and could conseivably cause in} jury to
RPE's position in Germany. All of these fastorsa must be
earefully “wolghed in considering any future action of this sorts

Further, this mst be classified an a "orash action", as
evidenced by tho time elapsed datwoen conception and terminations
Crash actions are good once or twice, but are not to be
recommended as a habit either from the point cf view of cost or,
even more important, 4n cognizance of the utter necessity of
careful and thorough preparation of the beat possible message.

On the positive side, this ean be etated:

1, The message was timely. worth saying, and clcsaly
integrated with RPE Poiteyo

2. Enemy reaction was immediate and sorely hurt.
3. -Intornal conditions and the world Communist

altuation suggest that the acticn was taken as
an apt moment «



--- Page 227 ---
14-0000

Se

-~
&.

Technically. witrt radar holp 1t #aa provod
that balloons co1ld be launched carrying
rolativoly heavy payloads on en. aasembly lino
basis with a high. degree of targat eccuracy. ~
This was not proviously known,

Aside from the irpuct of tho myasages, the
very faot that tro West waa interosted enough

| to go to the trovle and expense of punotrating .
“the Iron Curtain by a moans which-the regime ia

poworlesa to prevent - by Migu or bullets ~
cannot be lost upon the captive peoples.

3. S. Walkor, Jr.


--- Page 228 ---
14-0000

. tne
~ -
CZECHS Hil SLOVAKSS. CONES -TO-YOU TODAY
FROM TRE FIGGE WORTD!
THE SOVIET UNTOM TS GETTING SZAKER?
THE PRCPLES OF THE CAPTIVE COUNTRIES ANE GROWING STRONGER!
Tne Soviet Union is ; weaker. The atrugrle for Stalin's
hey 2 ehakes the en Soviet emplre and. fear creeps
Lhit ov Kremlin. wl fall with Meria and who wlll
erent * feria? K millicns will ll victins to the
new which in) ney & to Lerin--~ the blige t purge
whden the Soviet Unien-ras ever known? :
How many vietams wilt zt in. the Soviet Union and how many
in the occuntdad count Who wlll fallowlta Berla in
Preopue and who will be red down by hin fall in Bratislava?
Whe wiil be the new § yo and who the new Cl ntis?. And
when tne purge spree broadens, down Prom the Athureau.
to the lands and distr: » to the offices and the factories - .
how many funetionaries LL safely aurvive?. .

the ainking

ce and:

fr

elves

will aurv

Gnly those
Con

fiel

The Soviete nave tra
the Moscow boot weighs
oppres2ed pecole and if
puppeb povernmentsa bees
the peaple will only

Into s.tmlésion. m0
appease the wrath of t
by pronieing concess
Germany - they will
longer be deceived by

themselves. in a blind alley. If
heavier on the necks of the

a demande upon the trightened
re preseing,
tor the people
uniB. regimes; in order to :
e, try to brabe their subjects
tn dungary and ln Eastern

rz for the people will no
conceBesons. :

er. The first flnmes of revolt
ovakla and in Hastern Gearinany.
os trava, Troe: Oslavany, from Berlin,”
cho of this revelt kaa roared
ol _ Shaken. -the. entire Soviet realm:

The people are grov
ed out in
Jigen, from Nor
and Magdebure +.
t the world an

They started self-criticising.
In Germany the anti-labtor de-

Czechoslovakia the frightened

st from applying the penal laws

scow, under the influence of

volt in Czechoslovakia and dermany,

ne sharoer, Beria and his alil-

ims. Your resistance has helped

they” piarted apolomisi
They started giving pro
cres3 hed to oe revokes.
sovernnent was forcee: t>
concerning absentecisn,
the news cf the pzoples
the internal strucsl=
powarful oolice rell.es

od



--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

age tnetr -
tT rovirse

to alter the course of iia tory: new forces
Yppearince on the battlefield, the voor),

‘ma jor vietory jn thelr f1zat with the repime,

CZECHS AND SLOVAKS!

y “he
tie As

more your oppressorp 4re shaken by unes
rater Jn the certainty of your vietory.
afraid ef you, it knowns that power ide fur.
your tide, This is the time wher peop}
wont, and unity of purpose are capabic
concessions. Your dattlefteid of labor ts ta
and in the fields. On this battlefilelu of labor you have
the advantage ef nunbere. On this battlefieid you Cano s
be vanguished. Yow will not be content a beines, you
wlll ask more and more fron the exploitern. go not”
presum: to give you orders ner te ive you, adut aoa, “eu
and your new leaders who are
Inow beet how and where to wer YOU te
know that you ere nat plone: Anong the masa 62 people
behind the Tron Curtain the five of revolt ja en
and its sparks are flying from country to COUnLIY .
where in the free world

ai

our friende are with yoo.
help will crow as your ‘determination yr

PRES EUROPR}



--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

On other bide:

_ woe

BANQNOTE ¢

On one side:

Cuechoslovake, know tig:

The r fg veaker. than you. have dared to think!
Poxer J with the. pcople and the people atand opposed.

With unity and ecurage, organize your strongth: Down
with the collective! Inalst on workeiu' righte! Today
demand concessions; témorrow - freedom! oo

-~ gitt of the Soviet

desperation, of |.
licage to fight, to meet
st as you know best.

Men call this the hunger crow
Unton. It an. .the symbol of re;
favesyear fudiure: Tt ls ac
nega ulth strengin, to re

The other eaptive peoples are wunitiag and will Join you
4a your strugele. .

The {rec world 4s with you! - .

All power to the people!


--- Page 231 ---
14-0000

CAREAN INFO WALKEH FY MICHIE

OUR VIENNA BUKEAU YESTERDAY REPORTED POLIAUING BALL LION REACTION
QiGTZ SEVEN MEM FHOM PARDUBICE SAID THAT ALL LAST Wik PROPLE

WERE TOMPING LIKE FROSS tO CATCH THE cEArLers AS THUY CANS DOW,

MANY PROPLE WGRE HE COINS ARCUND Ti;

7 KECKS. MANC SOLDIEEG

ae) COLLECY THE “LEAPLEDS. ,

WERE CHECKED OUT PROM THEIR ANMY U

SAME REFUGEES SAID ALEO THAD IN PLL: G PLANES TOOK OFP VERY ~

HOUR FROM THE AIRPORT TO snoop DOW CHE EALLOOWS, «PHBE

KO REPEAT NO LEAFLETS “AND HO REPPAY BO BALLOONS IN VHF SUDE JOVI CE

AREA IT WAS REPORTED. NEVERTHELASS A LL THE GENDARMERTE ENVERVI SVED
THE POPULATION 20 SEE IF THEY HAD BOLE Mor % OBTAINE ‘DAWN. ALSO THE

PLE TO ASK NVERUELODY ALONG

POSTMEN HAD ORLERS PRGA THE GTNDARH

TREIR POSTAL ROUTES if TuEY HAD ANY LEAFLETS. UNQUOTE



--- Page 232 ---
14-0000

_ SMALL BALLOONS CCKPALUING DIENCUNCING Lt

MUUCH SLANDER--STATLON FEE FUROPE ~ WAS LED BY AMERICAN PXPEX

ity

. BALLUOH ACTION, AMERICAN: \

RALLO WARSAS JULY £9  Gvoo liouRS

IMVERIALIS9TS. WAVY LATOLY LAUNCHED IN WESTERN) GRIGAARY A CAMPATOH uo oy

AGLINSE COPOUOSLOVAKIA = THE DAILY RUDE PREVO @teTED TK aN ARNICLE °
ENTITLED QUCRE A CAMPAIGN CONDEMNED 70 FIAGCS DHOUOTE. FROM AUSTHTA!
% HAVE BENN LAUNGEED IN

THE DIRECTION OF CZECHOLLOVAKIA, THE ACCION - AS SRNOUNCED BY THT

WHO CAME TO WESTY HN GREMANY PON TEAT INURKEION. IT TS A PACT SACS |

KUDE PRAVO THAT FALLOGN EXPERYS DAVE NOY SPATGID THE LUAPLEYS . a

“ DURERG TWO DAYS Tim: CAECHOSLOVA KO CISIZENS HAVE BMOUGHT HUNDREDS OF

SO SECURITY AUPTNORETLIES AMD HATSGNAL CQiAUTMPEES.

THGISANDS OF LEAFUE

CZECKOSLOVAK WORKING MASSES ATE. DEEPLY INUIGHAM? AP THOS DISH

PROVOCATION OF WARMONGERS UNQUOTE.

RADIO WARSAW JULY 22 C760 HOURS QUOTED THE NOTE BELT BY THE CSECHO:

ERXCAN EMBASSY. THE CZECHGSLOVAK GOV

SLOVAK GOVERNMENT ‘TO TRI Av
M2Nt SEN? A NCCE TO THE <ECAN ERNBASSY TM PRAGUE IN WHICH I

PROYESTS VIOLENTLY AGAINST SPREADING ON CZECHOSLOVAK JERRIEPORY SOME

LEAPLETS, CALLING FOR ANTY--SPATE-ACTIVIO. WE NOT STRESSED THAT .

7 PREPARED ANU CATRILED Gi BY AMENICAN

THE FROVOSATIONS HAVE RE

CITIZENS WHO ARE SPAYIUG EN DHE AMERICA CCCUPEETION ZoNb IN

GERMANY UNQUOTE


--- Page 233 ---
}4-00000

EO CN AND PUSRTICACTONS LLY SOR
aly 20, LOD

Ti Loktons roort de one of the fre ful) atieckn on we

recent “PoJicon Goeration" in Cxechos vlovekda. The tect
Gree Realo Prague on July 19, 1995:

We ara zolue to reac t6 you now an article fron to oray tn 7
article if cevica. "An Acton Pooned to Radiure”. 0)
th peure poliey of the Bove Union ond of sit the equa
the cama of prane, the comrie vio that a war ean he beam ved frvow
Bhowmec amon the pecpale a i throuch TOOLS. Cavalli. Thda
MVOlIGL OW Ceedtes a pacat concern with ole Lor Ons ht
fuort a cource af irr saravle fran and of 4 suc Vhs

Thee Voce tie warnoncere do their ceut to put cbrtae vit the wy

Glo Lords touaeds che

sening, of Anternationsl neon ion tn
MGs fC pagh of tne wrovavaceur and nebo eur of the Praae ca

we given te Byrne tT. Th Geerany staulte meee used,

fron ene racks of war ce minale in tae decomenude +

Berdin as lt au in cere other partn of tia Gercan Ler seritic
Rigun}ie. And after the failuse this muah hecakaw d tiere
cores tac hypocritiez) and denagoteal ofler to hely ts otk aon hae
tion of the DUK, woich weu made for obvious CrCoaAtanda .cus which

eb

in taet, was admitted by the Veutarn bovrzeols orean,

Thi

Og oat

Inte this chain of provocations which are ated aneinat v
strenytocniug of peace thece also besongs the Amerdean ore avanéa
act, fon vbleh was ctarted in the lant a yo in dostarn Genuanry

BF aingt Czechorniovakie. In a simtler veu dn wadeh we Joares age
AlLl-famed "Crucecera for Mreedan” + 10 today asain
oom: dLapersing inflanatory, leafiet ter kliovr are
favarian o4de.

bar
being sent fron

More atel oimiilar
euada bi 21000
wed

chere Gan?

Munien tranicittce Pree Burope, firsie ny
cetions" gotaet beabontiecalin of the aero.
3

Q

action which, alluyes yo ar iie binvets acuta.
ever hus peen at ! and foe thi ¢ircevion
to Weetuen Garmany spscialicts fron Auertiea,

£
t

de een tadoud cercify treat the baldoons mpeatasdg hes

the lenvlete ta the fiese tuo days tens and “ua?
a? thoue tearles 2 vith our vollee and cuc natiet #1 zon! Attest?
where they erc being brought by ous eltizens tee pale Leceay |
dincovernd, whe fareer He} Leo Counrayater, ¢

Brod, brought an entire parce’. of vacflots
Oiete, Josef Korine: from “ates prs whe an entir
fool down. The isaflets ary being broush: ty che
Viedimir Lenin works 12 well ea otuce faectoe vy ; my
roclweyren and ehilerea. Yet even if the balloon eetLen wes not
only four times sigger - 23 Free Uveope but huncved: times
bigger “han the Crucis: accier of i fl, dln bring 2 ite
initiators the very cgsosice of un <7 hee in mi

c

2 2° ceekxy
da one



--- Page 234 ---
14000

WAth vords of justified angor cur citizens ce
and they are especially offerded by the fact t
leaflets 4s some kind of a raccimlle of the
stamped on both sices by inflanatory words.
-. esteem the new crown which js firm and valu
mom y+ purchasing power which helped us: to get rid of ratio
: therefore, with sherp and efter crude words they eritictize
its inage had ccen misuned as the besis for printing biz ties
a

concerning th: government of our republic and the USE.

The second leaflet is propagating the Fascist proevocet!
took place on seventeen June in the German Demesratic
. When those provocations ended ty failure, their orga
that they sheouid be used at Inet for the printings of Ze
Pictures, cemonstrating, the tandits of Berlin in action;
are startin fires or indulging in provocations, ete. oo

wheh-

gust towards those who have stsrted this ers
the plctures of the Fascist prevocaticrs in Berlin are
tional news for us, as the directors cf the balloon ac
" Amepine. Similar pictures were priblished not- long ago
Svet: Prece, It demonstrates the absolute political sh
nese which when people mentioned it is deserited ag at:
the organizers cf the balloor action who think thet th
influence our people by leaflets one side of eh cer:
a glorification of natred and cf
was te teke oliace on L7th June in, Ferlin,

Those pletures belong dato tre series of the photesraons whieh

the Nazis throatcutters used te take while they were Breet! Zz

fires in tie cecupied countries, in the Urraine, in Cr: in Da

Lidice, se 18 quite seturzl that this, too, can only ereete dia-
rinei sets = a

in vain is the part of the cefender of Czechoslovak w
and this will always be Sane - assumed By those,
actions there emanates whe wis
is not wented by any honest wor tne Ay
political or his religious o Lori. This. po
demenstrates how the USA reaztlonary cireles.
of international tension. i

entire world are looxiny far: i
of a truce in Korea, wnou with ‘cont’idence
peac2? policy of USSR, aiming at the peaceful. settle ame
disputed international question H -

Tp condermmy
would

Therefore, the balloon action was iret with s}
the part or our people. The balloer specia
nut like to hear whet the
to the SMB and. to the Naticral’ Committees,
that. ever. such peaple whe uc fer did not Lind an
to the. eceialist Cevelopment exprése thelr snr
means the est is employing. Jindal our peo
of . by the late ent violating of: ‘the inde} pencence ci

ratory,

e

” .
o? fended
woz te



--- Page 235 ---
14-0000

Agnorance of t

“War vero

- | 3.

whe thought tha
Irie, the Cruz
mere posaioiiit fore
of mic Republic. Gn the
vistlant guare t

Bo they waist’ be con
pecple-overtly laurh

achieve anything by the balloons.

f CVreedom In the Vest ere losing m and
ucving enemy aetivity on the ritery

8503

oy
°

Bti
ug and
th the balloon actien which an:

dc at snd whici they condemn.

ronvlers ef our country the
all the attempts cf their aven

They opuniy say that the entice action was a kind ef yanstertom ot i
. the £05" 2st ant

which not even 1 Hitler dared to commis at the ts
hatred ecaspea 20 Cse a. en
the lesriate | ten they had found ty. the curity
administrative Organs, They ask that the action

& the badio oon ac

This opontanes
etrated in 4

peoole

tale C
the dballoons, some
Always atl th $008
people knew this"

thin
Lurene

mercenaries of Pra
Pree Euroove even pra.
kiad of .nosor poetry in which one
things were coming, from above" and

So.

no Free-Surcps believe
= them from avove from the
ich «n the eve of the end of the
adven in peaceful resi
d wiich destreyed the fF
forks in (orcer to make our
were

%2t our people
They will re
2t; that 4¢

bombs
OD and .

zon Shoda
LCoS tM

M2pters o
Works and the

3 rn Germany 4 ocd of
to bring us migery end st

of Korea

boxes vith 1
ion carried t
with che nar: of Munich are ¢
the worst t of our. nations:
loacs the lo of the so-called

And one more eninetda:
was found n:
Muncnen and aise
eitizen the

menories now
our peopl

In fact the org 3 of bie ridiculous balivon
action spent tnzir dcliars Cor ballowns, = “neta nae
carrying tns emel of Pree Birope whten ure also beings
They can hardly exczet 2 Shanks on che part of their .Oyers
because tne res exactly tne contrary of thee . True,
a few business ren finally go: their pickets full tut otherwise
the action was. doc: to tatlire from its very bexin z This
action blown un by Frec Furop. deflate: soon Just as ‘1i3 balloons.



--- Page 236 ---
14-0000

Lape

gr

4tyo¢ 7-

RFE FeZIs53 ,
PUENIX LANG WALKER CAIFFITH FS CC

mG

FOLLOWS RALIO PRAGLE AMSGUNCENENT OylG TODAY EE NOTE ON BALL

FOLLOWING NOTE TO THE

“TRE GINISTRY GF FCREIGG AFFALRS KAS

-EMBASSY GF TEE USITZo STATES O8 JULY Zi, Wo:

PURING THe PAST DAYS B4.LGONS Wine SENT TO CZECHOSLOVAK: TERRITORY
WITH LEAFLETS OF A HATSHA OESISNED TO IMCITE DISCONTENT OF THE

POFULATION ASD TO ENCONEAGE ANTI-STATE ACTIVITIES. THIS NFe ATTI“PT

iP

SoLOVAK WORKING PLGPLE WITH PROPAGANDA Ine

TO INFLUENCE-TRE ze

ASTANSARLY MET WITH ISDIGNANT #25 1.7 Ati Ly

SO PRIMITIVE A LeveL, wr

TRAT Tie ENTIRE ACTION . wy.
WAS PREPARED ANG CARRIES CUT BY AML AICAN CITIZbis SENT FOR THis

aY UNDER US OCCUPATION ADMIN Ig-

PURPOSE TO GERMANY, TO CER

TRATION. IT Is THEBER CRE AN “HERS THE UNITED str Tes

BUSED ITs POSITION’ AS AH OCCUPAT 10s POWER TOWARLS ENDo

TANY, WHICH SEN

CCORDING TS THE BASIC



--- Page 237 ---
/4-00000

ANCOMA TP CREST Pa Ch at fH MAako THIS tau Vo GATLUN UP HASIC

POUPLES OF TuTeaNATIOGaL LAS PARTICULAEL' GUURCTIONAALE JS THE

FacT TeAP LP TOOK PLACE AT A TINE Wide Tite MALTGUS OF THE EXPIRE

i
7
ARE (UCkiAoING THEIR EFFORTS TO Sthe suckin Tia PEACE ANE ASSUKE
i PEACEFUL COOPEL ATION. ‘
;
THE Aly. OF THis PHOVCCATIVE ACTION, ORGANIZED UhLER THE exXoTECTLoN :
t
: OF Uy COCUPATIOS AUTHORLITIES Is [C INCREAS. THE POLICERs OF THE
: .
SO-CALLED COLD cAn AND TO PREVENT A LOOSENENG OF INTERNATIONAL TENA |
! . i
i lon. :
: t
: |
|
FoR EB MEAsO.y THE GOVERNKENT OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA DECISIUELY PRO-
7 i
TETS AGALIST THIS ACTICH AND ASKs THE GOViRMPENT OF THE UNTER
: STATES TO FURNIo# PUFORVATLON ON THE SfePS TAKEN TO PREVENT SIBRILAR
. {
PROVOCATIONS AIMEG AGAINST PEACEFUL COEXISTANCE OF NATIONS, REPRE- :
:
t
SENTING CRUDE INTERFERENCE Wl INTEAYAL CZECHOSLOVAK AFEAT SS." i
EXE Now \



--- Page 238 ---
00000

COT GL ae Be Suiy Shy unis

ary

a

Britlear Cpowasiema 7

ay LiPat ’ RL
“he "Cerenl avy of thy ik

adlae ish. foo "Rude

Peavo" dealing with tho _proparsston fon "ye". Lo lion

beeaaenst fro abvoudy ne balloon ope bten em douny th

.
wast tak plea foe "KeDay when aad bess fe Minetad soe

Soyears Satled wit the Movtin cleta,

wins “Unele tec S Soha bo whitest

Whe yvookty pr

and undura

ena of

Linke the sdprd

Whit propane wes broadeant by Itrlio

dlntoeb, Th bolls tho sbovy of tho "sued ee found BCas

or the aro Mleh pad been pub dato the bed Cons On bho

wb eeay pare

rent and of coursy damodduboldy reeopnt cel

only ths ganic

thea: oy tha real comme tex: one he onsuvod

the tobsccentakes vip ana when PAyluy gets une cudoy nied

Revldent tho Gvewn as hod cous. em Ente... he

and told Qin be could not gobo nmythins Cor

ban to pay whi rund Cree bowls curs caw.



--- Page 239 ---
14-0000

SEGRET

_ SEGRUTY INFORMATION

2 Jay 1953

MEMORANDUN FORa DEFUTY DIKLOTAR (PLAYS)
SuDILT Csech Aintster of Foreign Affairs’ Note te
7 Anerica Legation :
REFERENCE Mano dated 21 July 1953 ~ Subjects "Caeoh

Reactions to Balloon Uperation™

. de The Cgech Dose of the Department of State 4s proparing an
answor to tha Caoch note wich will fenorally disclaula any U.3,
Governmental responsibility for ‘the ballvon operation, Tho VUA te
boing instructed to trush off tho Czech note and tu cite it ag ane
other axample of the regine's attempt to provent the Czech psople
fran getting the truth.

2. RFE wild not cemunt on the note except to report the U.S,
reply as a news ites, but will comment on the itude Mravo editorial
taking tha lino. the Csech Government cantt let its peo.le now the
truth ant aloo speculating on how many Czechs did not turn in thoir
Pamphlets.

te .

THOMAS Hi. BOADEY ;
Chief, ‘
International Organisations Division

C-10/Branch 1/WPD/mhj a
Distribution: as
Addressee - orig &1 ,
C-l0/itranch 1 = 3 2
cIo -1
RI -2

a

eT eee



--- Page 240 ---
14-0000

- . §
Viele
SECUIITY INF GRATION
;
: 21 duly 1953

Caeeh reaction:

are Guach 1 :
tof a note fr
! vered Loday bo the :
a
: 2. :
: upen thic ,



--- Page 241 ---
1400000

‘a lovel, underntandably.

=e

; iECRE?
eo SO YEUEY UIFUR ATS ON

Fella Radio Prague enncuncenon: 0510 today ra note on balloona:

"The Wintutry of Foreign Atfotre has vent the fLollewing nota to
the Embassy cf the United States on duly 20, 1953:
: During the past days ballcona vera sont to Czechoslovaxtan terrie
wd to incite discontont of tha-

tery with leofleis cf a ntiuwe design:
Population ard to envouraze autl-utabe activitios, This now at tompt to

inflluoneca the Cxroch workdny: poople with pewpagawla means af se primitive
towith indicnate dnoiance, that the ontiro ,
corvdad out by American oitizens sent for thia
purpose 20 Cermany, to Oenan tarr under U.S, occupation adninie—
tration, It is, therefore, a new ijistance whore tha U.S. GQovermaent
obu3ed Stu. pcaiticn av an ecenpation pevor tevards ends incomparable
with tha four power agrees en Gar ‘ny, which binds the U.S, to carry
avt tho ocenpatton accerding to the basta tanot tant Germany is never
Ogain to beocme a threat to world psace and its neoigkbora, : ,

Another important factor which mikes this new violation cf bagla
priacipla of international Jay pariicwarly objectionable is the fact
that it took place at a tine when thd nations of the ontire world are
inoreasing their offerte to strengthen ths peace and assure Ppeccefuyd

ccoperations |

action was gpropured and

. Tho ax. of this provecutive action, organized under tha protection
Of US. ceaugation autherdiies La to increaun the Policles of the go~
called cold war and to Prevaut. a loosening of international tensions.

For thera reaseng the Government of Czechoslovakia decisively pro~
teas against this action end cake the Gevernmant of the U.S. to Surnteh
information cn the stops t.ken to prevont olmiler Provevation aimed
againat peaceful cc-.uxistonie of rations, reprosenting crude interfer.
once in Internal Czech affnirs.' .

SECRET


--- Page 242 ---
14-0000

eopy

1283

i FLEASE Nav

me rE
Took ye

TOS PATO

MA LOR

DOOR MUDE

DE PRAYO



--- Page 243 ---
14-90000 ©

July 20, 1953
The foll ne report 1a enm o-. the fivst furl attacks con the
recent i ‘OBlovakia, The text was read
Over Rass gue on July 18, 1953;

3 @d to you new an article fron tocay's& Rure Pravo.
cle ie-ealled "an setion Doomed te Fatlure". Than) 3-to ~~
«dof all-the cou es of

Sa VAT CAR be brevenued reew
the world, Naturally, thig -

“ho thone for whom was £Ou8tL.

The art
the peace Policy of the Sovies Unton

the cans of seace, the conviction
meer anene the is

vues a

&
7)

as vie catns ang ofa luxurious dire.
ove PONvErs da thets best to put obstaclus in the way
Aes. SAGs the of internat Lonal venslon. In
Korea tis the provac wid soboteur of the paaes effort
Th. Rhee in Germany bandits vere y “

Zi war splrtnala In the democratic
S$ well as in game other parte of the German Democratic
Republic, And after the feilure thig much heralded Gav, there
Comes the hy eeriticeal and denagogical offer to help to the populu- -
tion of the DIOR, which was 5H or obvioug Propaganda seas which,
in fact, itted by the festern bourgeois Presa,

+.

ain of provocations which are aimed a ainst toe

of peace thera flso belongs the Am

3 Started int t days in

<eslovalia. In a fe Way In which twe

- “Crucaders for Mreeden" were do & 4t. te

Tsing Inflands: 3 8 aver our terpr
the Bavarian side,

DOL. & panda

ias

The Bunien transnitter Free Europe, financed ty Ford and Similiar
"tustitutions” Speaks bonbast:caiiy or the Peopaganda balloon
action which, alls edly is the CHC action of ¢ t8 kind whieh
ever has been att meted and fur t: direction of 4} a theve eame
to Western Germany Specialists Fron America,

aid
ens and hundreds of
& ahd our national
mur Citiveny after
Doukraveioes,

apare
ands
ttees
en

or Cecky

We can indeed certify that the
the leaticts in tae first tue
of those seaflets are with our
where they are veing vrougat they
discovers: Poe Parmer Hajek fr
entire parce!

works:
Pr ractories, oy farm

3 leaflets ars
. AOSKS a3 well ¢.

m2 : oO
vallwayren 4nd children, yet even di balloor action we
only four tires tleser rope gays 2 hun, tines

ring to lis
mind,

ftw

bigger then ¢ “
t they had

initdators th



--- Page 244 ---
14-0000

“peace policy of USSR, aini

Jestlets

and they are evo
leaflets te som

Stamped on both sides by inflanatory woras. held in

ereat

esteam the now crown which t5 tirw and valuable
. purenaging. poxrer—wht } , on ine and,
‘therefore, with sharp and ofter erude vworda they critic : that
1t3 Imuge had occn misused se the basin for printi olin iiew-

conceraing th. governuent of ovr republic z and the USSR.

Tne seecnd icars tet is propagating the elas provocatioang which
too place on seventeen June ir the derman Democratic. R
When thone provocations ended ty fadlure, thete orsaniz
that they should be ayed at Just foe the printing of 2
pletare ating the bandits of Berlin in action;
are star 5 Or dnduigt ing in provocations, ete.

gle into the serles or the photographs igh
shrosteutters used tc take while they vere 5
we occupied: countrier, in the Ura in C an Li
Lidice, pb 1s quite netural that this, too, can only te dis-
gut towards those who have started this criminal action. Besides,
the pictures of the fascist prevocations in Berlin are no vensa-
tional neus for us, 95 the directors cf the bailoon actiin ébvicusly
Imavine., Similar pictures were publighed not long ago’ in ovr

Frace, It demonstrates the absolute pol? iticeal shortatghted-
ness when people mentioned 1¢ 1g dencrived as stupidity of

the orgenizers of the balloor “etion who think thet t cound
influence cur people by leutlets one s4d whieh constitus
a glorification of hatred ana cf the attack. anainst peace whigh
way te teke place on ifth June in Berlin, -

Tas
the
fires in-

In vain ‘48 the part of the defender of C echos loval: S xowiring people -
and thie will always uc the same - as:
actions there emanates the wish
is not wanted by any honest
political or his religious ostcton.
demons tre.tes now tne USA peaationary eine
ef International tension.

his

It 13 4 gross heresy just at the time when the peonle of the
entire world are looking forvard with hone toward
of a truce in Korea, when with corfiderce they are
1g at the reacefal sevtl
disputed international questions,

Therefore, the tallcon acticr. san : with sharp: condem..tden on
the pert of cur pecple. Toe valloer spectalints
not Like to hear what the people sey when they brir
to the SB and to the National Gomp.1.tte
that ever euch pecple. wi
to the sccialist develo
means the vest is empl nis. And a3) pe
by the letent viola ting, of the. “Indeencenss ot
They are surprised by, the gr reat. amount 0: 3tun



--- Page 245 ---
14-0000

A ceeegere es mare ee eet one

-actlor

_ samy,

wee thowsnt
True, toe Or
meee poustoth
of our
vintlant

ve action
cap if

ound te
they ask

pe whieh
adcast, witie
tH

in Whleh one
above”

a Loncer
food vame

“ft
war hurdess
WeArters of P
orks and the
ticn “ore

eke und’
1 Pizen
Roiborn dork

eetern

sient.

hore ec

cr
houst

In fack the o
action spent

wd

bachuse 2
a few buazine 7

the 2e



--- Page 246 ---
14-0000

CQieTNENT

‘Droft Hote Lo Usechonjovak Govornnent
Jortathia Toxt ©

Following ta toxt note for tranasission FOUOFF Ln reply to its .
note July 20, -

Popin toxt, : Tho Azorlean Enbassy presonta ite covplizents to the
‘Czechoslovak Mintatry of Poreign Affaire and with reforence to the

Wnistry'o Note of July 20, 1953, concerning tho roleass of salloona

* fron the US Zono of Germany has tho honor, upon inatrictions of tho us

Covernzent, te mako the following roplys ;

Tho balloone &pparontly in qucstion woro not roleagod by any official
agency of this Governmort but hy the Crusade fur Procdon, an erganisation
established by private Acarican cltizens. Tho US Covernna:t has ascortainod
thet the balloons wero raloased for the purposo of cormunteating vith tha .
people of Czechoslovakia,

It 1a a fundanontal convletion of tho Atioriean Government asd people
thet freo comwunieation batwaen peoples constitutes a principle upon
whieh tho very life of tha internationa? cozmuntty should be founded, If
any govornmant attempto to erect a wall. sealing off its poonle fron con-
tect with the outside world, it 4a inevitable that ways will be found
both by. the people inside that country ani by tho peoples of ather countries
outside to penetrate that ertifietat barrior and rointain sere Line of
eentact with ono another, The use by those outside of such redia as. .
balloons confircs that the Czechoslov:k Covornzent hes created a barrier
irterfering with froe cucauniestion, Tho US bolievee that the best
agsurarce that thia reans of eormunteution wn not be used is to obviate
the need for it by permitting what is natural and neesssary in the nodern.
worli, ransly, free contact betuosn’ ‘ations and the froe exehang ge , of,

inforzation and idoas.,


--- Page 247 ---
14-0000

Ag for tho contont of the mosrapen carried to Czechoslovakia b7 ,
this medium, it is undoretood ‘that thoy contelned inforration on ourrort
develcpnonts in Control and Feotorn Furope ard in addition various
atatemonte focusing on tho idea of "froodon"” « There would be no reason
for a govornmant to bo disturbed ahout tho princlplo of froedon itn a
mossago to ite poople, if conditions of freedom actually axisted io that
country, Ona cannot readily beltevo that “the C2echoplovak Govornnont
world even raise. this fanue with tho us Covernnont 4f the fundarental ©
freedoza voro observed in Czochoslovakia'-ard ‘Af tho Czochoslovak Govorn=
Ront, wore not now especially concerned, atout tho attdtida of tho people
toward the absonco of those frosdons,

The US Governnont eannot agree that the trazentsaaton of those
Mossages to the people of Czechoslovakia fron tho territory of the US
Zona of Gorvany by the Crusade for Froodon Comittee involved any nicuss
of the position of the US ag an occupying povor, Such conmunteation is
eloarly not contrary to any cuadripartitoe agrooents affoeting Gornany,
Nor does sueh cormunication violate any other international agroarent to
which the US Government in a asipmatory,

With reference to offorts to strecethen vorld ponce tho US, as 1a
gonsrally known, has endoavored in avery practicabic way to vork atop by .
step, in accordance with tha deep interests of the Acortean people in’
permenant pence ard in cooperation vith. other countries, towant building
an erduring stroctura of International peace and stability, The 1S scoks
to help bring about @ relaxation of intornational tersion inezever thero -
are gomine possibilitios of doing so, It is recopnized at -the sare tize -
that true international tranquillity ‘presupposes conditions, which assure
hunen richts aid fundarental ‘freedons for the People concerned, Bed text / _.

| cante soonest. intendod date delivery so. "press releaso may bo iseucd nore.



--- Page 248 ---
14-0000

Policws Redio Pracse amouneeran’ O10. today re note on
beLloons: : . >

"tho Hedetry of Fo Atfatves has sent the following note to the
Eubanay of tho United Statice on July 20, 19535

‘Lioons xeve sent to Croch territory with .
nsisht dacontont of the pepelation
etivh Thia new attennt tw influence
proprayenda moans of co prunitive a level, .
fate Austanea, that tho entire action was
riean oltisens sent for this: purpose to
under US cecupstion acniniatration. It is
the US Goverment abuan 4 wn position as
wig aparabla with the fous’ power asrece
ta carry out tie occupation according
y io never spain to become a threat to

OS

tre Cnach we
urndorstanladly
prepared ans
Cornany, to te
tharefore a new
an oceupatd,
ment on Ga‘ nany,
te the basic tenct +

witch makes thia new violation of basic

7 portiewarly objectionable i the fact
when the nations of the entire world ere
strengthen the peace and ausurm peacefui

Another 4npertant. ¢:
principle of internstiong?
Gat it toak place at
anereasing
cooperation,

“VO auction, organized under the protection
is to inareasa the policien of the so-called
oovening of international tensions.

cold war and to prevenz

For thes: reasons + Soverment of Ceech decisively protest agsirst
@43 aetion rnd eoko the sovertriant of the US to furmish infomation on
the steps talen to prevent. sulla: pergseation ained anainst peacefind
co-sxistance of natlar: >» Tepresenting crude interference in inteme)

Czech affairs.”



--- Page 249 ---
14-0000

i.
UNCLASSIFICO ” RESTRICTED CONFIDENTIAL Secret
. GENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIN.. .stom TOP AND BortoMmy

SENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENEY
_ OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

(CJ approvan, C) inrorstarion ( stonarure
CO action O omer ary 7 (J seturn
CO commen 1D Preparation oF remy C7 otsparcn
(2) concunrence ( Rtcommen pation CG rus

REMARKS;
Attached is Mr. Durkee's recommendation in
Tospect to Hr. Zyguunt Nagoreld, Jr.,

organisation for PWor intellig:
I concur in . .

M0781 0. « covtssncat mreering cores,


--- Page 250 ---
14-0000

os

Senurity babes"

cfrr

dowhth inte h the reg
concludes with reeassurdations an
Sori antantites" $s eaanaetde
eretion activitte
2 pV S reeary
and 748 colle sort arnuetat
fn sebion that t
fers wifeh wa reeetved fron ©
i very paceet (234900 per mont
‘8 few munthe! duration,

: tad
fadtud dual

#8 sources of tefors
pL ra the rofult of ar
De vankaen, we recently gry
dy to cover a tryeo t -

OWEN

i ?e ALL you plente nuvi
i potats of reeollect’ on wa tes
ay reecilestion tr ace
ture a trier on Mentton
dherron ty Sapa
«

if:
aE nore,
you vLuise :
Mle for tra
wet, that wrereas ve aid tn fac
etude foros th ey: vied, we bay
tits ¢ “Suadcon indrtalh,
racher of Sace cust and
ye nu totorest
Nevorakd

Soy
rohan,

the Identity ang ob
uo fares ty
“Or Gastre to contd
heyoud tre cor

ni tio ese@lustcon that

ths

amd re

poriad

! ey le . so. . a :
ee ee . : ; oO

enter

ne Th fa:


--- Page 251 ---
14-0000

_———

*
. : . \

cern lye ie eae

au: duly 1¥53

10, Attn: Hrs Durkee
VIA 1 Cudef, £2
iG/28/F

Propoeed Ballaca Campaign in Event progident Uffers Fuod to Poland

our discussion of 17 July, attached hareté fe.
a gamplu of the coupon wiich it is recommended that the Crusade for Froedom
distribute by vallean fron Germany in the event that a Presidential offer of
focd for Poland is refeced by the Polish Guverments, Thin covpen reds 40

follows:

“2. With refcrence Ww

The beara of tito coupon 46 entitled to receive from the food
supplies donated uy Anecicanst .

(food listed will be tnose ppecifienlly offered)

the words, "Invalid dua to tna

Starged acroce the coupon Are
h 'Peoples! Aepublic”.

rejection-of the offer vy The Polte!

of tnie plan ana roguesting

2. we are advising tie Frankfurt mirolon
uld releare vy balloon

their estimate of tne nunser of leaflets which they co
from the valtic, Plieues advise vs wuicther or not your printing: facilities
can supply the German xiceion with whatever nenber of leaflete they under lane
to distribute, se, Gh the other hand, will advise you soonest of the numvor
of balloons we will require from your ctocks. and tie auureso to unden they
are to be conelimed. : . .

3, In the event ‘nat the Crusada dcaires to dneludo a printed neueare
on the reveres of the Leaflet, it 18 requected that tie text of Lou resale
be cleared eltner with this desk or with tie German mission prior bo

printing.

Attachments

+ ALFC) i
Leputy Chist

rn,
58/F1iiowarstma jap 4 choo

2c July 1953
2 Addressee
1 RI
2 Ez /P


--- Page 252 ---
14-0000

16 July 1953

tee

MEMORANDUM FOR: 10/PP
ATTENTICNS Mr, Thonaa Braden
SUBJECT: == Mr. Kennoth Dean Koch |

1.° In Jamary of thia year I Qiccussed with your office the
retenticn of Kenneth Dean. Koch in Berlin ae RFE reprosentative,
due to his oxtonsive ueofvlness to FI in Borlin, providing PI
with cover facilities; deads, general services and working very
oatinfactorily in supporting the FI mission in Borlin, at that
time I wee assured by IO that they would do everything possible
to retain Ifr. Koch in Berlin as the RFE representative. In May
of this yoar I had cocasion to visit Bob lang in Naw York on
another matter and T azain touched uzen Mr, Koch's assignment in
Berlin, at which timo Mr, Lang assured me thet no chunges would

returned to Gormany with no definite Job envisaged for hin,
John Elliott has takon cver the KFE office in Borlin and there
Seema to bo no attempt te make any concessions to FI wishes in
Berlin, .

2. We find this solution én extrencly unsatisfactory ONO.
Fulictt, by background, goneral character, and atility, 1s not
oo ueeful to FI in Berlin es.Kooh waa end I seriously doubt that
RFE vould find him aa catisfactory as Koch in standard RFE business.
I knew Elliott vhen ‘he Wag @ nevererer man, end I have checked with
several of his fcrmer colleagues vio agree that he does not have
any of the hard-hitting qualities sc desireble for an PFE repre-
sentative in Berlin. This ts not an attenrt to belittle hia.
ability as a journalist but the job in Berlin is very much ore
than that, In ehert, I would ayrrociate your cffice ‘taking steps
with RFE to return Dean Koch to Berlin ag RFE reprecontative, since

j
i



--- Page 253 ---
14-0000

we

Security Information

«20

cognizant of our intelligence intereste in order to be ablo to
chonnel the right. type of refugee to our docrstes. Purthermors,.
in many ceses the RFE ropresentative con forform valuuhle soreen~
ing az cutout functicns which would preserye his ovm cover and.
yet save ua valuable time and offorte

3. I vould spprectate any action you can take on this

cubject and refer you to IN 40404 from berlin which to attached.
Flesse keep me advired on any progress you make in this casa,

-- PETER SICHEL — ‘
- Chief, EE/FI -

Attachments IN. 40404 :

: a3 dee .
geeurily Infor Aver


--- Page 254 ---
14-0000

Scekel

Security: lofarination

16 Indy 1953 —

MENORAMDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS).
SUBJECTS RFE Report on recent Soviet Zone
. . Politburo Heeting ©

1. Attached herewith, I an forvarding you a cable
wich has just deen received in New York” from. Munich.

2. The information contained therein was transmitted
by the RFE correspondent in Hamburc, Hajor Ransey, who reportede
ly got it from a usually reliable Rritish S1S contact.

3. RFE has asked us to treat this information with oxtreno
eaution and strictly as speculation.

THOMAS W, BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

Attachments a/s

oF,

OM auOH -



--- Page 255 ---
14-0000

SEGRET.
SECURITY INFORMATION
SOVIET ZONE POLITUURO MEETING

Cable dated 7/16/53 fron Isintch to New York

"Fast. Oerman aling Progident. Wilhelm Piook io definitely on the -
way out, reliable sources in clone contacts with the East Gerzan Vovern-.
ment said hero today. The eources stated that Pleck's ouster was dis~' -
closed during-an East-West Germin Communist Politburo meting which
endod in Rast Germany on July 12, Top Gorman Communist. leadars were
aloo told that East, German Sooret Polico Chief, Wilholm Zaisser, is .
now suspended or:under house arest. Zuiaser wae arrested for pudlica-
tion of casiilty figures of the June 17 revolt, the source daid. Hig -
ouster alov falla’ in line with recent Com:unist polioy ‘shifts all over
the. Red Fapira, they said, At tho meeting it wag disclosed thst SxD
head Walter Ulvricht will remain a potent foree in East German pelitios

despite recent runoro- fhio” impending. purge. Premier Otto Grotewoh)

Will ba given increased er in the now government get~up, the sources
paid. During a-disoutsion’ of recent events in the Soviet at the Polite
buro meeting, the'Commmnist loaders wero given information f ra: Soscow
reporting that Foreign Minister. Lolotoy will emerge during tho next

: month as the key figure in the Soviet Union. Premier Malenkov will

‘perve as a figurehead for “Holotoy, the sources revealed. Tha Bal deny
is fast becoming.a major political force tn Russia and several eererale
have been ‘recalled from outpost areas by order of Molotov, the scuroes
said. The USSR ia suffering from acute shortages of raw materials,
especially rubber and. oil, as wll'as strategic metals of the rarer
varieties; it was disclosed at tho meeting. In view of thia, the top
Commnists were told that Russia would continue its "peace offensive?
for at least another ‘year. The sourves, reported to be Phighly re
liable", said that the revolutions released at the meeting were to be

used a9 "policy directives” by East and Weat Communist leaders.®

NOTEs

,. FU. "This information was released through our Central News with ~
the warning to treat with extreme caution, adding that Politiesl Ad=
visor's office agreed it is of most explosive nature and should be -
handled strictly as speculation.® ; ;



--- Page 256 ---
14-00000

SECRET
SECUHITY INFORFLATION
.15 July 1993
te OLMEC TOL, CENTRAL INIMLLICEHOS: ACENCY

SUBJECT:

Attached herewith daa gs

ou
2 OR Lerlise |

Attachment

* Seria

idance received by .



--- Page 257 ---
14-0000

“TIED 10 OVERTHRON THE SOVIET GovER

RAPIDLY THAN AFTER

8 EDLTURIAL OF I2VESTIA, THE SRCONG.

“SECRET

=
\ SECURITY 7

PROVISIONAL GULDA ; PURGE OF BRITA

“I BACKOROUND AND ANALYSIS:

(MIS WILL BE ISSUED LATFR IN MORE G? AIL AS SOON AS ‘Tu? VERMITS. )
THE FOLLOW NG FACTS, HOWEVER, STAND GUT LWTRIATELY:

12. NO PERSON OF DERIA'S RAS 5) THE SOVIST UNEUH HAS VALLEN SINCE BERIA
HIUSEL? REPLACED YEGHOV IN 1938; THE. PURCE COULD NUT BEING ATA HIGHER LEVEL.

THE CHANGES AGALNS? BERIA (OF BELNG A BOURCEOLS REEGALE IMPERIALIST AGENT WHO
COMMUNLST PARTY AND RE~

TUDE OAVARABLE ONLY TO ‘THOSE
4@STS INTHE 1920'S. ;

ESTABLISH CAPE TALISH IN THE USGI}
AGAINST ‘THE TROTSKY TES AND THE RIG
2, THE STRUGGLE VOR THE SUCCESSTOW TO STALIN IS DFVELOPING uct MORE -

DEATH OF Lett i It TOOK FOUR THALS FO STALIN TO AER
MOVE TH RIGHTISTS. CURTHERHORE, COP DERI i OMLPT TO THE RIGITIN THE
EAST GERMANY. AND HUNGARY, AND THE AY! TAS UATE AS A WEEK OR SO AGO OF |
* PRO-WATLONALIST". CHANGKS IN TADdi DECISION 1K THR STRUGGLE .WST
HAVE HAPPENED ONLY WITHIN THE LAST. ¥: ABSENCE (WHEN ALL THE
OTI:R APMBERS OF THE POLE TBURO Wea 4UL THEATRE ON JUNE
26 WAS ONE OF THE FIRST punlle IND ACHING FALL; THE JULY

TaN,
DAYS. BEA"
FGERT) AT THE &
LOLONS OF HIS Al

3. THE FORCES NHLCH DESTROYED YHGA ARE CEXTAINLY A COLLECTIVE GROUP, NOT
SIMPLY MALENKOV HIAGELS. MALENKOV>S NALS FARS ORLY ONCE IN THE ANNOUNCEMENT
AND THE FRAVDA EDITUAL EMPHASIZE" CULLLO TIVE LEADEMSIIT r WORE THAN SVE BEFORE.

G4, ° THE PRAVDA FDI TORIAL MARES A Now RE AL 1% WHE GENERAL LINESAWAY
PROM RIGHTISM AND TOWARD LE TIS? eX SH, PFREAIG KOR ACCURATELY AWAY FROM
MODERATION AND TOWARD; e~ FASCIS? ROTEMISH, THE SHIPT 76 AN EXTREXIST COURSE
IS BASICALLY IN TWO QUESTIONS: - : ‘

A. THE -RATIONALI TIES QUES TON
B. AGRICULTURAL COLLEUTI ‘ZATION

IT IS NGV CLFAR THAT BSSRIA WAS PRO-NATIONL NINGUTY AND ANTI-INTEMS FICATION
OF COLLECTIVIZATION. THE GROUP WHICH HAS REMOVED NIM 15 [RO-GREAT SUSSLAN AND
PRO-COLLECTIVISATION. IT IS RETURNING TO THE STALINIST LINE. WILL THE DOCIVRS!
PLOT DE REVIVED?) THE SLANSKY TRIAL? SLANSEY-TY?E THIALS IM THE SATELLITES?

5. NOT ONLY BSRIA HIMSELF HAS PALLEN BUT THE SHOLE APPARATUS OF THE SECRET

' POLICE IS BENOUNCED, WILL LOSE.MUCH PACE AXD IMMURTANCZ AND WILL BE SUBJECTED

TO A TREMENDOUS PURGS, WHICH MUST SHALE Te WHOLE GUVERNMENTAL ‘STRUCT | TO ITS
FOUNDATIONS. Lo. : a ot

" SECRET


--- Page 258 ---
14-0000

2,

.?
LY CONTINUE ON THE INTERNATIONAL SCEIE=~ -
BU NO OLNUTME COKCESSIONS (BE. G.,
: SUR « ON THE IWTHUNAL SCHEIN
: TES SWISS 3 TALK OF LMPROVING Tid: LIVING STAN«
: DARDS UF TRE URSE WIL BE TUdARD INCREASED :
: CAPITAL INVES GHT SUMER GOGUS—-TARTICULARLY IN THE SATEL=
LIES. es
: Tl, wigpes:
CAUTION: AS B5SOR ENTS 1% THE KREALIT. AND THE
CATELIETS C WICULAK THEORY. TIS 1S
Me EAD CF ‘OR THK SUCCEESION, -BUT ONLY THE
FIRST act; TO CUMS. © THE COALITION #HICH
DESTROY ON AS WAS THE BALEHKUVe -
: BERTALLO? JIN. ‘TH BASIC ANALOGY
: FINS? lik, ELIMINATED
: LGiLWATES BPeKA); THEN HE
: IN MOS PRESENT DRAKA WILL INA”
4 Coat TOs BY TG: MESING ELEMENT IN IT),

MORE FERCCIOUSLY, OUR PEOPLES CAN
ROOPIMESSORS ARE BAXING THEUSELVES
MING SiHONGER, WHEN THE
” PREMLEIN IS WSERENED BY : : ITE KRMCLINS ARE VIG) HORE WEAK:
AWD FARALY: UN. LACAL SATELLITE CCR
LURIS THITR Ott SKINS TO BE AS
ETUSH TIME POR THES PEASANTS
MAN REVOLTS AED CZECHOSLUVAK
AUD THEIR OF OVER. AS THEY’
UCIURE OF CONTROL 1S CRACKING,
GAIN THAN NGI. THE REGIMES WELL
EN’ A FACADE UG? SBONCLITHIC
; YPHE PACADI IS WiOLILW AND ‘THAT THE
E TNTERAL TLSSENSTON, WILL MiGBABLY NO? BE ALLE
TG UNNENAKS z PECISTVE HOUICH. HUAEVER, WE SHOULD WARN THE
+ NAP TS (AV HUNGARY IN PARTICULAR) THAT

A MORE EXTQEME COURSE THAN- BEFORE
JON NOW REIGNS EVERYWHERE). NOW Ig
USEC, PUR THE PSOPLE TOSCURE Tim GAINS” THEY
B Pot MORE. IN AVESY MAL SENSE, THE PROPLE RE

STASE RATER THAN SFECTATOUS IN THE AUDIENCE. ©
ST CONTINUE: YOUR.EFFORTS IN THE COL-
WAYS YOU KNOW SO WELL, 70 FORCE

THE EVEN 3 pooy
CERTINIY Sy,
UML Ty."

Muze UKEONS,
THE REGIMS 70 BARE ACIUAL QUNCESSTONS t0

SECRET ©

dae


--- Page 259 ---
14-0000

~*~

SECRET *
SECUAI TY UNF ORLA ELON | .

DB. TO AE COMUMS TS:

THE EREMIIN IS RIGHT IN ON POLNT--THIS IS AN EVENT OF IMMER | SIGNIFICANCE, ~
IT PROV ONCE KOSS, AND WHE ARATIICALLY THAN AT ANY TIME SIBVE THE TARTS,
TAT KO COMMUNIST CAN EVER PE. THOGE Ol YOUR Li ZAPOTOCKY BHU TRIED To
HEDGE IN HES BRATS: On Tus MALLS 'C ISSUE; THOSE OF YOU LIKE NAGY,
GERG AND BATA “HG 8 XAMULS OF THE RIGHTIST COURSE—YOU ARE SUITABLE .
UFPEIQNGS FOR THE ANY THOSE COMIUNIST LEADERS WHO HAVE NOT BECOWE -
Li, NO URDO SDLY TRY TO BECOME AX TENTS TS
YON THEIR COMRADES THEY KUST DRAG DOWN
OF TRYING TO -BRGUME AN & th ST AGAIN?
BHC WE CALNUL BE SURE WHO HE WILL
ELC NATE BIRTA‘S UPPONENTS. AS
M4) YOU HAVE ONLY TU CHOICES.

AND WHAT
cA SOVTRT? ERCTARA (tk
BE, HAVIEO ELTUERA Ag WILL NOT Wy
COMMUNISTS (SEE Wak GUTDARCH NUBSE
YOU CAH ALD THE E ALD SABOTAGE HE REGIME, THUS CROSSI EG THE "GOLDEN BRIDGE® .
TO SAFETY, OR -— YOU CAN FLED. THERE IS No OTHER CHOLCE, - : :

IN A NEV URGE.
YOU KN THAT THE

C. TO THE SFCRET POLICE:

TOUR TURN HAS NOY COME, IF ALL THE PROVLE THAT BERLA FRONOTED AND ALL THS
LOCALNONGANS OF TSE RVD IN ‘THE Y LTO URGED, AS IS Ni AEROURCED, WHAT
SIM THE SATSLUITES? YOU HAYS

YO YOU ‘THLWK WILL HAL Pra TO YOUR POOR MART ONN
EVEN 3 GHANCE TO SURVIVE HEA ME CHCENARY COMMUIES 7, AGAIN, YOU CAN MAKE

YOUR PEACK WITH THE PEOLLE OR YOU CAN FLEE. OTIERISE, YOUR DOOM IS CERTAIN,
. i

NOTEx

45 YOU WIL SEE FROM THS ABOVE, OUR PRESENT LINE (HE INCREASING STRENGTH OF THE
PECPLE, THE INCREASING WEAKNESS OF. THE REGIUE ) REMAINS INTACT. CEECHUSLUVAK .
CULDANCE NUMBER TEN EB ALYCST COMPLETFLY INTO THE NEW SLNCUUS TANCES AND MUST NOW
BE IMPLEMENTED (WITH APPHOPRIATE CHANGES FOR HUNGARY AND T'OLAND) WITH REMGWED .
VIGOR. : . 5 :

4 :

EXD MESSACE

SECRET



--- Page 260 ---
1
14-00000 .

~~ SECRET

-- SECURITY iHEORMATION.

4S Judy 2993
MEMORANDUM ORs DIRECTO, CENTRAL INTELLIGESCE AGENCE
SUBJECT; == Purge of Borla

- Attached herewith is a guidance reoctved by
RFE on tho purgo of Beria.

3
H
t
i
4
i

-. CORD WYER, JR.
Deputy Chief,
International Organisations Division

At taohment

RRR coat ett aae et lara pays ag ca TA tp DEC maT

PULA LANG


--- Page 261 ---
14-0000

=H

~ SECURE TY THe

CSA

: PROVISIONAL GUIDANCE: PURGE OF BERIA
— ee BEE A

i BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS:

(THIS VILL PE ISSUED LATER IN HORE DETATL AS SOO AS TLME PERMITS. )
THE FOLLOW WG FACTS, HUWEVER, SUAND GUT LIMEDIATELY:

: COVLET UNION HAS FAILEN SINCE BERIA

1, NO PERSON OF BERLA'S RAUK IN Tui f
HIMSEL? REPIACED YEZIOV IN 1938; THE PURGE COULD NOT HEING ATS-HIGHER LEVEL.
THE CHARGES AGAINST BERLA (GF BEANO A BOUXGEOIS RENEGADE IMPERLALLST AGENT WHO
TNAED TO OVIRTIROY THE SOVIET GOVE » DESTHOY CUMIUNIST PARTY AND RE~
ESTABLISH CAML TALISH IN THE USSR) ARE GPA MAGNITUDE GOMPARABLE ONLY 10 THOSE
AGAINST 1M TROTSKYI TES AND ile KIGHTISTS IN THE 1920°S.

2, THE S\RUGGLE FOR THE SUCCESCTON TO STALIN IS DEVELOPING MUCH MORE: -
RAPIDLY THAN AVTER THE DEATH OF LEniN. 17 TOOK FUUR YEARS FOR STALIN TO RE~
MOVE Tk RIGHTISTS. FUR'HERUORE, CO DEKLNG THE SHIFT TO THE RIGHT IN: THE
EAST GERMANY AND. HUNGARY, AND THE AMQOUNCEMENT AS IA TE AS A WEEK OR SO AGO OF .
“ PROWHATIONAIST® CHANGES IN TADJLKISTAN, THE DECISION IN THE STRUGGLE wUST
NAVE HAVVENED ONLY WITHIN THE LAST Fiev DAYS. BERIA'S ABSENCE (WHEN ALL THE
OTUER WFMBERS OF THE POLI TBURO WERK KUSENT) AT THE BOLSHOI THEATRE ON JUNE
28 WAS ONE OF THE FIRST PUBLIC INDICA TLONS OF HIS APPROACHING FALL; THE JULY

8.EDI TORIAL UF T2VESTLA, . THE SECOND.

"30 THE FORCES WHICH DESMOYRD BIA ARE CERTAINLY A COLLECTIVE GROUP, NOT
SIMPLY MALERKOV HIMSELY. MALENKOV?S NAME APPEARS ONLY ONCE IN THE ANNOUNCEMENT
AND THE PRAVDA EDITORIAL EMPHASIZES COLLECTIVE LEADLRSHIP MORE THAN EVEH BEFORE.

4. THE PRAYDA EDITORIAL BARKS A KEW IGVERSAL IN TIE GENERAL LINE-—AWAY
FROM RIGHTISM AND TOWARD LEFTIST EX RELISH, OR PERHAPS KORE ACCURATELY AWAY FROM
MODERATION AND TOWARD; - FASCIST FATREMISH. THE SHIFT 1 AN EXTREMIST COURSE
IS BASICALLY IN TWO CUESUIONS: :

A. THE NATIONALITIES QUESTION
Be AGRICULTURAL COLLES T1VIZA TION

ITIS NOW CLEAR THAT BERTA WAS PRO-HATIONAL MINORITY AND ANTI -INTENSI FICATION
OF COLLECTIVIZATION. THE GROUP WHICH HAS RENOVED HIM IS FRO-GREAT BUSSLAN AND
PRO-COLLECTIVISATION. IT IS RETURNING TO THE STALINIST LINE. WILL THE DOCTORS?
PLOT BE REVIVED? ‘HE SLANSKY TRIAL? SLANSEY-TYH: TRIALS IN THE SATELLITES?

5» NOT ONLY BERTA HIESELF HAS FALLEN BUT THE SHOLE APPARATUS OF THE SECRET
POLICE IS DENOUNCED, WILL LOSE MUCH FACE AND IMPORTANCE AND WILL BE, SUBJECTED
TO A TREMENDOUS PURGE, WHICH MUST S KE THE WHOLE GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE TO ITS
FOUNDATIONS. . uae _ .

"SECRET

‘
i
i



--- Page 262 ---
14-0000

| CAPITAL INVESTMENT AT THE EXER
LIES. ot

II. GUIDANCE:

EREMLIN 1S WEAKS
AND PARALYZED. AND OF WURSE THE rus

DARDS Gl THE

CAUTION: - AS DEPORE, WE

SATELLITE COUNTIES BUT WE Dy KOT ACCEPT AML a
TW END OP TUE FIRST ACT OF 4 RUE ‘

FILST ACT; THRRE ARS MAW

DESTROYED BENTA IS JUST AS
MULOTUY COALITION FOr!
TO STALIN'S TACUCE

BERTA
HERE
TRUISKY AND THE LEVTLS 1S
ELUMINATED THE RIGHTISTS

VCLYE ELIMINATLON OF Tins

A. 10 THE PROVLE:
AS THE BOLSHEVI

WEAKER ANU THE’

UUNIST HIG SHOTS WILL BE

URANICAL AS BUYORE. THIS COULD NOT COMe
AND WOUKERS OF RASTER EUOER: A?TER EAS
DEMONGTA TIONS, THEY NOT KHOA THEIR OF S
ARE MARSHALLING THELR FORCES, THEIR TYRANTS! Sit
THE EVENTUAL DOOM OF COMMUNISH WAS HEVER MOH,

CERTALULY TRY, AS IME KR.

UNITE." BUT YOU KNOY, 4S THEY ENUM, THAT THE
REGIS, CONFUSED AND RENT WITH THTERMAL ULSSENSICH, Wi
TO UNDERTAKE ANY ONE CLEAR AND DECISIVE POLICE. HOPE TES
PROFLE THAT THES SUIT To RX CEMISM DAY MEM: (LH HUA
THE MREMLIN WILL ORDER LTS PUPFETS TU TAKE A KODE Bx
(BUT HERE ALSO WE MUST WAIT AND SEH

THE TIME, IN THES PERIOD

DEVOUR EACH OTHER ETER HOKE
LOOK. ON WL 7H PLEASURE AND A:
Cis BAS ER
NED BY DISS.

7:

MATION

CRM; HOG
i PLACE. OY
TLL GUATINUS TO BE TALE OF LY:

SPECULATE ON FUTUZS DEVE,

Y HO;

&

Tdi DEAW GP LEH,

[esi # COALITLON Nod
CFROZABLY THE NEXT ACT LN TES

REST O? ‘THE COALITION SY THE =

TOO (KS

-ED WITH SAl

Ait IS TRYING, TO

CUNFUSION NOW HET GL
OF CONFUSION, FOR THE MGPLE TS

> INTEHNATIONAL SCINE—=
CONCESSIONS“ (E. Gey

LiTEGAL SCENE IW.

SLES THE LIVING STAMS

ORKERS BUT IN.AGTUALI TE THE COULER WILL ez TAARD INCREASED
% OF CONSUHEIt AG S——F3.2 TICULARLY IN ‘As. SATEL-

ik Ti MUALIN AND THB
x THHRY. THIS IS

SSION, BUT ONLY THE

THE COALITION WHICH

UCKL CATPLLE TE COM
i SKINS TO BE AS

FOR THE TRASANTS _
ABD CZECHOSLOVAK

2 Fi HAER. AS THEY
¥ CONTROL 15 CRACKING,
ut THE REGIMES WILL

 “YONOLITHIC |
AND WAT THE
“UAABLY NOT BE ABLE
OULD WARN THE
TICUIAR) THAT °
2 THAN BEFORE
WHERE). NOW IS
THE GAINS THEY

HAVE ALREADY MADE AND PRESS ON FOR MORE. In AVERY REAL Sue THE PEOPLE RE
HORE THAY EVERY aCTURS ON THE STAGE RATHER THAN SHICSTATE

LED BY YOUR NEw LEADERS,
LECTIVE FARMS AND IN THE
THE REGIUE TO WAKE ACTUAL

‘THE AUDIENCE.

YOU THE PROFLE MUST COUTOUE 1052 ZPORIS IN THE COL-
TRADE UNIONS, IN THE viAYS {CU CY 50 WELL, TO FORCE

CONCESSIONS ‘TO YoU.



--- Page 263 ---
14-0000

~ SLAREP * -
SS TY INFORMA TON ‘

2, TO TS COBUNISTS:

S POLNT=<THIS IS AN EVENT OF DuMEHG ¢ SIGNIFICANCE.
MATICALLY TAN AT ANY TMS SEIMCZ THE THIRTIES,
AWE. THOSE OF YOUR LIKE ZAPOTOCKY ®HO TRIED TO
ON THE NATIONALIST ISSUE; THOSE U? YUU LIKE NAGY,
YUGOLS OF THE RIGHTLST COURSE—YOU AKE SUITABLE

VAND THOSE CUR{UNIST LUADERS WHO FAYE NUT BECOMS
CLL NOW UNDOUBTEDLY TRY TO BELO EX TEMISTS
NOW MANY OF THEIK COMRADES THEY LU37 DRAG DOWN
PUNT OF TRYLNG'TO BECOME AN PA TUL ST AGAIN?
CTATOR (RFAUBER WE CANNOT BE SUE SHO HE WILL
‘ LU NOT RY TO ELT RATE BERIAIS OrrENTS. AS .

» GEECHCSLOVAX CULDANCE NUMBER TEN) You HAVE ONLY TAU CHOICES,

“YOU CAN AID THE FECPLE AND SABOTAGE THE REGIME, THUS CRUSSING THE °GOLDEN BRIDGE®
TO SAFETY, O8 -» YOU CAN FLEES, THERE IS NO OTHER cHorcs.

"7 THR ERSVLIN IS RIGHT IN ¢
IT PROVES ONCE 4. i, AND AX

T CAN EVE
SATISEAVA SPE
GERO AND BATA BRO BECAME TE
CPFEFONGS FOR TSE NEW S

SIST CEVA ITO
“AS PAST AS POSSIBLE
IN A NEW Puscs

Go TO TES shRer POLI¢S:
YOUR TURN EAS NOW COME. IF ALL THE PFOPLE THAT BERTA PROMOT2D AND ALL THE
I SR ARE TO PURCED, AS IS NOW ANNOULCED, WHAT
HAPPEN 7) POOR MARIONETPSS IN THE SATELLITES? YOU HAVE
3 NOS. TO SURVIVE TEAN THE CRGINARY CORUAIS 7, AGAIN, YGU CAN MAKE
LOUK VEACE WITS THS PEOPLE OR YOU CAN FLEE, OTHERWISE, YOUR DUGM Is CERTAIN.

“NOTES

AS YOU WELL SES FRCM THE ABOVE, OUR IRYSENT LINE (INE INCREASING STRENGTH OF THE
PEOPLE, THE INOR \G WEANNESS OF TES REGIME) REMAINS INTACT, CZECHCGLOVAK -
GUIDANCE, NUMBER © ALNOSY COMPLETELY Into THE NEW CIRCUMSTANCES AND BUST NOW
BE IMPLEMENTED. CHETH APPROPRIATE CHANGES FOR HUNGARY AND POLAND) WITH KENEWED



--- Page 264 ---
1400000

',

uy, a SECRET
: — _ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Officor dosignations-should bo-used in the "TO" column: Under each comment a lino should be drawn acrosa shoot
“and oact'commont numbered ta correspond-with the number in the "TO" column, Cach officar should initial (check mark insulficiont)
[) before furthor routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be raturned to Registry. . :

FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950 10.


--- Page 265 ---
14-50800+

se . em /
. De rege > eee
SEE] . . AA Ih
Security Information .
aa ~ . ” .
: LS duly 195.
DIRECTOR CanYAAL ex cetaa:
: BPH = Balloon Operation .
Attached herewith is the story of the balloon operation
; , and an esrly report of what happened. , :
Cand leat .
aX 9 OR.
a . Cnlef
. international izations Division
Attachment: a/s
t



--- Page 266 ---
14-0900

PPARGOED UNTIL 11930 on at? = JULY Uy 1953

™~ “spent
' Security Informatien

POLLOWING RELEASED rocatae ‘Tonays RELEASE FRC RASS Fs eR EUROFEY" 7

FEC, JULY Ub, 1953—— THOUSANDS OF IMGH ALTITEZE zézzoony CARRYING.
FESSAGIS OF, HOFE TO THE CZECHOSLOVAK, PEOPLE WERE ¥20.2457 ON THR CZECR BORDER

LACT maou. ME CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM. =~ Lo fo AT Barte ee.
CARPIED BY STRONG WINDS AT ALTITUDES UP TO 30,070 FT, THe BALL. “WERE.
nm .

EXPECTED TO REACH AS FAR AS Te TNDUSTRIAL CENTEA oF SCTPAIA OW THE RLISH
. BORG, WITH POLSEN, PRAG UE, Most’ AND SOKOLOV AS SPETzsL TAPSETS.

THE "BALLOON BARRAGE" e~ THE SECOND AIMED AT CORTACLOVALIA BY THS SSUSADE

| Fa FREDO e» WILL CONTINUE FOR SEVERAL DAYS, A4.T°TEL OF MORE TRAN U2 22,000,000

MESSAGES, oR ONE FOR EVERY PRESON I! THE COUNTHL, silt BE EENT,

CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM Launcuen A SDATLAR BARRAGE AT Ps Zi HIOSLOVAKIA a avcusT
23, 1951, AND ANOTHER AT POLAND ON AUOUST 28, 1951. WHETER, THE PRESIST
OPLPATION XS POUR TIMES AS LARGE aNo PELTEVED TO Ez = EXGGZST EVER aT COMPTED,
MESSAGES CARRIED BY ae PAL-Loows RELEASED LAST WIZ? 210 TODAY WERE CF

TEPLE TYPES: AREPRODUCTION OP A NEW ONE--CROWM NCTE, ZEL2TNG A PLEA SO OFPOSE
THE SOAUNIST REGINE; A PAMPSLET EXPLAINING TE REC i HORSTRATIONS at
FAST GERMANY AND THE FALL OF SOVIET POLICY CHIEF LATE BEQIAg AND AS ALUMINUM
SUIS STAMPED WITH THE "FREEDOM BELL" AND THE SLOGAN "322 CZECHS AYD SLOVAES FOR
FEEEOON—-ALL THE FREE WORLD FOR THE CZECHS AND SLO7s£5.8

THE BALLOONS USED IN TIE OPERATION CALLED "WINES iA Yee" ATE OF PSO
TYPES, A RUBSER SPHERE WHICH EXPLODES AT HIGH ALTITUZES, CLITERING IPS
PEGSASES OVER A WIDE AREA, AND A PLASTIC BALLOON WHIce DEScuDS OW TIS Takcst,
aoTd TYPES ARE FILLED WIT! HYDROOEN. ,

THE PULL TEXT OF TE HESSAGE PRITED ON THE OME Corea WITb POLLO

OS ONE SIDE _

GCECHOSLOVAKS, KNOW THISy THE REGIME 1S WEAKER THAN 704 RAYE DARED Ba)
T2IHE3 POWER LIES WITI THE PEOPLE AND TIE PEOPLE STAYS CPPOSED. “WITH mar


--- Page 267 ---
14-0000

ON THE OTRER STZ |

as SECRET
» Security Information

A e2e

AND COURAGE, ORGAIIZE: YOUR STRENGTH: DOWN WITH THE COLLECTIVE: INSIST OW

WORKERS! RIGHTS? ‘TODAY, DEMAND CONCESSIONS; TUHCRROW < FREEDOM!

2

HEN CALL THES “te HUNGER CROWN + GIFT OF TIE SOVIET UNICN, If xs THE

” SYMEOL OF REGIPS DE! EPATION, OF PIVE-YRAR FAILURE: IT IS A GiALLENOE TO

FIGHT, TO MEST w2Lrerss METH SVRENOTH, TO RUSIST AS YOU KNOW PEST. THE
OTWER CAPTIVE PEGPLES Ine ANTTING AMD WILL JOIN. “ou IN YOUR StnUGOLE; _ THE
FREE WORLD IS WET ZOU" ALL FOWER TO THE PEOPLE’
TUE PULL TEXT OF THE FAMEALET ApouT EVSNTS IN EAST GERMANY: C2ECKS AND SLOVAKS!
HEAR TE MESSAGE WICH CONES TO YOU TODAY FROM THE FRSE WORLDs
THE SOVIET UNION % GurmT:a WEAVER! ‘TAS PEOPLES OF THe CAPTIVE COUNTRIES ARE
GETTING STRONGER® THE SOVIET UNTON IS GETTING WEAKER. THE STRUGGLE POR-STALIN'S |
HERITAGE SHAKES THE ENTUE sovine EMPIRE AND FRAR MAS CREPT INTO THE KREMLIN, «
WhO WILL FALL WIT! 2ERTA AND WHO WILL FALL AFTER BERIAT How HAY MILLIONS WILL
FALL VIGTINS TO Tz MEY PURGE WHICH IS NOY GOING TO BOOIN | THE BIGGEST PURGE
WHICH THS SOVIET GNION 72.5 EVAR know? ; ;

HOW MANY VICTINZ VILL FALL IN THE SOVIET UNION AND HOY MANY MI ‘THE OccUPTED
COUNTRIES? WRO WILL FALL WITA BERIA IN PRAGUE AND WHO WILL TE DRAGGED DOWN EY
HIS PALL IN DRATES. Sv? WHO WILL BE THS NEY SLANSKY AND WhO THE NEW CLEMENTIS?
AND WIEN THE PURGE S?2mars am BROADENS, DOWN FROH THE POLTVEUREAU TO THE LANDS
AND DISTRICTS, TO TE OFTICES AND THE FACTORIES - HOW HANY FUNCTIONARIES WILL
SAFELY SURVIVE? : ; ;

ONLY THOSE WILL S-EYIVE wo WILL DSTACH THEMSELVES FRO THE SIKKINO COMIUNTST
BOAT IN TIE. ONLY TEOSE WHO JOIN me FOOFLE AND NELP IN ITS STRUGGLE: AGAINST

THE OPPRESSORS,


--- Page 268 ---
14-0000

SECRET
Security Information
~3- *

LAT ANY RATE, THY SOVIETS ASE IN A BLIND ALLEY. IF TE YOCOd BOOT WILL

WEIGHT EVN TEAVIVA OW THE NACKS OF THE OPPRESSED PSCPLE AND IP MOSCOW'S DEMANDS
"UPON THE: FRIGITENZD PuPtet COVERS oF THE CAPTIVE COUNTRIAS WILL BECONS HORE

FgoS1N0, THE RESISTANCE OF TH: PEOPLE WILL ONLY GROW: FOR TZ PEOPLE WELL NOT
RETURN TTPO SUMOSIICN. IF THE COMMUNIST RUGINES, IN ORDER 70 APPEASE. TRS
WRATN OF THE PEOPLZ, WILL TRY. TO BRIRE TUEIR SUNJECTS BY re@asIna CONCESSIONS
43 WB HAVE SEEN Ii HJNGARY AND IN EASTERN OFRMANY, THEY ‘WILL FO? GET ANDWASRS:
POR THE PEOPLE WILL NOT BE DECEIVED. AMMNONE BY “PHONY conceszrons,

_ THE PEOPLE ARH GROWING STSONOER, THE FIRST FLAMES OF REVOLT PLARED OUT IN
C22CHOSLOVAKIA AED TH ZASTERN GERMAWY,. FROM PILSEN, PROM YORAYSKA OSTRAVA,
FROM BERLIN, DRESUZI AND MAGREBURO THE KCHO OF THIS REVOLT PEARED THROUONGUT
‘THE WORLD AND DEEYLY SHOCK THE ENTIRE SOVIET REALM: THE PEOPLZ SHOWED. TRETR

STRENGTH.

THE COMMUNIST 22GIKES RECOCNIZED TIE MENACE AND BECAME APPLID, THEY STARTED
APOLCGIZING, THET STARTED SKLF-CITTTCISTNO, THEY STARTED GIVING PROMISES, IN
OZRMANY THE ANTI eLABOR DOCTRES HAD TO BE REVOKED, IN CZECHOGLOVAKIA THS
FRIGHTENED GOVERMENT WAS FORCED TO DESIST FROM APFLYINO THE PENAL LAWS cone
CERNTHG ASSENTEEIOM. IK MOSCOW, UNDER THE JUFLUENCE OF THE N¥do OF THE PrOTLES
REVOLT IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA AND GERIANY, THE INTERNAL STRUGGLE £4 LONE SHARFER,
BERIA AND HIS ALL-POWERFUL ROLICE PELL AS VICTIMS, YOUR REVOLT HELPED TO
ALTER THE CCURSS OF HISTORY: aH FORCES MADE THEIR ‘APPEARANZE OH THE BATTLS<
PIELD, THE PCOPLE WOM ITS FIRST MAJOR VICTORY m ITS FIGHT wim THE REGIS.

CZECHS AND SLCVAK3: THE HORE OUR opPriess: RS ARS SHAKEN .2Y UNCERTATITY ,

THE GREATER IS THE CERTATNTY OF YOUR VICTORY. THE REQIME IS AFPAID OF YOU,
IT KNOWS THAT POWER 13 FUNDAMENTALLY ON YOUR SIDE, THIS IS The THE WEN

PEOPLAS UNITY, A CORON AGREENT AUD A UNITED PURPOSE ARE ALE TO : TN COR-


--- Page 269 ---
14-0000

pecs

SECRET ;
Security Information
- b -

~ CESSTONS., YOUR SATTLEFINLD 1s. mn THE ACTORTES AND nr TIE FIELDS. ON THIS

SATTLESIED OF LABOR you Have: THE ADVANTAGE oF NUMB: RS. oN THIS MATTED
You CAIOT te VANQUISHED . YOU WILL NOT BE CONTENT WITH PRoUTsES, You WEL,”

ASX FOR DEEDS. TOU VILL NOT BE CONPENT \ITH BRIBES, You WILL ASK MORE ax

MORE FROU THE EXFLOITERS. WE DO) HoT PRESTHE, To Ove Tou ORDERS hott TO. ove
YOU ADVICES, YoU AND YOUR NEW OLE ADERS WHO-ARE- BEING BORN IN-THE STRUGOLE KNOW
BEST: NOW AND WHERE (‘TO STRIKE, BUT WE vANT YOU TO Kiw THAT YOU AQ NOT ALONEs

. AMONG THE MASSES OF PEOPLE BEHIW THE Ino CURTAIN THE FIRE OF REVOLT 18

SMOULDERING &'D Ts SPARKS. ARE FLYING Front COUNTRY TO COUNTRY. EVEREINTERE IN
THE FREE WORLD. your FRIENDS IRE vam YOU. THEIR HELP WILL CRO AS YOUR

’ DETERMINATION GROWS.



--- Page 270 ---
14-0000

SECRET : \
Security ‘Infornation

The following was received from Conder, Hunteh

Have report early afternoon that Czech fighter plans attenpting
shoot dowm balloons. In only instance so far! , Feported, planes shot down | og

>

: tao out of tan that were in air at moment. Also have report that attanpta .

?
ay
ry

being made shoot balloons. dow from (roune, but no gucceas. This stiooting “ es

“Occurred at U0 local time, which ds only report ‘so fer. Wilt inform you
of Pay developments.

aa


--- Page 271 ---
14-0000

. Seermt
Security Information
. . ;

The fcllowing received fron Condon, Munich

Following is full story as of 1700 leeal tine on shooting. At
1L00 two possibly threo jet aircraft, presumably MIG, which kept well
within Czech territory, managed after considerable moving te shoot
down two repeat two balloons. Aircraft departed area and have not re-
turned since. Small arcs fire during most of afternoon accounted for
total of three repeat three balloons. Snall ame Cire effective only
during periods. when weather, conditions did not permit rapid rise of -_
balloons crossing border at height within range of submazine guns amd
carbines. , ; ,

: ts.
+ Walker's report - Temper of residence in launching area cala and
umyorried.

° End of Hessaga



--- Page 272 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDIM FOR: Chief, 10
FROM EB/Czechoslovakia
SUBJECT: Bohumil HOUSER’ . oa!

1. FPeference ia mde to a letter dated 25 June 1953 and addressed
to you from Mr. Leo M. Chorne, Exacutive Director of the Research Inati~-
tute of America, forvarding certain proposals sant to the latter by Mre.

“Bohumt]- HOUSER of the International Rescue Committee, Camp Valkay Nusrne
berg, Germany, This. memorandum will suzmirizo.for you our knowledge of
Sudject, ond our present interest in his activities, . : -

2. Subject was born 1 March 1922 in Bratislava, Cxochoslovakia.

He reportedly fouzht.in the underground in World War IT and vas taken
prisoner. From the end of tho war until December 1945 ho wag employed
as interpreter to the U.S. miiitary unit in Falknov,. Ceachoslovakin, and

in 1949 he vas head of the porsonnel department of the Brom Coal Mining
Company in Falkmove ~~ : .

: . 38° According to a report from the British Army of the Rhine, he was
recruited by the Gzechoslovak Intelligence Service in 1946 in Cheb, Czecho=
Blovakia, and is an ardent Cormunist, ‘Aceording to the CIC, ho travelled
to Belgium shortly aftar the var, and then returned to Gerzany (alo). °-

‘4e We do not know exactly when Subject left Czechoslovakia. Ho.
eeors to have enigrated to Australia in 1949 or 1950, and to have returned |
to Germany some tims prior to Septamber 1951, when he became assoclated
with the American Fimd for Czech Refugees ant with the International Rescue
Camittee. According to one informant, Subject vas doported from Australia
for Commmiat Party activities. : ee

| :5e On 14 April 1953 Subject sent Mr. Cherne an operational proposal °. ;
of such interest that, in. spite of the unfavorable information on Subject, ¢ .
we felt obliged to investigate it- further. Upon our instructions; an agent
of the Munich Operations Base contacted Subject on or about 25 June, using
air force cover, and obtained the identity of Subject's lead. This person
turned’ out to te an individuel who has been suspected since 1949 of being _..
an agent of the Czech Intelligence Service, and vhe has very recently :
been crossing lines with ane or two operations being run by Berlin Opera-
tions Base. Under the circumstances it appears very likely that Subject's:
lead amounts to nothing more than a provocation or fabrication. We are ©
still waiting for an appraisal a ere ) mondations from the field. +7

a | SLULLE .

Seeurity information = arouaRo a, PIENEY



--- Page 273 ---
14-0000

we SEOMET

. Security Information

: 7 duly 1963

i

:

HEMORANDUM FOR: DIRTCTOR, CENVAL INTEMLIGTCE ACHNGY |
i . . H
: SURJECTs Propvard Ualloon Operation |
i af
: Sheparuson

i : : Conant did net. eralion,
i : on the contre, le could
i Vrequest® acc . ig eed
4 upon our id

i

either cr both ¢

ep werd after these tulks.

enizatione Division

Shenardsen cond fur

(international org.



--- Page 274 ---
14-0000

oe

“religious programs,

_“Bete-4889
bo

pesere sin, 7 July 1953
7 | aa
Memorandum for the Kecord . ; . ~

Subject: © Coaveraation with Congressman Kersten

1, On 6 May Congressmen Kersten addressed a letter to the
State Department, enclosing a letter dated 6 May 1953, which he had |
received (rom Mr, Creighton Scott, a former employee of Radio Free -
Europe at Munich, Germany, Thia letter was highly critical of cer-
tain personnel in RF’, particularly as regards allegations of pra-com-
munist attitudes. On 6 July I discussed these criticisms with Congress.
man Kersten in detail, conveying to him orally ‘the materiul contained —
in the memorandum of 17 June 1953 [rom the Director of Security; Subject:
Inquiry by Congressman Keraten; which the Director ol Security had noted
should be utilized :n this meeting with Congresainan Kersten, :

, 2. The, Congreseman noted the difficulty in evaluating the type of
Criticisms which Mr, Scott had made but appeared ‘willing to accépt our
explanation. go so

3. Congressman \avaten then. turned to certain eriticisins which
he had heard expressed regarding RFE from several Sources, including
Scott, One such criticism is that RFF is ne doing the best :t should on
He feels that this aspect of the bruadcasis’ could

probably be considerably strengthened, Particularly among Catholic .

elements, .

4. Mr. Kersien cited the opinion of Count Tarnowski (sp. 7), -a well
known Pole, who told the Congressman that any fourteen year old Soviet
citizen would be s> well briefed on Soviet philosophy us to tara up their
noses at the RFE material. The Count (and Sersten hppears t> agree)
feels that the Soviet population has more sophisticated philosophical
material thrown at them by their own Government, and that it should be an.
important function of RFE to counter with an attempt to destray the Soviet
philosophical material and shake the Soviet faith in their theoreticians, :

5. Congressman Kersten realized that it is difficult to capture a
wide audience with philosophical argunents, but he.fee!s that if these
arguments reached a segment of important leaders behind the Iron Curtain,
it would help to destroy and counter the philosophica! teachings of Marx,
Lenin, etal. The Cungreasmen feels that many of our brdadcasts deal
«with econamic matters, and, while these are important, RFE should go.



--- Page 275 ---
14-0000

captive population are not intereated in rightcat movements, it is

deeper and hit harder on religion and philosophy.

6. While Congresoman Kersten is aware that many of the

hls opinion that RFE cannot beat communism with socialism. In
particular, he felt (and Scott bore this out in their conversation)
that we were making ton much use of Czech socialiats, and we were
using sociallets from the Bence Gsvernment which had sought to _
compromise with the communists. While be recognizes the popa-
larity of Benes and Masary% in Czechia, he feels they are not ef-
fective in Slovakia, where there is a heavy Catholic pupulation,

7, Congressman Fersten plans to gy to Eurspe, probably
in September. While he did not say bv, | belicve he would welcome
an invitation tu visit RFE, Munich, Furthermore, as the author of
the Kersten Amendment end of several resolutions on the enslaved
peoples; at least one of which rnay receive Congressional approval
at this session, consideration might be given aa ty whether it would
be advisable to request the ‘Congressmen to utilize RFE facilities
lo broadcast while he Is abrzad, :

Walter i, Pforgheimer
Legislative Counsel

OGC/WLP:Jps : ;

oe, Pot fe oof
ae 5 ae a a
i DL. yl 72 a fo. CR 7)
: : fu ?. a ee
reo” PT oR o $e

Vag ra TO

oa / (LF

~ .



--- Page 276 ---
14-0000

3 duly 1953

MEMORANDUH FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTeLLIcesce
SUBJECT: - D'Arcy Brophy and Louis oviss* Trip to Europe

2. Mr, Brophy and Mr. Novins tell ms tizt you have agreed
to pay their expenses for their trio to Eursze. I told them that
since thoy were traveling on our business tiay chould draw tha.
money from Heritage Foundation funda wiich have been mado available.

2. I think this is the tidtest way of sarcling the transaction,
Novina gave me some reprcsontations that 1% would be better to
channel funds for the trip throush one of riz eliente, Paramount
Pictures, Thio seems to me comlinasted and ixeecure, and I recomend
that if this subject is raised with you direesiy, you again sugsest
use of Heritage funds.

co BRADEM

TROMAS ¥. BRADEN
Caist .
International Grga-izetions Mvision

clos tw3/eh

Orig - Addressee
lce - 19/ar I

lec - ClO
lee - 3

Paty


--- Page 277 ---
14-0000

1 July 1953

YEYORASDUM FoR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTI.LIGZSCL .
SUBSECY: Conmonta on Arthur Page's Letter of 29 June ‘\953

1, I think a budget preoentation before a mixed audience of PFC
nevioera and.directors or members of the Executive Committee of NCYZ
plus enpoosedly manbers of the HCr7 staff wmld be extrenoly confusing,
wbether it were hold hore or in New York, ot all tho maxbers of the
Pr have detailed knowledge of NCFE onerationg and most.of the merbers
of the Zxecutivo Comittee do not have such mmvwledge. I see a reeting
such as Artaur Page sugneats going about as follows:

a. I0 Divieton presenta tha budget with cuta wiich we plan
to recommend.

b. Membera of the Executive Committee of NCIE oppose the
cote. -_ . .

©. PRC is placed in a position of tarning dom its om
ateff before the assembled outsiders vith whow the staff is

working.
2. 1 ehould sugvest inatoad that we follow the following proce-
dura: :

a. IO Division presents the budget with the suggested cuts
dn sane, .

De PRC considers these cuts carefully.

©, PRC calle in export monbors of the staff of NCFE, Lee.
Spencer Phenix, Bob Lang, Barnte Yarrow ate., if it desirea to

4d 80, and questions them on any matter within their respective
respons.bilities and da particular about the suszested | cuts, .

d. The exports leave the Toon. +
@. PRC rakes up ite sind vhether to aceept tho cut proposed

or to makn bigzer cuts, or to add to the bucget, as it r may desire : a
to do. . ! .



--- Page 278 ---
14-0000

~ ae la.

3. It would be useful to brief the Exocutive Comittee on
the reasons why any changes in the budget aro made aftor they are -
mado, and it might be well to have a lunchoon with the Executhve
Committee ‘down here or.in New York after the action has been taxen

and havo the Director oxplain the Teanono ay PRo-dtd -th}q or thats
: fe Agen. me

L, I suggeot that you write arthur Pace saying that you think
& moeting such ao Phenix sugiests would confiso our procedures but
that you do think a Pater-rorting with the Excoutive Comittee to
explain the actions ‘taken and have a vecting of minds for tha work
ahead after tho budget has been passed would be useful, :

THOMAS W, BRADEN
. > Chief .
International Organizations Divisten :



--- Page 279 ---
14-0000

Jun 30 383

MEMORANDUN FOR? CHIER, TPERMATIONAL GRQANTEATIONS DIVISTON
8uaJZcT: Fands for Batloon Cperaticn

This will authorise you to inform officials of Trtaaic
that tho restrictions imposed by the Project Rovicw Corrd ttee,
at ite meating on 29 May 1953 of £3,000,000 for oporating expenses
of TPTONIC for the first quarter of fiseal year 1954, may de
exceeded by the funda neossssary to prepare and/or execute a.
balloon operation, ‘ .

A) Alo Mubles
ALIEN W. DULLES
Birestor
‘I0/BrI:WPD/eh
(30 June 1953)

Orig & 1 - Addressee
1 co - Finance _
lec = Budget
lee = 10/aD
leo - CIO

1 co oR
1 ce - DCT



--- Page 280 ---
14-0000

“after his conversaticns with the
“to Radesou's death has not been: RoBi ble. Gherman ald not refuse to

MUN 89 KE

ke

PENORANDU FOR«  C/PP

SUBIRCTs Recent Develorents in the Runant an Pefures
Situation

1. In a verbal report te the Rwasrien NetLonal Comalttee |
his return froma trip to Kurona to secure former Kine Michael's:
approval of a proposed refugee, comittec, tr. Visolanu stnted that
thé Xing did net reject the crenssal ervanced fuer the reorariantion
and enlargesont cf the ~resert Comilttes, althouph he indtestad no
interest in havieg the plan st into effect immediately. Th'a infor=
mation on the attituca of ‘the King 1s contrary to that previovaly
renortod by a member of the Rweantan National Comittee, who atated
‘thet the King had finally res Jected the rroresal uien tho recoasenctation
of tis ADC, botro-l.qsare :

2. In his last conversation. with Hre Vigolenu, the Xing requested
that the nesiers of ‘the sresont Risartan Nationa). Consittce stould send
hin, either Jointly er indivi suallys their opinions in eri ting ndout
tho following nointar

a. ON Wiat groun:s coes tro Ruaarian Iaticnal Cond ttee
consiver that it cannot curtinue in ita rresent for?

be that are the eritorta fer ehossing tha weavers of the
new committee and who Gre tre peruens wie should belong to it? .

zations
nin in

Ce who are the Rusa tan exiles and
in exile wuleh ¢ ba eons:
the matter of foring 2 nex

3. The Rumanian Uetionm] Comittee xembers vlan te send a Joint
resol:tion to the hinc requestinc that he entrust Yisefana with the ~
fornation of a new camittee to. we seq of menbers wiose nmes
were audnitted to the Sing. Uhould jichael refuse this request, the

Camittee intends to tencer ita resi nation.

ecinversationa in Paria with

Ake Visot aru rerarted that tic: :
Cafencu, Gherna: ,. Yertain avd intenissa, to vhom he ~rocosed ne-bership
in the new comtttee. At that tine, Wich sas before the death ef .
General "edescu, Cafenc refused beer se cf the aeclusion.of the Gensral,
in the new or anization. .bince Vigoian: was unable to return. to aris
if» 2 Meeting with Uafencu subsequent



--- Page 281 ---
14-0000

become a member of the new committee, but wished to be accepted aa -

@ representative of the Socialist Farty. Thio woulti be difficult -
because of Cheraar's affiliati.n with the lefteiin;: faction which
seceded from Fetrescu's Forty in 196, subsequently joining with the
Communist Party. Antcniade and Veriamin have arreed to become members

of the new comalttee.

Se In a letter to the Fund on 26 May 1953, Gafeneu stated that
an attempt shoul: be made to rive support to a new conmitteo through a
large national council in order to establish unity of the leaders and
of the Ruszanian colony abtoad. [ae said that on the day of General
Radescu's deatt, he had received a letter fron the General asking hiss
to take over “his task” to assure the unity of the Rumatians abroad.
Gafencu rlso wrote that friends in Faris and abroad had asked him to
take over the leaderatiip of » small "ad noc" committee with the: support
of all the Associations of Free Runanians, which he stated he will do
if tho New York group assures him of their support. . After that, he
indleated ne vould see if there would be a Possibility of an understanding |

tith the Vieoianu group, . \

6. Frinea Hicholas reports that ne has been approached by Gafencu
with a request that he Join forces sith Cafencu to form a new Rumanian
refusea comalttee under Gafercu's leadership and with headquarters in
France. A comnittee embracing such individuals as Nicholas and General.
Ion Gheorphie, wiem Gefencu also rerortedly approached, would not:be
acceptable to segnents of the Rumanian refupee colony. because Nicholas
is not on rood teras with the sing and hag had Iron Guard’ associations,
a8 does Cheorgt:e. . .

7s It would appear that thera is Little reascn to believe that
the Ruuanian refuees will set asiue their factional disferences and
personal ambitions to form a representative eummittce at this tines

i
-

CIRISTICN M. FREER
Acting Chief, SE



--- Page 282 ---
~

Nae

i a SECRET.

7 SECURITY JHFORMATION

28 June 1953

IMEMORANDUM FOR: CATES, LITERMATICUAL GiOAKL ZATIONS DEYISTON

SUBJECT: . WE Coveraye of Stockholm L6PTY Congress

1. At our request BFE ts golnge te pive ful. coverare .
to the ICFIU Heetine in. Stockholm. Lt has arra have a '
the meeting coverad by three deske, ‘The Wungarlann are 7 .
using; a Stockholn stringer, wiile che Poles and Czechs are
“each sending editorse in additlon, there will be ral
coveraze to the central newsroom by EFE'G informition eurrns-
pondent, Dreifuss. from the labor leaders of tha
t to the Czcch people, in line

with our recent guidance.

delivcred Bp
ernoon prior

2. “A copy of the UN Slave Labor Hepori, vs
tie box€ of Col. Xullany'e friund yenterday ‘af
to departure.

WILLIAY PF. DURKEE
thief, tU/tranch 2

SECRET

w


--- Page 283 ---
14-0000

NSLASSIFIED RESTRICT? CONFIDENTIAL

SECRET
(SENDER Wie cURcLE CLAM FICATION TOP AND DoTTom) . ‘

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

C77 aprrovat - 74 INFORMATION (O77) stanarure
C1 acrion C= oveecr reety CoV eetorw
(7) comment (7) prerararion OF REPLY [7
(== concurrence Cc RECOMMENDATION Cer]

Remarka 7
Alicas

\;

Please insure that Mr. Dulles Sees
before the NCFE people come in, and that
don't get their hands on it.

TB

RESTRICTED ASSIFIED

CONFIDENTIAL



--- Page 284 ---
14-0000

ss : Security i

MATION [iite.rtwe Rayne |

23 June 1953

BERORANDUM FOR DIRECTOR CF CENTRAL INTELLIQENCE
. ENDJECT: Your Meeting with NCFE with afternoon.

” According to my informanta (I have not talked to artiur Paya),
the Executkve Committee of HOCK madu two decluions at its necting . 1
yesterday:

‘+ 1, That the performance of RFR in the recent difficulty wan .
like that of a divisional commander who ratuses to obey the corps oe
plan, ond . . . : :

2. That WE should immediately devise procedures so that future
guidances from CIA will. be put into eftect without the two-week delay
caused by Tang's rofusal. : :

3. AST undorstand it, however, it is a fact that the guidance
he not yot tully in effect and that the action part of the guidanes,
that is to say, paragraph |, of -the instructions of the Executive
Committee to Radio Free Europa (you have a copy on your deck), has
not yet been put into affect. [ ana guessing that you will get allot
of talk this evening about how most of this has been done before land
1s already standard operating, procedura etc. otc. etc, .

he If you want to tuke a firm line this evening, IT sugvest
that you stick to trying to find the answers to two questionss

a. Is the guidance initLated dy. you and passed upon by
the Executive Comrzittea fully in effect? : j

b. Have any steps been taken to make sure that in the
future yuidances will be put into elrect?

ToC ; ; _

MAS Wy BRADEN
: _ Chief _ .
International Organizations Division

TH



--- Page 285 ---
14-0000

match -

3 January 1953

TICHAL CRCAIT ZATIONS DIVISTOM

NERORANDUN POR. CHINE, INTE

SYBJECT 3 * Telophene Conversation with Jeano Neknight,
Departront ef State

eKnirht called to report that Mr. Merbert Plarce fron
UN Public Affairs Office is vary dleturted abort the conduct.
of "sone RPE man’ in Now: York, who ig approaching renhers of tha |
Us Nisajon to the United Notdons and a
tions, for exa ple, Uieir Were on the r

ecent Doctors? Trial.!.
2e Mee Meknticht Leake that. this practice shovld te ¢\scontinged
especially in view of the fect that. the rev menbcre of the US|}
ere not yet fully informed about, or syxpathetic, to FFU. He feels
that any questions concerning US policy on particuler issuea should
be cleared with Ur. Keotsman, tho vOA Policy Chief in Mew fork.

“3.2 think this matter, cught to be dlecuseed with Seb ‘tang.
Would you let ma knew whether you will ts:e it up with hiny or
wtethor you wish me to do go,

"ET

information

the: all -rorta of| Gies=

co
ten


--- Page 286 ---
14-0000 |

_

ATION
2 Fobruary 1953-

MAS MD Pun THe ReCUWwe

SUBJECT’ Meeting to Uiscuna Etate Departeont Froposals on huw to
: Couiter-Check itesa on UNUA Agenda,

“Se 1 attended a meating-on Nodnesday, 28 Jamary 1953, to|diecuss
paravra, 6 and 7 of the attached papor propared by tha Lepartrant of
Etaree 1t culle for the estaulioticont of "a Sonsiosion of Lrviopordent
merbera-to study the nature and extent of tio eacnpen problem, julth -
the view of detarmininy, the reasuns and Cirounptunces inpaliiny |theso
people to eacage®” and. Gugzeate th.t "this inquiry cuuld foilow the
pattern of the comiseion oa forced liber. Tho Coslesion would hear
refagees in ouch places ao He.tern Germany, Canova, ete., and its . :
eventual report to tho astozbly would, in fact, be a rayort on tiho entire
eommnalot system, the denial of basio human rigat, ete.” -

2. T © questions raised in the meeting contered arvind the poasioility
of Cl4's Antolligence activities belng sompromlued by tie inventivatLons
of this com:ission. 1 was docided that Fi, KEDUAP and the oporsting
yeoyls. were the ones competent to make’ the deoiaion.

3. Hr. Lazarus inforsed ne by tolephune on 30 January, that the
above-nentioned individuals had presented hin negative ensvers on the’
sudjsct proposal, Ther Gcnelusions are bolng forwarded to the DLP
aid subsequently to the Ge,artcent’of State. xr. Lazaros further
Stated that any recomendations by 10 wvuld be welcome. —

FLLEN STERN
LO/TCHiCs BS/nka LU/T. sIC

Distributions:
ge ~Addressee
2cce -10/Tue
lee -~C/lo
lee -A&1 a
slice - Hr. Braden — * - ~

lee = ur. Hand Lo MORE:
SECURITY INFORMATION



--- Page 287 ---
14200800

lee ~ I0/Seeurity officer

23 Avril 199)"

SURG N KORG SACCRUIY OF FICRR, CIA

SURSEST: Leland “tows

1. Purguant. to my conversation with Kr. Hamby, 1
have talxed with tho’ irector of PR and ne has acreed to
terainate subject's prusont job. oO

#. Eo intends to briny; subject to wey York und make:
hia his verzonal consultant in the New York offico, fle
aoounss we of hie full intentiona to carry out this plan
and fursher apsures we that he has mo intadtion af giving
audject sdudinisirative or operational aut writy of any kind,

3. Is thie arrangemont satisfactory to you?

THBAS Wy BRADEN
CuIFP :
Intornational Organisations Division

CIOrTS “eh

Orig & 3 - Addressee
lee = 10/Br I ..

lee ~ CIO
1 ce > RI



--- Page 288 ---
yeon000 0,

22 Aprtl 198

HERORANIUM Potts “LEPITY DIRECTOR (FLANS) ©

SUEJECTe =° ss Iuldus Fpateta

Ta response to our recvest fra the found, we are forwarding
herewith the genoral informition availatie concerning delius

Epstein.

(ghee: Fy

THOMAS ay!
: chef yo.
intermoticnal crgantzations Mivisfon

Attachnenter (5).

“Ltr, to Nelgen dta Lf
Personal biography by
kxeerpt fron Concresst

ttecard for 2/9/52
Rooklet by Lpetein .
Article by Arthur iiss “anc

Jo/Branch 13WPDs4jb
Cistribution: :
Accressee © orig & 1 vin CPP
I0/Tonie = 2ce .

CIO - lee

RI © lee



--- Page 289 ---
|

-
A

Calleg re de I'Europ e Libee

CHATE. AU DE Fou or us : STRASBCU Ps ROBERTSAU (Bas-Rhin)

: Bolte £ roorate 61. STRASBOURG & PB,
“SeUErmone pcr! JON: aed + INTENSANCE : 832.06”
_  Atmass. ru coon Mique: itun VER STRASDOURO

Ot  Gpee HT ITF

feces bee

pe fei Ca Dor, wo /
{ es ieee ; _+ | : yy :
tad & ede Tey fh
f a TIE fe G2 we, Whapee. Fe
yg
aa | Leni,
| G.

———_—f

| et



--- Page 290 ---
14-0000

Cory!

April 1, 1953
Noe 26 Dear Adolf, Fo eee

a

A day cr two before I sailed for burope in Jamary, 1953, I received! |
a-typed manuscript copy of tho "Progress Report on the College de 1'Zurope
_ Uibre", which has now appeared in mimcographed form under date of February
27,1953, over the signaturus of Royall Tyler and Richard Sears

I admit to considerable curiosity when this document appeared. In
the covering letter Royall Tyler morely stated, "It comes from Dick Sears".
I rather wondered why this report should be compiled when it was| known I was
coming to Europe presumably to examine into comiittions and it seemed to. me
immediately that this might.be a counter foil to what it was expected I
would find, In reply to a direct inquiry from "@, Sears now states it was

“prepared "to reinforce the German languago urt project by supplying informa.
i tion that was apparently lacking.

At the risk of indicating an overly suspicious temperament, which is
not charactoristic of mo, I fecl that this. report over-simplifies|a complex
i _ , Situation. It emedies a point of view that the operation at Strasbourg
‘ -fs proceeding smeothly and successfully, hich it is not. It assums that a
paper plan (for the National Seminars) is in full and healthy bloon, which is
not the case. I have stated so frequently (almest ad nauseam) that you must
live in this frustrating atmosphere for a while before you can understand what
conditions are. Royall Tyler and Seara have never had that experience ani
formed their opirions from what they have been tcld by Davis, Galy, Straka,
and Donzelot. The latter in turn was constantly fed information by Galy and
Straka, and altogether has spent only thrde or four days on the ground. He
has had numerous: talks in. Yaris with Galy and some.of: the tutors.

So, while the factual material in this report can not be questi onéd
— I mean the statistics and the historical portions — th interpretation of
_them dcos not reflect the disappointing results. This pertains to the work |
of the Comittee on Awards on the one hand and ths actual operationjat Robertsa
on the other, : - : -

When I asked Sears-hew widely this report hed been distributed he told !
me "to the Trustees of FEUZ, to tha members of the Association du College



--- Page 291 ---
14-0000

de 1*Burope Libre and to:Yeasre. Thomas Sradén, Joti”

cory

Dr. Berle Page 2 of Noe 26” ‘April 1, 1983

CG. Faughos, C. D. Jackson

“J. assume, thorefore, that the mombers af our
ua of this lettor, have. reoolved

and Whitney I. Shepardson"..
Executive Comittee, to whom I-am sending cop.

ite

The sentence (bottom of Page 9 and going over to top ofPaga 10),
"These were mon of advanced education, oxpert in their kiowledgo of jphodr own
countries but also, most of then, having studied in Frenc?: institutions ard so
capable of forming a bond for thy students betwoen their training at, homo and_
in exile.", is not an securate description of tho caliter of tho tutorde

‘On Page Ui, aecond lino, I would question defivdtely the phrase
fyoll organized administration”. Also on that page, sixth lino, tha) sentence,
"Special French courses wero being given to those who still showed woaknesas"y
is ‘misleading. Such courses wore announced, but the progren for teaching the
French language ie only now being ou
staff at Strasbourg University after a conferonce with then I called

purpose.

for this

On the same page again, fifth line fron the botton, the phrase "the
sevority of the action taken in tho autumn has had a salutary effoct|in |
imposing firmer discipline and ‘setting higher standards” eirply 19 not Soe
The manner in whictthe action was taken, and tho inaccirazy af sove of the
judgments, whichhad to te reversed, called forth proteats from staff jand stu-

dents alike and did as mich aa anything else to cause present low student morale.

On Page 16, the last sentence in tho first paragraph roads, "A fresh
start in life combined with exposure to Western thought ard practice will, wo
are encouraged to hope, produce a full return." Instead of what ths statement
implies, the students have witnessed a.cleavage between the curopean ‘staff and

“tho Americans, -- and the "exposure to Wostern thougltard practice" has been

anything but inspiring. or unifying.

The distribution of this document can bo and will be very misleading
by ite imlications that success has been achieved to an extent that warrants
our proceeding on our present path. That will be unfortunate. ‘ie Inve acquired
a fund.of valuable experience and we havo made mistakes. Tle net result igs tho
present situation, Fundamental ohangos mst be made, which arc bound|to be
unpleasant, tut they are essential, unless we are going tc continue a| mere.
charity operation and rdss the real. purpose of FEUE. |

Sincerely yours,

LT:ECK

tye Levering Tyson

Dr. Ae Ae Berle, dre
. ’ President

70 Pine Street
New York 5, Ne Ye

Wlined with tho help cf the French language -



--- Page 292 ---
14-0000

Orig.- Addressee (thru CPP)
-l co = 10/BrI :

6 April 1953 —
\
MENORANDUN FOR: DEPULY DIRECTOR (Plas) :
SUDJEST “Information reported by Bob Lang, EFS

Bob Lang has had reported to nin the following:

1. Epstein, an investigator for Senator McCarthy, hes” Just .
turned into tho Senator a 1oO-naze anti-RFE report.

2. Lang hag recelved this report from three fomour RFE
employcos; Tho Llrst two, FALAG) and TATER, Penarted to Lang. they
were visited by Epstein. They reported this interview to Lang

‘bocause Lang hay considerable derszatory information on then, They

do not-wleh to be identified with any such report. The third
informant ia ono PeQasTii, about whom Lang hac written you. NeGIASTER
resigned a job in RFE to com to work =~ presumably for us ~- which
collapsed, and has since been trying to get his AFR Joo back. ‘Rob
considers his report for that reason to ba quite raltadle, Deus’ TER
wrote a letter to the New York Times, which was pudlisned 8 March, in
which he referred to hlzsolf as a former omployes of RFE. Epstein
apparently read tho lotter and imediatoly came to see PegASTRR.
During their conversation, Epatein referred toa Lepage uncomlt-
montery report he had compiled on Erk.

3. ACK oayo that it has somo derogatory infar:ation on épstoin
and it will be formrded to us.

iv

THOMAS W, BRADSN
Chief
International organisatioas Division! .

10/BrI :WPD-TWB/eh -

lee - CIO
lee - RE

a FSP On ye ELON



--- Page 293 ---
14-0000

SECRET

[UNCLASSIFIED “) RESTRICTEN -* CONFIDENTIAL
Ms (SLROER, wniccicte Ces Noe inn eet ew)

vo [b-3- “66
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

[HITIALs DATE
D> (Cnt

CT hprovat (777) intonation (C7 steaarune
Co "etion (771 orrect recy Cj re rure
C—Acoument CT pepanation of repuy <——] orsparcn
(“Koncurrence © [——Jrecommenoation (UJ eue

BARNS WV jne, ane
TAA te COL Ow

in oteem Caf toe ee “vem fett,

“RESTRICTED

CONFIDENTIAL

FORM NO. QA
SEP sear



--- Page 294 ---
14-0000

a : oe Ls ks
DEPARTMENT OF STATE 4

UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
WASHINGTON

“OFFICE OF THK ADMINISTRATOR
april 3, 1953

v Coar Mr. Wiener:

I want you to. ba informed of the uction which I an taking
dn regard to interns tionel broadcasting factlities. ja this

- country.
Ihave sent a letter to the compinies concerned along the +
linos of the ‘enclosed which gives a full explanation,

Sincerely yours,

ohnson
rator

koterté L
Admind.

if |

Enclosures

Cory of letter to broadcasting
companies terminating contracts, ©

: | Mp. Frank fisner,:
# : “Central Intelligence gency.

V/Y53 0t- ER file INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION AND EDUCATIONAL EXCHANGE PROGRAM a



--- Page 295 ---
14-0000

[
:
i



--- Page 296 ---
14-0000

=~ .
aot

oe broctenitiue: BE Thsd . .

rent a shot arn
REUEyt! . {

l

be

| i

ee

| |

: . : I
dot


--- Page 297 ---
14-0000

6 April 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIEZCTOR (PLANS)

SULIZCT: Agency Crannel to HCFE |

1. How that larry deFerfville 10 working for NCFE, I know . ,
that there will be a strong teZency on the part of all of us to ‘
Geal with WCFE through Larry, %:1s not only because he is an able
fan dut because wo all know 22 30 well. se

_ @e If wo take this course, nowever, ve shall confuse channel
of commnications as between the Avency end HCFS by adding to the
normal I¢/sraneh I (Williaa >. torkes, Chiof) channel and to such
informal channels as necessariiy exiet still another chanel. This
would make the Job of ‘all of us sore difficult and confound our

constant efforts at ordarly procecure,
3. I hope that higher extaority will bear thie in mind,

ote OT. BANOS

TUONAS WH. BRADEN
Chief :
International Crganisations Division

CIOs TH2/eh

Orig - Addressee (thru: CP?)

l ce - 10/BrI oo oe . .
lice + CIO mo . : _ :

1 ce ~ RI



--- Page 298 ---
14-0000

BENORANDUM Pole oF

SUBJECT A

le tire
the Board of

held goserve for Phun capt ted cyetrvetion for tie follavine

(a)

()

RMATION

SECUR:

3 April 1953

SY DIRESTER
Peety bIRCTeS

srearien)

Reqert from tro SUPY fer the Peleasn of : “150,000 froa

the Cla held reserve for the FR.

cturs, has recuested the releases of [150,000 fr

"alterations to we ALN bulldog

Installation cf a refrireratec cold reon :
for the storage of Zook 35,640.

Additional automatic iattles ant equips
suit in the kitenen and service rom 1,700,

Aciitional offlee e;sce on the aecend
Floor 2:

Tetal £7,900.

The orisinal cints¢ roo installation
provided fcr survice for a student tedy
of 100g the increase in enroliaent (acw
almost 200) has democstrsted that acre
refriperation and storace space ane equije
reat is needed.

Hoveing the wae etavents in the rain
bedléing wits reschtant changes in the
pryeical Layeout has vaant the readjust-
sent ef office rypase ar it has pruved
yosrine ty provece tan new offiees on the
eeoorni floor for the estinsted cost of £50).

Yaprevermnts to the A:rniaied hovee adigining
the main bublding emt usec as residence ty the
Asolptant Coan. G00.

Necessary edditiccal furniture té rerYace
iteza resovec by easor and inprove AMying
condi tone ; ygurt® 1,20).

SECURITY he AMATION

CH s06T

pencer Phanix, on Dehal’ of the NCPR, aca authorisation of
ba the CLA
PATpo sest



--- Page 299 ---
14-0000

(c}

(4)

- (e)

Jwalge.. --

t: i
Ul { . ,
SECURELY INFOSMATION {

The contexplate! a terattion tn ives prl~e
elpally the installation ef central head .
eonnscted with the satin heating gyri. 24
the present tLaec ther ie so central > bes
the bulldins is constantly daan in wintervi oo ,
and the atieupt to nnintain y batiafse
te.perstore vith eloves and pertatie
haa pruwn! uncetisfectary, ither i
Cxraist of adcitieval kites ealpeaa, tr,
iin a8 cas water paater, a nitchen cabives,
corstrcciten of a closet, repairs te bm fete

trical ayaten an! rolen of extatice garage |
opace iste « amald di ing rom,

Zeagtrustisn of an enditerius for etudact meetinss,
lectzrna and reereation ectivities, auch
eorts, atudont theatricals, Bovine
the lta wt Ao a oncsrary feats

oP Stlocr exerciac durin the winter NETL.

ordi will Lave aon orced Ceverete Sounta
o-raide walls of pine clspboarde’ (aid Ler tc recent?
conitrieted domitory and ketene val
firepscel styvau rateurtat fer ins:
roof cf tha aaco natlerial used fos)
and leeture hal
catisfec
ant the

ieded in
Vils teilding are offices an Uving quarter far
the “comciere.* Tha architect's eBtirare shove the
Oatizaied coxt of the auditeriua insell 427 néetars x
22 metere in sf Be, including Is, for Bleel corte
and 13,900. fer safety rlaes} ag yD, we adie!
east of the etace with the * co.
steve a5 £19,509, eorneetin: Pasta-e:letwser anditori

ont adtoinir- tulidii, 19,300, reiecatior of iLtrsry:

alteration of stucy halle, ci,lW, vevatia seats, sia
are virkicw curtains, action pletiuns eq ia art with se
ar wirdow Cortains, rhtion -letere equi peert wit! ae
ad athletic caulpsent, £22,150, (AX fi: bres arom.

‘Reeairfacine vsihs tetuean tailcin.a at trataliation
Sev electrig Lichte at atrog cteupubnta alos tha

we 2 “CEB

Trorallaties agi eq:tprent. od avcentral telesr,
Suitchioard its RecesReary wirins and adilt

atiere'e? acoumscatio:

thon,

rat

bes)
: and
Ie)

reen
Teen

1)
joe

3,00).

Lon

al
@lapiong inst renyits 60 39 te permit dntepomer-fcet!

Va

URMATION



--- Page 300 ---
14-0000

te

SECURITY ie SEMATION
ade

betiveen the various tulldinso and officze. £1,000.

(f£) Adehtional Aumltuers macired for the “coemelorcele’ ©
charters: eoutpemnt for Mitehen ealarce ent and

Aitbonol fem ahince for the woueats dora tory.
cs ae So
Fy SDs

{g) Architect's foes.

Total

Fs neiten of the
new renidenee for ‘the Apristint coat, made ¢ ty the reeont
aerecsest on the cart of the ounsr to pernit the égcistant | ean
te oocsry his prerent qzrarters unt tho teyuisation of the Lease
on tho catire property dsatoat of requiring sin to vacate tha quarters
tris gumeery the clinination for the time sof a prepesed scall .
apertrent butlding to necom-otata viniting prefaancra onc ofiictalas
fautepon-ent of certain lan'iscanin« expenses ant baa A elictastion of a
proporet anterresent af the cindrr Mall now! felt to lea umecausary since
@ Liali of 200 hag been fixed for ‘next year's anre)t Lracnte .
in erfer te co plote nent orn arnetion by 4nurt y 1953, wink
auld atert mot Inter th JE, WS, art ta woof the tina
noeveuary tor tha preperation of workiue plane, r at hide, and
ak: gpatere of eontrac stds cf the gepatost Seportaree thal tie ceeepaary
forse be nate arexytly” availa :

2. The differance betwen the total of s13s,La0 are! Mhe L150,060 anced for
fa 0 10s mergin allomines for price dnermansse

3e 8S recawannt, for releare fron the CLA nde rrantva ty the f°/? and the

“Ef, all itene oxcent (a) ant tho US marcia Allowaaza, a total of Sie
, ite

10/Branch LssPbs jb
Listributions
Addressee - orig & 2 (peer
1 ee (b2/a
Camcuetces 1 os Comp.
outed trey 1 cc ere
ee Loftre_ lw

oerre Barua)



--- Page 301 ---
14-0000

Yas

SECRET | pe 82.98.)

Senurity feformation —
7 | a

2 April 1953

AFHORANDUN FOR: The Director of Centrel Intelligence
SUBJECT: © " Good nows concerning Villian Heimlich.

1. have fsuat recuived through Mr. Durkeo a report fron
the RFE people in HKunich to the following effect.

2. Mre Hetmlich has visited tho premises and talked to -
zome of the key ‘personnel of RFS-Munich. He was cordially
recofved and shown sround. At the conclusion of his visit,
Mr. Hoimlich -stoted that whereas he waa not primarily or
particularly intorested or concerned with NCFE/RFE activities
end operations (presumably meaning that he was mora concorned
with the State Department informetion project <= and presumably
A), he had been very much impreaned by what ha had seen. He
weo satefied thet thio was a hard-hitting operotiong that
thero was no "fat" cn tts and that ho would so report to the
Senate Committee upon hie returns ,

FRANK O, WISNER
Acting Deputy Director.

tap G/T = te tor

“SECRET

Secu: formation



--- Page 302 ---
14-0000

: Z :
a5 -
t
1
: answers to fire
: by Ute lurk
. t

: Lense

ainnich.

?
2. The origin:
by use hy cle .
statement entit >
te wee du vlace of the
whether this recs
thro
' .
{ 0. .
. * Chief
International Organiza
:
:
t
ok


--- Page 303 ---
14,00000

ANCL SIFTED RESTRICTED CONFIDENTIAL - SECRET
(SENDER wiie CHRCLE CLASSI ATION TOP AND BOTTOM) .

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLip

Co Wrrovae CT} wrorwarion . C stowature :
oven “CoV irecr repey COT re ture
OMMENT CT onepararion oF repLy OT orsparcy
Co koncurrence ° C7] econmenoation CaF
REMARKS: YIP OL hy Ut gon pores
cud by esc Ef na
Aa 6.) “ore EPP, BT
SUSFEMSE 2 APRIL
¢

SECRET | ONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED UNCLASSIF LED

FORM NO,
SEP tpa7 20-8



--- Page 304 ---
14-0000

ROUTING ANO RECORD SHEET

SECRET Soper

INSTRUCTIONS: §Cfficor dasignations should bo used in the "TO" colufan. “Under each commont a lire steru'd be drawn acroso sheet

and cach commant aumbared to correapund withthe number in the "TO" column, Each officer shouts inrzal Coiech mark insufficient)

before furthar routing, This Routing and Record Shiset sbouid bo returned to Rogistry.

No, / ; Lo ~ 3-8¢/

bate -

Toh |
ak ye bpd hbo
thu at aes t, aot
OM Oryupsathian 45 Phalen
leh. aly Jia wth bree.

“

Pabotnlo an

ye

FORM NO, 51-10
FEB 1950 -

L nt Moe ti Claaye

MEL kB Censanatal PalaTING OFM

SECRET cs, J aye yp ao

4 bone

LL)



--- Page 305 ---
14-0000

that, he wat
hide stab

Dordt

pleased
He alsc

Blatt

npacti ty
operations.

ve ouber
ser contact

Lo

thaat

has cachieh resard for if:
ne an excellent Job. Tt is 5
istant and. that Alan vichic,

ny could £211. such a tion.

oa ith
derable, tine with

i hire Stowe feels Lt remarkable th ring his cons

a RPS that he has never heard a bad word about ir. Condon.

5 . ce. He bas a very Merb regard. for Yre orifgith and the role he
: plays in mlins that it 4a

ce care of RFE's outalde
celationa in Germans ot have the tine andy
(2) iq not particularly ufteative in dealtar with Germans because
of his vouth and rather pedantic manner. He info that there
ayriond & nt with We

imroscihle for

, WiLity of rettt
: 4 he felt Swine could oxectien ob of dealing
: to and German public 2 of Swinr's
arity with Cermany and his prestire.s
: Lhe tews and Infortiation Service of APE
. Apees ha the heed fer top rank
: “wropean S political knowlecre,
a can be
i i Service
wih Lene to more ‘the ve pact the
fil] have dures, in his

erly interrate the varioug free
mrees and te provessionalize
ave bis News and infomation

pro. ran content.

Service prepare sc
pointec out a ner :
hin creat operational flexi ei : Y
at will. . : ; .



--- Page 306 ---
14-0000

SE

Sccurily 18

plea for Valicen Lavis who is

6. Stowe alsu made a stro!

| friend.

Nenich, apparently

Stowe fa acebronm person whe in
e he has been

a
with Lan:
unable t
fore fe
ke

that rea
exile par:

SECRET

Security Information



--- Page 307 ---
14-0000 -

_on Phenix's rec

eS SECRET.

Security Information

ever had
hat if wan in - aase,
soovale

r conversati
ear before

tL of

> the enestion

he sevlc ta

5. we diseuss
arcson ireec that
an over-all estirate of Uriversity
for Pu - %It wae arreec, therefere,
st cates 17 February 2b

I stated that
mS and we a

attention to cetails of

ea

ecuest



--- Page 308 ---
\ \
1400000

|
1 4
e | |
tte | ; |
x . : |
: 4 LaApril 1953. —_
: . 7 . a - . 4
: i
PEXORANTURE Poke DIRECTOR CENTRAL TPTELLIGENCE AGENCY | |
' Ties Deputy Dimeetor (lara)
| Chiet, Political and Pegeholesical Warfare
- i _
= : SUBJENT s: Release of Funds for Perohass of apsrinentsa to hous t

H Feu poraonnel.
' .
i

3 .
le Spenser Yaenix, Treasuror of RovZ, haa submitted a requast

‘for the su co? 422,200.00 to Purchase four apartzents in Strasbourg,
France, to hore some of the ty torial stuff of the Free University in
Exile (sce attached}, PEVE can obtain tsseq premisss by special arranges
mont with the ety of Strasbourg, te-when theca apartments belong. There
is an acute hezwing shortage in Strattesrg wo that theae epartments are |
natossary 1f te teaching ataff of the Urdaversity is to be reasonably

aecormodated.

@o I reesmmend that thig awa be releaned to FE
hele reaerve fer FLUE enpltal constrictiane
thos: qvartere Le
of heusing aberti;
not ba subatanziss

frea the Cl,
The yervhase price of .

adily recovercble, 12 heccusary, by resale buaruae
in the city of Strectourg = a shortaze which #i1L
1y Pelteved for soratina. . .

Sesurity Information - : oo |



--- Page 309 ---
14-0000

23 Marwh 1953

Dosr Xelsone

, - - As roquested by you this morning, I gcota below tho taxt ‘of a lotter

rocal ved today fem Paris, regarding the urncuimmished apartnenta
e by Rotertonu perscire).

+t

Clty: of Strasbourg do prepared to soll for

cre ; "Thiy morning I sen’ you tha following eadlet

PIN) OEE

tPOR ONE HUNDRED SEXTET TiWUSAND FR
MAY TO PURCHASS FOUR UNFURNISHED A
HUNDRED THOUSAND FRANCS STOP 0
TE TWENTY SEVER MARCH STOP WESC:
. TING MOST SATISFACTORY SCLUTION CF
: . SABOLOT? :
Ag stated in Minot's memorandiom ef the 9th of EFarch tha atty of
Strasbourg is in contre. Thoy are willing to rive us an option on.
these apartments, at a cost of 140,000 frares, ‘ovtd option te axphie
on 1 Hay 1953. Thoy give us until the c7th of March to take up thia
options |

AS K
PQONG PROBL LETTER F

i The anartzents will be finished on the }st of Aurust. They have
effercd us the following apartmenta: . :

a) Southarn axposure - pround floor - 3$ roozs, plua
~  kjtchot, bathroom and maid's room in attic. Fro 4,075,006

b) Southern exposure + 3rd floor ~ l recms, plus .
kdiechen, bathroom end uaid's reco din attics Fr, 1,520,005

c) Northern exposure - 2nd floor + 3 reams, plus .
kitchen, bathrea: and maidéa reca in attice Fre 3,955,060

4) Northern exposure. « 2nd floor

. « 4 reoms ploz kitchen
athroga and maddts roca in cttic

Fr. 3,950,006

2

TOTAL Fre 15,100,006
} To the sbove total mus% be added the costs off
5 a) Registration, transfer and notary fese.
») Installing electrical fixtures:
. ¢) Installing stoves and ice boxes in itehon, - oo
¢) Furnishing apartments, (I ssauxe none of oy staff

will have their ow furniture, otc.) .



--- Page 310 ---
14-0000

RY ds : to Fre ),300,008, nk
fatal of 20,100,000. 0.00 at 356 franen to 2

dollcr,

fT am sxare of yor reenanu for not wishirg to cm real estate

dn Enropoo lowover, 4 svoblen a finding suitable qsartew Yer
the Collega aterf dan diffMoult ones Pr ding the De
avztlsble, Ty ard I are in favor oF purchases, ay thosa
provide on immediate. partial solut.on loa ai fricult pry

If you should deeida to bake up the ontdony wa aan diecuss tha
Aimweiel doinile of che _purchane vhon yeu vintt Paris nest

ronth.!

You wil note that fer tho rolatively enall. paysont of 180.000 frencs,
an option will bo granted valid nntal Lay 1153, ond wince it ts obvious
shat a final dccieion canrat bo imicdiateiy midoy IT have cabled Paria, ree
qaesting that the option be purchased’ so that wa may have tina to. considax .
ing preblen ceroiilly. ,

ing avi available for dilo-

T chal?. ba in Washington naxt Sundsuy eve
cuugion Mondey mornings If you have not becr: .o to clear the quantion
afere thon, I auggest that you set up a mee with George Lefton at
wedch Danicl Church and I can prosent our viuvs in tho hope of obtaining.
srapt datermivations . .

Elacerclys

Vitaa Le Digby



--- Page 311 ---
14-0000

2

Us May 1953

MEMORANLIE! FORs Chief, PP’! ;
SUBJECT: .-—s Letter from 0. Me Dinktrov

The attached letter to Mr. Shopardson with ape
pondéd Agenda and Procedures of the. Plenary Segnion of tha —
B.N.C. cans to me through a reliable source in New. Yorks
Me. Dimitrov ia unaware that thece papers have fallen into
our hands. I am passing them along to you for whatever
interest they may have. You may want to eend them to Tom
praden for hie cerutiny and files. It whould be underlined,
thet Hr. Dinitrov mst not becano aware of our having
ssoured thts material. ;

oe

Richard Yelas
Chief of Operatlons, DD/P

Attachmants : hs *



--- Page 312 ---
14-0000

Tet se ph oes reepiq

9 June 1953

"  RMORAOUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ©
SUBJECT: Bradshaw Project

Attached ie an accounting signed by Willian 1. ntasy
of the Bradshaw Project, for.the period August 15,1952 to
May 27, 1953, Thia 1s for retention in your files.

£.W. BRADEN

tsiqnea, Tie!

THOMAS V. BRADEN
. Chief -
International Organizations Division

Attachment

Ae stated,

CIO: THB/sh

Orig - Addressee
Lee = 1O/ToNtc
lee - CIO

leo - RI

SECURITY INSSeM ATION



--- Page 313 ---
14-0000

‘SEGRET os

Security Pe prantiag

2 June 1953

MEAIANLUM FOR, bROUTY. DIUMCTOR (PLANS )

SUBJECTS Romarka for meting with Spencer Pheniz ot al
on Thuraday, 2139 PM, 4 June 1953 a . i

1. Ata PRC aotion on rriduy, 29 May, as an interLa action
ponding a full review in August of NCFE's total proygran and budget
the Iiviston recounendeds | . mot

a. NUE be given three months operating expenses ‘=
23,945,104 - the current rate of expenditures: .
am fi
be 813,590 to be pnt in the Free Europe University. in
Exile account = the proposed FY 1954 operating expendituras --
with authority for NCI to draw upon this account for ‘three
months at ths current rato of excenditures, KCFZ authorities
had requested that tho full amwunt be made available to them
ab this time to enable thes to comly with the. leval require~
2 . monte of the Hoard of ftazonts of the Stete of New York, to
i which tne University is rosponsiblo. It was exoressl;" stated
i thatthe aotivities of tne Tur Would be subject tu the dater —
full review and that the recomonded action in no'way implied |
approval of liniveraity activities at this tine; and ro :

. : 6. Approval for RFE capital expenditures of $1,299,275

: a for the completion of ffPts transmitter program in its prosent
locations, The funda tor thesa expenditures were to come out

: . of Crusade funds which, as you know, are spéciflcally raised

H for capital construction, : .

: 2. In its action the Prce
. a. Refused to allow tho $3,945,104 which NCr2 requested
‘ . to cover its current operatinz expenses by cutting this Cisure
: ta $3,000,000 with the statement NCiE can come baex for. nore -
if necessary, and with the further stipulation that Crusdde
- funds be' used for this purposes i

b. Refused to allow R:F to undertake {ts proposed capital -
develooment but authorized thie Division to investigate the -
powsibility of using two lM kw transmitters owned by this

Agency and ao yell as the purchase of the ‘Unused 100 kes fron
V9As and : ae



--- Page 314 ---
14-0000

c. Refused to appropriate any money for the FEVE, but
directed [icrE to transfor funda from other accounts including
that of the Crusade for Fraedom to the FAH, avtvorlsing NCFB

"to incur expenditures for thres months at ‘the curront/rate,

3. The intent of this Tivision in ito recommendations. to the
PRC was to provide NCFE an: tha FEUL with the operating funds neces-
sary to continue its notivities in the FY 1954 at the current rate,
Thess funda ware to tide NGrE over the fLyet menthe of FY lsh, -
pending a thoroush butyetary and oroxran review and subsoquent pre-
sentation and recommendations to proper CIA authorities inithe month
af Aucint, At What tine biltney Shenanison will have completed his
Anitinl tour of insnection, and ean be on hand to dofend hin budyet

ars) our recomendations thereto. r

The only excoption to tis procedure waa the request for
approval of Rists capital noods. Tals request was inde after a
Usrough examination of proposals by this Division and Ueneral |
McGlailand, Oftico ol Communications, hin techntlenl etaft! and RFE
eminaers, As a resull, General McClelland autiorieed this Nivision
tw stato to the Pri that tho firm vruposale wera technically sound,
A® Lar ao théae capital expenditures are concerned the 1) Miviston
had completed its review and recomended thelr approval in order that
thors be no delay in getting thts adit tional tranomitter oquipnont in
place. ar

. hb, Y would atrongly sugvest that the meoting on Thursday not
involve a general budgetary review, [% vhould bs eonLined y dno
opinion, to a statement to Mr. Spancer Yhenix and his budyctary
officer, wo siouid be the sole HUFE officers pregont, that CiA will

conduet through the IO Uivision: :

a A thorough and dotatled review of all current activities
and nev activities proposed by NCFEs. _ ao j :

b. A finanoial review in the sense that all financial infor
mation necessary to support the NCH" program and budvet 1s mde
available. Our atudy of this financial information will be
confined to a general raviow to ensure accuracy, adequate explana-
tions of uncertain items and a reneral analysis to ensure proper
budgetary procedures, I would like to point gut and strongly .
ermmhasige that we have already received tie slmoat cooperation
iNCrE in getting such provoan and fisca.

nformation. _
. j
S. We cannot, tn my opinion, having granted NCEE broad autherity
ia the oxecution of ita task, seek to impose our Judgment for theirs

" 4n the detalle of their management of this project. Such matters a8

wern raised at the PRC, i.e. whether the request for replacement of
32 trucks is based on Avency standards for truck replacement, have in
my opinion no place in such a review, Wa can review manazenent and
fiscal policies in a broad sense to satisfy ourselves that thay are

i" .



--- Page 315 ---
14-0000

sound. NCFE offlotalu. siyuld be presant at the budzet roview. to
angwer Such questions, ‘This 1s their Fooponslbility, If we are
dissatisfied witn the present manayenent, we should get.a now one...

: We have, however, the responsibility of making a detailed
review of the poliéfos and the activities ‘of NCFE undertaken in -
pursuance of their mission as yiven to them by this Agency. | NCFE
18 entitled to know tnat ite proyrans and policios are xpxroved and
that-no after tho fact question can ering. quailly, NCFi da not: ~
ontitied to undertake proyrans or activities wiich 4ré not approved
by this Avency, si

. At the completion of its review of HCKE's Proposed provran
for FY 19Sh, a review whicit favelvés detallod examination in coonera=
tion with the CIA otarfe and area divinions and with the Departnent
of State, [9 Livision will make its recommendations to tha, proper |
Anenoy officinis for their ftrial action, Puch an orderly procedure
Will eneble this Acency t have comletoly reviewed No vactivities,
to have concurred in each, and wil). nllow NCKE to proceed in the
‘movledge that ito activities are fully antnorinzed and erproved.

6, I, thereforo, propone that the- meoting on ‘Thursday bo
confined to Phenix and his budget officer during which the ‘ahove
acpronch can be made. 1 will leave for your judgment the queation
whether tha actions of the PEC on Friday should be opaned for roview
and modification, Phenix will certainly want to do no for the
following reanons:

a. Tne operating funds w-thorized are not adaquate’s

bs ‘the directive to use Cmaade funis ror oporattonal
" expenses runs counter to established procedures and \CFi's
commitments to the public in the use of euch funds;

&. The failure to approve RFE capital items now sans a
delay into noxt year of the installation of tranemitting —
equipment, which Af anoroved Now, can be tn plave and operating
by October of this year. (This wll not be the case if you
authorize our use of the Avency owned 19) k's and a purchase
of the VIA transmitters can be arranged, which [ believe can);

it
ecount.

4. There are not sufficient surplus funda, Axoluding the
Crusade, to a. nly to tha Free Europe Univerai ty, (There are,
however, impressed cash funds wiiich are a three nonthe!, operating

- advances in NOFE's possession which can ho: used - Pheriix arees,)

oeeatoe bee vi
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief '
International Organizations Division

bog oh
Gece omnIEe aT TT)
!
at


--- Page 316 ---
14-0000

~ UNCLASSIFIED RESTRICTED” “OMSIDENTIAL SECRET -
(SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOM)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

(Dy approvan . : ‘CD tnrormarion (7 stcnature

(action J ( omrecr reper ~ return
: comment . [7] PREPARATION OF Peet DD oiseaten
i (7 concurrence ( Recommenvarion Oru
io . :
: REMARKS:

This 1s the letter which Whitney, Shepardson
sent to Sol Levitas, about which (t are aware,

Ye

RESTRICTED

CONFIDENTIAL UNCLASSIFIED

SECRET
to84 30-4 . . W-O570-1 6. 0. covtzenset reiting OE



--- Page 317 ---
14-0000

Yi. Es We Levitas,

Jeers.

_WE3sIR8

May 5, 1959.

Executive Witor, | . : . . ; A

Ine Lev Leader,
7 Zest 15th Street, uo ,
Sew York 3, N.Y. . !

Dear Mr, Levitass ;
In January i953 en arrangement was zzde

‘Whereby you were to’send 1000 copies of The Sew:

Iaz4ex to England and. to Furcpe during the current

~~ We wish to diseontinue that errengeme=t,
Ve do not wish to beve our contribition used any

-. longer in that way, :

: “I would like to discuss with you et your,
esrly convenience the cuestion of the return t> us

of some pert of thet contribution in view ef zs
peper, printing and mailing costs which will ce’
ezved by the discontinuence.. . .

‘Yours stneeraly,

Prestdert,



--- Page 318 ---
14-0000

| yn Orig & L0/8eI
SECURITY INECRERATION an

SECRET

MFMORANDOM FORs CHI! INT+RNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DIVISION Jo
ATTIMTIONs TO/BRANCH ONE ee

Utilization of Various Bal kan Panigre Groups
by SF Division for Operational “Purposes :

T

SUBJECT:

: : j

i. . . noe i .

. In realy to.a roquast made by !'iss Stern of your office for :
‘detailed information concerning ‘the oporational uti) ination of various
Balkan em{rre groups by Se Division, there aro attached ad tabs
to this memorandhm.studies covering our activities ancnig tho
Albanian, Sulgarian, Rumanian and Yugoslav enigraticn. | Wo understand
that thie information is required to provide a basis for reviowing |
the operational plan and budget of the Find for the comins: ysare
Since the information 45. considered h: ehly sonsitive, it is forwarded

for your. information only. : . . : .

: . | * Ghrfstian "Freer i
io. _ Acting Chief, SR

Tab A © S!. "tilization of Albanian Rmigre Groups

Tab B= SE Ttlisation of Bulgarian Taicre Groups
Tab GC @ SE cuilization of Yugoalav ‘mirro Groups ©
Tab D © SS Utilization of Rumanian Fnigre Groupa _



--- Page 319 ---
14-0000

_ SUBJECTS _ Reported Financial Support of

Dn ee, _
REFERZNCEs.. - Menorandun (10-3-682), dated 2 Hareb 1953.

“te Feceiving money: from. miscelleneous Bulgarians in Canada

SECURITY INFORMATION

MEMORARLUM FORs Chief, Internatione] Organizations Tivision ue

Dr. Dimitrov by Pulgerians in Germany

1.. With rogsrd: to reference momorandus, this Division

- has long suspected thet some such erranzerent existed. Any

Honey which Pr. Tiimitrov manoged to extrect from ‘the “Guard
Company members is-ottained by him as e result of fis own ¢
“personel sway ‘exercised over this group of Bulgarians. :

26° It hes ajso coma.to our attention that En. Timitrov

andthe United States in the nase of a*trust fund sihich: he.
has set upe “You are ‘no doubt awere of this development.

3. Wo sro most interested in getting fron you, . your
estimste of Ir. Dimitrov's income from al] sources ss soll
es a listing of thos @e ‘sources of income .adout which ‘you Lo :

NOW» . a o

Po

CHRISTIAN ¥. FREBR-
ACTING CHIEF, SB

i

;

srcunt CET ion


--- Page 320 ---
14-0000

MFMORANDLM FOR: CHIEF TO DIVISTON ue ;

SUBJECT 4 Proposal for Haablishing a sicrofile Library

of tturantan 'toference Natortal i
i
:

" 1. The attached paper outlines a project which may be of
interest to your division, A Rumanian eniere, interested in #
Proparanda and cultural activities, prepared the parer aftor cone
@alting with a number of rofueo scholars,

2, Althoush the remlts of rich a project wuld be of preat:
valne to our Rusantan oparations, imnlemantatdon ir constdersd
beyond the scope of the activities of thiga Diviston, Further,

_ At apraars more nractiesble for a Project of this tyne to ba °

undertaken by a research or cultural orsanization, rather than
an intalltcance agency, in order that the regmlta may be more)
widely used. . :

"3. It ie sigvested that. the MGYR, which 1s cancomed with ;
werthwhile ecployment of refugee intellectuals, na be interestad
in this project for its Nid-Furopaan Studios Center, I? the VOOR
is not in a position ta financa such a project, it is possible that
& privately ondowad foundation would be interested, The enters
has discussed this project with Dr. Serrtus Yacobson of the Library
ef Concress and with Professor Moseley of the Puasstan Tat itutea
of Colunbia 'iniversity, le han reported that both azenctes appear
interested, "

h. Secanse of some doubt concerning the reliability of throa
of. the indivicials mentioned in section TIT of the attachad ra-
port, the following data ig a:bmitied for your infomation;

a. fr. ‘‘ircea Rliade was formerly editor of an Tron Guard
(Ruranian fasctat troup) newspaper and a doctr!natre of tho
Suard., He 49 resorted to have atsassociated himself from the
Cuard in the last. year but this infomation cannet be confirmed,

d. Pr. Leontin Constantinescu reported as formerly pro-
Tron Cuartist in his ampathies, '



--- Page 321 ---
14-0000

ti

‘y
ij
i
c. Mr. Tom Claidian is reportedly enzagod at the presont _.
Line in owigra tron Guard activities in Zurope. - - | Te
5. If farther information is denired, please contact Mine Nowsom,> ,
extension 195, . : wo ea

t
i
JOHN FE, BAKBR
Chief, SE
(
il
‘i

Attachment: As stated shove

SECRET


--- Page 322 ---
14-0000

MEMORASUS. FOR CHIEF, 10 ch

26 March 1953 |

SUBJLCTS * Bulgarian Guard Coipany :

Seeret Mano from Chief, IO, Subjects Inforuation on
Quasiesoldiers located in Frankfurt dated 19 Harsch 1953

¥

1. | Lele control of the Bulgarian Guard Company wae ateuned by
USAKTUZ in Decexber 1952+ Since there was never a definite peried of
onlistaest, nacbora of tie Company were free to leave at will, ‘Ao a
result, tiere was a consiserable turnsover of personnel, Tho maximum -
vo etranzth was 200. Peak otrength, about 30 in excess of 1/0; was:
reached in 19526 However, this ruber was innediately. recuced to 200.

“2, ‘Tha Conpany was continually plagued by the constant political
activiam of the adherents of. Ur. Georgi'k, Dimitrov, It 19 estimated |
that a maximum of 40 mexbers: were hardecore Dimitrov sdherento. | |

4
3- The first Bulgarian Commander of the Company was Stefan Doidev,
Upon hie resvval from the Company, Borislav Baichev was ‘appointed in
hie place.

he Stoyan Dobrev (Yapazov) dues not appear on the last roster of
Guard Company mezbers (Septexber 1952) available to use He waa ono of
the early mexbere of the Cospany.

4

OCHN E, BAKER 1
CHIEF, SE 4

SECRET |
a


--- Page 323 ---
14-000p0

ete a re aM eR oh 5S

4

‘

MEMORANDUM FoRs Chief, Paychological Warfare Division i
SUBJECT: ' The Now Leader '
fi

i

Confirming tho instructions from DCL which I relayed to

you. by telephone last wook, CIA is not to pay for overseas
‘subscriptions to the New Leoder eithor ty direct or indirect
channela. _
(Signed) AERD C. VEER
ALFRED C. ULMER JR.
Assistant Chief
Political and Paychological Warfare
ces C/IO



--- Page 324 ---
14-0000

‘ secu TET atin :
16 March 1953 _
& NOCH | Ciicl, Internationa Orinkaationa bivss Lon !
_ SUSIACTs ° Nemorandum cated 13 iarch 1993, Subjocts wy, totes on
. . Farts Trip i

|
1

Foundation on Cohr
He was granted this anounte

1. €. 9, Juckcon wrote the Norts luke
behalf, asking that he be cranted | 10,000.

2. Zurcher Merle. t: Coe are menting da New fork today ane Io nave done |

; everything that I can to ensure that full buckin I thins this
: waz really already being done as far wot Gack, 1

wugceacted that thie be done and a tel ron esving hh fel)

avthority to act in any manner in which he sow Cit, including the firing of

t

Kaleom Lavis. “In my discussion with Stepardson this corning ihe arreed
the entire mbject of tho University and its future chovld be diseisned

irmediately. thie natter for
natruction

—~ 3. In ‘hecuesing the TUS in le with Spencer Phenix ‘hile you were
away, I wae infonwed that you had decided that support would |be ui therawn
after June 30, If this is so, I wonder how Pacak could be employee nnle

it has other reans of ee that Lennen acre
té co beck to Paris for onsen paid basie wi
no calary.

rt. Phenix also
at least six monthe

th

Frankfurt is supposed to make hic lefeetors dyailahle to
I discvsred this white in Lunich and was assirec that this would be
The difficulty up to new has been Troscott and the lunich stations

ity to insist upon anything from Prankfurt.

hk. ACUE has a wank account which is used to ‘bank funda ppasetny: thresh
the Committee and which showon ACE books. Another accour: impossible
; for cover reasons as f passed to it do not shaw in 4 accounts in
New York but would in Fari ar t anrang: G to have
Pucitt's account a joint one sone ad rin Paris or to
Lave Fugitt sicn a blank tO ce hele a All these .
matters were cone inte in y opinion, is
; : ucincatechniauc Qe inett ,;
t shares this orinion, “or exar : af ntecd a reise.
i

about the Siise france matter and coréover my tepression
res now followed in the unity projects, to wileh I
s Jivision, have been arranzed at

oe I knew nothin;
is that financial proee<
presime you refer, and which are not in th

SEGRET

Security Information ~ F i



--- Page 325 ---
14-0000

rd

xm,

SECRET oe

Security Information

tt, who is
arrancenents
one, if anye

‘the cireetion of administr
as serupvlous and thoroush
and I would acecp
things |



--- Page 326 ---
14-0080

we,
t
25 Hareh 1953

“STMCRANTAM FOR: BIRECTCR OF .CTUTRAL INTHLLIOTNCE

SVOSESTs - Dy, Paul 4. Fabry

$% Clover's suggestion, I saw Paul Fabry, a very
ioerescive and learned young Hungarian vho is not a
etfigen and ho wanted a job. f have replied to hin
negatively in the attachnent and do 59 because there is
a long liet of allegations in tho files about his ard
his vife's Comunist associations. these allegations

ney or may not be correct but ara necepted as correct |
‘by John Hughes who advises most atrongly against having

anything to do with him.

THOMAS Vy BRADPY
Chief

“International. Orpanizations Division

/ttachrent



--- Page 327 ---
14-0009

po 25 March 1983

Tear ir. ?abryr

I heave given 0 lot of thought within the past -
few days to the queatton of your immediate future
which you reised with me. T find on checking into
our rules ari regulations that I simply. can't help
you here, I am sorry atout this becanse you are
an inmpre:zive man to talk to.

I wish you goo luck elsevhore,

Sincerely,

Thomap *. Sraden

mm, Paul #. Fabry
M7 W. E7th treet
Sew York, Hew fork


--- Page 328 ---
14-0000

. 7 ” Seguity ilo maha ot ToN'<

| | 7 Harch 1953 : 7 Me $-QQ_
we MESRANOI! FOR! Chief, 10/eP : . — Jb chu ‘

ATTENTION + Mr. Thomas Braden a fh my :
. ! aliylo yn
SURJECT: Mr. Fampoy ied fe “a
: le ‘Reforencs our corvorsation sometime azo, 1 would i?

like te give you the recults of our Reyistry checks on

fiamsay, woo my or may rot be identical with the present :
British citizen employed ty KFE in Hamburg, - . :

PTT-289 cut ject arrived in Trieste under

19 Aug UB sponsorship of Charles k. MOFFLY,

- director of AIS, He sperks Cluont .
forbian and during war was commanier
of a Yugoslav camp in Egypt. Has”
been assigned to planning section Mey : .
of AMG, AIS ta cover for SIS.

PTTAS291 Individual tulteved identical’ with t

3 June L9 gubject signed tnterropation report : ‘ :

oither as or for the Priaste Security i i

. Offteer. :
T-hhO32 - ANTOMIJE, suspected TA for British,
2h Sept Lg has for three weeks been under con-

stunt PIS interrogation by Italian
spatking Pritish sergeant in aparte
mont of Had. AILS. RAMSEY. Sure i
velllence revenls apirtmants several : SG
SS officers in building. Gold, SI: i i
chief, seen entering and leaving ' i
building with sutject end several . 4
unidentified British women.  . 1 i

FET-371  ,- Subject is the head of five Fritish '
§ oct 48 - officers who are in Trieste making : a
@ survey of the entire area prior to
‘seonduc ting spectal mission in Tugo-

. Slavia, . .

a

L. ;
Security Informaiion po
- ;


--- Page 329 ---
14-0000

- RFE representatives act as bini-doys for tt

thee,

-2.5

© MAVAORESE Subject British PS) (Pub. Sec.
20 June A? officer) Graz. intervenod tn the
ense of Josef Mersey, :

“TNe2220% fubject ts tn Crsz. Cuestion as to
2 Sept a? whether in FSS or SI-6, : .
“ TNS218°8) Subjoet was named by Mary Allison”
- 27 Aug Mikes, now held if zrison in Baden! -
: : by the Sovtets, as FiS officer fa.
Graz. .
-WEL*593- Public Safety O*ficur tn “il1tary 4

12 Sept &? Government in Graze Sv has been in
: contact with rerresentativey of
British Austrian Station.

“2. Ramsey no coudt ts an oxtromely cesiratle officer
for RFS and I see w obfection to a man witn intelligence
background being erployed by RFE, stnce ta odviously tho
combination of lancuage and background mist’ >a invaluable to
their program, but I still belivve that tose EFS posts which
could ba exploited best by us should be ocoarted by Ame rican
citisans, who can be cleared by us and who eiil have American
intelligence interests closest to their hessts. You may-or
may not know that EFS, especially in such ces as Herlin
and Viema, 1s om of the important Screenrizg puints for
refugees coming fron the Satullite areas acd as such the °°

nig Agency's FI

progray wherever possible,

3. I shoul
possibility of xeer
AFF. representative,

reclate your keeping m. advised on the
Xenneth Daan Koch in Serlin ay the

oo



--- Page 330 ---
14-0000

257% +

Ne

rn SECRET

. . Srevrily Info mavon

Bo ; 5 March 1953

MEE AMDUM FORs Chiefy 10 Divisiah -

ATTENTION: Mr. Durkee oO
- vVIAs C/pp

SUEAECT ; Radio Free Furope. ‘eealleneous matory

mi conversation with Mr, Lang. ..

1. This fe a brief report for the benafit of “r. Durkee land
for tra ti formation of Mexpra, Parnes and Eraden, concerning ‘certata
aspecte of my luncheon conversation with Mr Fobert E. Lany of ih Mareh.

26 I belteve thet I was successful {n covering in one: way ow
another all of tie points raised with me by Mr. Durkee orior to Ry
conversation with Mr. Lang. I will not attenpt in this memorendm
to recapitulate the entire conversation, but T will co-ment on
certain aspects ticreof and state that, in reneral, the conversation
serned to me to be quite eotisfactory.

3. YT recefved the impression thet there are still "ureels
within theele" end much internal friction within the NCP meteun.

Thie fe very rerrettable, but ft seers to bo a fect of life whiek

I thing should be brought -to the attention of Yr, Shevardeon st a

very esrly date, and he should be urred to tring the warring factions
togetter on a more auicable basis. The persuselftias {nvolved are

#11 fasertant to the success of the overation and 1t {8 a preat stane

tha they spend so much of their time and energy trying to onere aeee :
and crecenate one another. I would not "rive un” Rob Lanz on phis

talking with Mr. Shepardson -- tut simply make this asa general of

servation of ours,

&. TY came dow quite hard on Bob with reenect to the Leland
Stowe trochure wich Mr, Durkee handed to me and which I return te
you ferewith. . T. pointed out that this thing struck us as quite bas,
and for three food and sufficient reasons, to wits :

®. It represents too much concentration of effort on
publicity and oropaganda within the IInited “tates <» our
target is the satellites and to sane extent the Fest of the
free world, but we have no charter to operate or proparandi-e .
within the United States and this only invites trouble when oO :
it ts done; : :

SECREI

Security lulormation



--- Page 331 ---
14-0000

ote ae colts

4

be ‘Aa written, this commu:icstion or brochure haa: :
every anpnarance of offering & sew international newe.
service to American editors. {724 48 called "The KFC News
ond. Inforastion Servico".) e not indicated whethor |
thia will te chanced. for or fiurstshed free of charga te |
the proposed newspaper recto! z we but in either cnse: ‘
4t would ba almost sure to brt ¢own upon: the head of wT

\ the wrath, ‘indignation and hoatility of all the major nows
servicss who ere extromoly fealvus and sensitive about” com=
patition of any kind, but paret rly Governaont conpotition,.
The news norvices and newnpazere

yee

ave played Ball pretty wall
in covering up our dark Secret, Bet I eusvect. that anything
of this kind would make enenle# out of friends and set thel-
news services upon a course of 4eliberate Oxposures '
©. This move points up aaé invites attention to Leland-
Stowe's wregent posi tion and, 22 hy Opens up unnecessary
vulnerabilities to the kind 6% 7+eck with which we are all
too familior concerning indivit:2le who hava "written a book",

: . i
Rob Lang had no ready or vary Satlelaectory explanation of this natter
~~ sald thet he hed not known about £* or hed not seen it <= and that
he could only intersret it as an effet on Stowe's part to personally
rehabilitate himeelf, I said that 2 #24 no objection to a prosram
of solf-rchatilitation on Stowe'a pe: tut thet he simply. could not
do 60 at ‘the expense of the orgentzazion for whieh he WOrkes Tene

" ‘appearad to arreo.

5. I told Mr, Lang that gs far ee we understood it there would
be no objection to his going to Turtey % soe what ho could negotiate
for himself, Ambassador ‘MeGhoa'a e4iie eppeara to have rulleved °
State Departmont's objections and tr.« oly question seams to be, one
of operational feasibility and dest:

ty as regards hie making
the effcrt with the Turks. T venture’ to predict that he would run
into di??Tculties with the Turks, and purpested thet if he were to
fail in i.is Turkish mission he night etoo ty in Greece to lock into
the eituation thera, which I said we zac reegon to bolteve might! be
more favorable, . . : :

Tah eX 2, WISNER”
Desnty Strector (Plans)

mnel (1) -
Mimeo brochure offering resorts
via "RPE's News 4% Information
Service." -

SECRET

Sevurie ' cemaniicne



--- Page 332 ---
14-0000

“vidual ty reason 6f his past. “From tha condensed

MEMORANDUM FOR! C/I0 oS on
ATTENTIOA «6s Misa Stern, oo ne
SUBI2CP t Matortal for Tranaatttal-to RH. mata,

be

acceptable script writera for Albanian material to be prepared for: use by
It vas originally intended to forward a list of persons pot considered

1. Forwarded herewith 4s a Lot of persons who are considered 'ta

suitable, but it wos later folt, that thio nogative approach alvht allow HOw . : .
upaccoptable persons to slip through. You will nota that this approved list a
consists of only 30 nazes, If RFZ proposen to une any persona not on tho .
lint all that they have to do is submit the namo of the proposed script writer.
.p9 that wo may check our filea for any information on bin. Immediately upon
receipt of the name of a peraon wo will ‘reply, stating whethar tha person iss
(a) unacceptable now, (b) say be used one tine only, or (c) may be used and
added to the approved list. . . . _

- 2. Of particular interest tous, and pousthing wo consider vorthy of
RFB'a attention, 1s the recent ‘uso of Rrnesat Koeliqt fer the preparation ofa
soript. Mr. Koliqi is-a.nanber of the FKI, a political organization which has
beon unaccoptable in the past. Mr. Koliyi io further unacceptuble as lan indl-
information available on him
it appeara that he “cooperated vith the Italian Minister to Tirana in|preparing
the Italian ecoupation . . . returned to Tirana {he had long lived in|Italy as
he docs nov) whero he hold the post of Minister of Education 1939-194).
Member of the Albanian Fascist party."

3. It would seam that the use of Mr. Koliqt for the preparation jof
scripts 15 subject to serious question. In this acript for February a2, page
2, he statea "a much better presentation of the various Literary phases . . «
is. the anthology entitled. Zhe Albanian Writers published in 1941 by'the
Mintotor of Education.® (Kote that ha wags tho Minister of Education iduring

thie period under the Fascist governuent.) ~

4. There are other specific examples of possibly doubtful porsons having. -
beon used in the preparation of scripts. Diniter Hareti, a Zogist official
thon Zog was in powor, a Fascist official vhen the Pasclate vere in pover, and
how reported ‘to be a Cozuunist stooge, was used on several: oocasions. | Zef
Shiro, forwerly, and possibly still, editor of the Fascist magazine, "Albania®
was used for the preparation of 4 script-on January Bere

5, As was agreed in a j
SO, . .



--- Page 333 ---
14-0000

it

wot Let . i!
5. Ao was agreed in a recent. discussion between Major Mitohell of

‘Divioion and Miss Stern of your office, we hope such embarrooguents may;

avoldod 1 tho future by bringing the facts to the attention of RFE and!

thie
bs
by

asking RFR to limit. its list of writers to those spocifieally apvroved by this

Division. - : ;

4 JOHN R. BAKER bh
i. Chiof, 3B

Attaoh,ont (1) . , -

fy
{

__fltoardemess Rea arate eae LWT DAA ES

Peer cHPT a anitoe ar. cone


--- Page 334 ---
14-0000

SoRaET ~

Se curity iniormation

i.
2.
3.
Le
5.
6.
Te
3.
9s

10.
ate

12.
13.
lk.
1s.

oi

li.
13,
».
20.
21.
22,
23.
2b.
256
26,
27.
2a,
2,
30.

wa

Alimehsoti, Kaeen (Dr.)
Andond, Alfred
Andoni, Vasil
Bajraktari, Muharom
Binaku, Ejup.
Danani, Seliua
Celvina, Hignet
Dibra, Aden (Dr.)
Dilo, Jani

Dine, Dilaver -
Dosti, Hasan
Emnenji, Abas
Farxa, Lbrahdua
Fratart, ldauf-
Gosh, Gsorgos
Kogi, Atlas

Kotta, Nuct
Kryeziu, Said
Kupl, Abas
Maca, Haldl
Meniku, Halil
Mulleti, Nyaini
Pali, zef

Ferpoza, Hysen
Pasikopija, Nexhat
Rusti, Hach
Skendl, Stavro’
Tafilaj, Tani
Toptani, Ishan
fernal-Cenay, Asllan



--- Page 335 ---
14-0000,

KEMOPARDUU TOs ' Acting Director, Contral Intelligence |

i . : _ Agency

SUBJECT 3 Dre Lela Kosrormenyttagy~

Boszormenyi-Nagye

he acquired prior to Septemter 1248 would add very nue’
-to-information we have obtained from refugees and
“defoctors who left Munsary moro recently and who were

26 Pavruary 1953

- ae This 1s tn’ response to your roquest for our,
views regarding the attached letter from Dr. Bela.

2. Our files contain only a limited amount of |
information regarding Dr. Hoszormenyieliagy. However,
it 16 unlikely that information regarding Hungary which

te)

better: situated to observe at first hand the bop govern=

ment officials there.

3. iT pouid suggest, therefore, that in acknowledg=
ing Dr. Eoszormenyl-Nagy's letter we advise him not to
make a apcial trip to Vashington. Instead, we might

suggest that if he {9 here on other business at some’

future, time ho should. yet in touch with Mr. DuBose at’
Sterling 35520. (Durose ‘Le with the Contact Division,

Office of Cperations).
\

: : : On a. 033
a

|
i
!

5 Mar 53

ote on cover sheet returned to £0/iD/P states: 7

“ wt0/T0xTC concurs ‘in subject memo ~ ES per WPD

'

‘

chief, Eastern European Division



--- Page 336 ---
14-0000

beer
ting

_ |
ae creat
: oo Mranch (983

, vanities Fyveiniich 9 > ; : ;
Sehedut od to be amployod at a salary of £10,000 on teceber 1/L9 as”
a procran adviser until March 1950. "ered under Sencral Clay and

uxier : saneral Frank Howley. : 4 ?
i L :

Veed to te with RIAS (Radio tn Americen Sector). Tole he would nob

ba continued beeacse up to the time (no cate) recorés showed t: reo

official investivatiors on the following sutjectsa | ! oy

le then surving aa Intelligence erficer, why instead ° of .
putth re: documents into
turn ts. over to.

' ai chamiels knuwm to hin, cia}
-

oflic:

Priva rgons in actranaaction frou wiich he sabred: cently
1 aapac te profit, both in cash and ana tutere 7 pesition
i with Yle Daye oy

i serving as ani
wither captured Gocunent tela tre Geman
Intellizence Sarvice was changad in a foot loo
jndich to niet

expense.

a servisy as head of HLAS, entertaining a:
verasont

of the station and ultisately, nercforey of tha :
privste Anerican parties, why <i he accoxany a
femsle singer ¢: Yr appearance abt a derman Va

thoster? in tie deiter car Brey te fre ciaAs sys. cy/orchestra
i an eater a perked of

ro into the exist. nee of
: ayrell padein” at RYAS a subdect was int forned
teat tre State fapurtueat did not wish to informs hin! and ho
on rusignec,

ert)
ville

ah. ae
: orcani gation |
in Cermany.

Ne ds Sots: vey instalisiions, ete, “unich people

have béen warned a!

i : : a
j i 2 an 4



--- Page 337 ---
14-0000

‘Daar Georges

Twill instruct kichael to give you this background wher ze next go23
see your colleagues. . . . |

' 2 ate

t

i
|
!
t
1

‘

Confirming what I have just told you on the sn0se, our ratual friond
wrote Michael a note the oxact contents of which are gs fcllows: | :
f ie en :

road

Yebruary; 25, 1953, :

“after you left this afternoon, Mr. Potert Yoereler cand in

to' nee me, and among other things told me that to his certain

knowledge, RFE had been infiltrated.

| "FT pieked up the wrd and asked hla Lf he wuld tell Be

nore

about it, to which he replied that maybe he hat ueed too atrong a

word, So then I told him to pick any word na verted, but to
me |whot he meant. . . 7 ‘}

"He then told m that there vere peopls wrziag far RPS

tell

who

were either ex-Communists or ex-Socialisets wie were utterly idis-
erddited in their om country and who wore dot.z ue more harm than
good, I asked him if he cared to tell me whe sone of these |psople

‘deriounce anybody. I thought I would leave it a3 tist and ws
on ‘to another subject. :

~werg, to which ho replied that he did not coma % the offies. to

wont

: “However, the purpose of his trip to Washiseton was to, feed

information to Senator KcCarthy's Committees, asc ce will-ba re-

turning in another ten days to give him sone aera stvice. |

*I-think it would bo most, important for zo: er Sob Lang

te.

havo a word with this gentleman and see if you ten’t find cut -

whew he ie talking arout, aes I as sure you woule Se eager to
and to act if justified.* a
nee

know

It was our friend's suggestion, and we will ee: upon it, that togother

with Michael and Kennoth kaltera I try to seo Voegeler. iis I will!do as goon
as I can locate him, and I learn that he iy now in Now Tore. Ye hare have in-
formation thut Voegeler associates socially with an indi vi¢cal
of employment with the Fand seme time ago, has since isa* 9 on;
condem the Fund as being infiltrated.
know to AMichasl as is also the basic situation which Zives sone coler to tha
allogation, |

Who; having failed
portunity to
The latter, incivicvei's identity 4s

I will reserve further comment on thie until 7 eee you persenally, or

|

down to


--- Page 338 ---
14-0000

MOSMCRARDUM FOR? XO DIVISTow

SUBJECT» Attempts of Virgil POFA te Secure Emm loynent
; with RFS Munich.

1. The information dalow suas reported by a KUBARK souree, and a
was acquired in Munich during October 1957; :

a Virgll POPA has renewed his attempts to secure -
employment with RFS‘ Hunich. Subject is in nogsseaston of”
a letter of recommendation ulyned by Sari NICULESCU and
issued in tho nase of General Nicola RACSSCU. The letter
Fecommonded Subject as a rood and caratle Rumsnian to
Generel Ion GHEORGIS asd Aloxandar GQGaIAN, the latter
20 RF employee, ana Fequosted then to assist Subject. in 7
gaining eploynont With KYS Hunich, Subject has taken the -
letter to GREGORTAN in Munich, and has visited hin several
times, in each instance proasing hia fer a jou. - . ot

be POPA haa explained to ORRGETAN that he wishes to
‘@elgrate to the United States, but boesuse he is antl =cIMa,
tho Simdots have informed i. Ss authorities that he ig a
Legionary. As a result, he waa interned at Elis Toland
and refused entry into the United States, GREGORIAN 18 avare
that Fora 4s otil). an isvortant Leplonary leader, and that
this explanation is a tyrical Legionary BANEUV Ero

2 It 10 requested that RFE be informed ef the above infor-
mations i . . .

tt JORN B. BAKER
Chief, ss



--- Page 339 ---
14-0000

rida oo)

eape§
a §nbit

SECURITY INFORMATION

pace

“Dear Gliver,
Bould you be kind ensuyh te pass ¢
the gacloced memorandum to Ld Greene.

, thanks

Sincerely yo

Konwthe

Renneth J. Wal

Enc. 1

SECURITY INFORMATICS ,

Fetruary

w ; i

ate

>

st.


--- Page 340 ---
14-00000

fo)
P. .
Y coos
“1? Februsry 1953”:
110 W. S7th Stroot
New York oe
Dear Ed, -

T saw your nam: on a piece of papor today written in
" recommendation of one Gaica Cantacuzino on 2677th stationary

no loss.

.We aro considering hin for a Job with the Rumanian’
desk and would be grateful for your coumants, He seems, so
far as wo have been able to cetermine, to be well equipped
but a difficult personality,

Hope to soa you Boretime soon.

Sincerely vours,

/e/ Bad
Robert E. Law

(For Edward Greene)



--- Page 341 ---
14-00800

12 February 1953

: "At LIS Twas called to mrad Connor's office and shown a “monorandun
‘sted 19 February 195 3» "useting with Representatives John Taber and

Li &f Clevenger on Petruacy 6, 1953 + taker Fast and Maxor vest",
‘Fra mesorandum wos signed vy General Stonor. Present weres,

Rep. John Taber Iro ~ Mr. Connors
Rep. CLUIL Clevencer T = Ne. Harrie
pr, Wilson Coton - Tas/iy - Nr. Morton
Senoral Frank vmer S  o- Mr. Barnard
I/R = Mr. Croeby - Mr. Lourte.

Genoral Stoner had bean discussing the need for roncy for mre
installations for YoA. AL the top of paige 3 of hin memo, there is
fousd tho followings :

Skr.. Taber mentioned that wo had a large Munich plant. .
said that this vas the alleged place of amloymmt of ruby

- Parsons. Wo stated that our plant in Munich was not .
comparable to the large plant built up by RFE, that ve
felt there snoi4 be a closer coordination on a technical
level beteeon ths. varicus US activities engaged in inter--
national broadcasting in Europe and that there wacn't any
Feasan why a elr-le centralizes plant should not be able
to serve Rais Free Lurspe, Voice.of “merica, Armed Foroes
Retwork, and tie Arsrican Committee for the Liberation of
the Pooples of Fussia. ©

Cdhen liberation of the feoples of Russia was mentioned as
a potential broadcaster, Hr. Taber made notes an’! said that
he would loox into the matter, Hoe was told that the single
building in Hunich erected by RYE could also house all tho
feoders locate in sensrate sites and separate buildings
pertaining to U.5. activities montioned above. Me was.
particularly interested in tuts possibility."

‘¥r. Connors told me that he had ordered paye 3 of thio meno 1
rewritten to omlt these tio paravravhs before the paper got further
circulation. However, ho wanted us to know what Stoner had said
as Siam by these two paragraphs, so that we could take any action
we see fit with reference to Taber and Clevenger. Connors said he
didct> know how far we cut inthe Appropriations Comittes. He
eat¢ taat he had warned. Stoner “twenty times” not to reveal such
tims. He stated that Stoner had learned these whinge while in

Germany.
ARISTIDES 0, LAZARUS



--- Page 342 ---
14-00000

“SECRET

Security Information

29 Yebriary 1002...

ate A, VTY hate He

WIA) Gororal Cusheer

SREETE | Redmboreecant of fre Francie Be Stevens

he Tt-So remented tenet
Francie ®, ‘tevens of the fas
Folto, "ew York. Thin ty var
j a gant Shy he

rowed te ofven te x

ant of “late for a

Se et our rec
Feo aa

eo: :
Hod Le Tetatiore et the Sartor L Comittee for p Free

"de Pre “evens van arkad te ¢e wie wort: becusre ef Sie clcae
gis

perecral friardendp with Ure “rvie. fe “tevene ts pt
tro Coraeltyz ef o Beate bej.art: “enh ©
Ser a trae UNG se

© MES h
act with tie Uational <

eseanciturer ts ghisehed
poner, are rely:
hora ale

Je Fn agcorntity.. ef ©:
airline stula, to he atte
OM leey pendins spnreveld

Aperoveds

Caderat Cougs 7
. FEBEGR = “orig &d
Gen.Counsel = lee

" TO/fr.l - fee
Teputy [rector (iccintotrattony” CIO = Ice
RI < lee
Attachnents 1. (a/s) : IO/Ar = lee

SECRET

Security Inf:



--- Page 343 ---
14-0000

- REFFRENCEs

ust

hoaton pene ee

MEMORANDUM FOR’ DLRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT # NCIE Support of the New Loader

Your Mouorandun of 12 January 1953 (BR 13-6149),
sane subjccat.

1. On 30. January, Saul Levitas advised our PY Staff by tole-
phone that he tiad recuivod a call from Spencer Phenix. According
to Levitas Mr. Phonix stated that NCFS has decided to provide the
New Leader with $16,000. £12,000 of this amount will be a direct
payment to tha magazine for services and the remaining ¢6,000 will
be used to renew 1,000 suaseriptions to the United Kingdoms

2. The PP Staff is preparing for your consideration & project.
separate from-the above whigh would onvisago sending subscr: ptions
to the New Leadur to key Socialist and Lebor people in ‘certaln

other priority aroas,
by k ie

RICHARD HELMS
Chiicf of Operations, DD/P

APP/ACU/ima :
31 January 1953 -

Distribution:
. Addrossee - Orig & 1 .
Chief of Operations, DD/P -

“CPX = 1 " ‘ _—
clo = 1% a BO :
APP =
R= 2



--- Page 344 ---
14t00000

, 3 Fobruary 1953

Yy doar tr. DaBarozat,
I appreciate your letter. and your interest. I

recall with pleasure our ccquairitance during the

war and have noted your desire to serve tho :

"damoeratio cause.

Very sincerely yours,

itr. 3, Delarcza :
11, Ranger Road \

CIOmtD/mf (19 Jamary~1953) Lod
retyped 0/DDCIsRIL/lab (23 January 1953) i
retyped O/DDCI:AND/man (3 Fobruary 1953).
Dist: :
Orig = Adcdrosace :
1 co = DDCI Chrono :
1 cc + ER :
1 ce = ClO.” :
lec = RI : .
1 ce = TONIC:



--- Page 345 ---
14-0000

“. é 2 Rebs

Se _ SECRET went BE Sin

cuaty

MPAORANDUM FOR: Chief, I0 Division : “reed
FRM =a Chef, SE yor
SUBJECT $ ‘Viorel Virgil TTLHA ‘

” ‘2. It i198 our understanding that Viorel TLeA is currently under
consideration for the position of head of Rumanian broadcasts for RFE.
In this connection we call your attention to infornation in our filog
indicating fa) the ponsibility. that Subjact is a #ritish Intelligence
agents (b) that a close relationship exists between Sudject and Nicolae.
MALAZA, the well-known Rumanian industrialist now in the United States,
and (c) that Subject. has tics with former King CARCL, MALAXA is cur-
renily under scrutiny not only by this Agency but by the FST, the Bureau
of Tmaigration and Naturalization, the Mepartment of Justice and the
House Judiciary Committee, for his allered collaboration with Xing CAROL,
with the TRO! GUARD and later, with the Rumanian Comtunist Government.
ChROL'n activities are, of course, & matter of record,

. 2. Numerous usually reliable sources have indicated their deliof
that TILFA ig an agent of the Hritisi Intellisence Service, This opinion
appears to be held by many knowled:eable Rumanian enisros,

3. That Subject is definitely linked to Nicolae MALAXA is borne
out by” the following: .

. a. A report by the FBI on Nicolae MALAXA dated 20 Cetober
19LA indicates that tho following telephone calls wero nade on
MALAXA's own telephone in New York:

"arch 20, 1OLf, ‘umber called: DIstrict 3000, Waah.
‘DC. “erson called:.V. TILA, Mayflower totel, Viorel TILFA
ie the former Rumanian Minister to the Court of St. James
who has been active in Subdject's behalf,

“eapr il 1, 19h, . Incoming collect call from Y. TILA,
calling from BXecutive 7300, Hash, N.C. .

“"aprid 1b, 19h? felesran sent to London, Interna-
tional 575, | signed’ VIORTL CVTOREL TTEEAY,

PApril lh, 29L8. Telegram sent, te Paris, Intemna-
tional 550, signed TILEA,



--- Page 346 ---
14-0000

From the same reports
"Confidential Informant T-3 advised the Nurvau on May n, 1918

° . that he had received information that among the members of the
soard of Directors of the Rumardan-smerican Leonomie Corporation
(sete: This waa set up by PALS KA) are ‘Morel ‘TILEA and Grizore

GAVENCU, . 2”

From TIL!A's own gstatementa to the jhreau in the same reports
©, . he (TTLEA) could honaatly say that MALAXA, tn hia opinion
and in the opiniona of .many. Rusanians, 1a by Sar the beat
Rumanian citizon. Yrs TILSA indicatad that there nover had
been any question about the chsracter of “MALAXA and that no one
could level any chargon arainet hin that would concern his char-
acter, morals or patriotiam .. . Mr. TILMA stated that he was
very sympathetia towards MALAXA al the present time..."

b. In the. ease of a anit brouctt bafore the Supreme Court,
County of New York, in November 191%, oy “ircen A, GROSS, formerly
employed by “ALAXA, against tho latter for racovery of cortain funda,
the followins was ziven as “ihird.Cause of Action";

- “ “That on or about the 10th day of Aumst LOL, at the
special instance and request of the defendant, and upon defen-
t's promisy to repay the plaintiff’ the sum of three thousand . ,

(#3,090,00) dollars, plaintiff piid to one Hr. Y. V. TILFA, the |
gum of three thousand (/3,000 209) dollars. S

. "That no part'of the said cin of three thonsand ($3,000.00)
dollars haa boon paid to plaintiff by defendant, although demand
therefor has boen duly made.”

©, Another source ig quoted as follows in “arch 191A,

*There 1a an important consideration which, in the minds
of some Ruvanian political exiles, necessitates the createat
caution concerning collaboration with TIL:A, It is a well-
@otablished fact that TILEA has close business connections
with “ALAYA and 1s working hand in hand with hir, As TILAA's
collaboration is ‘of no interest for “ALAXA from a business
point of view, dt 48 clear that the strong ties which exiat
between them are of another nature, It ig obvinua ‘to Ruvanians
abroad that TTLEA ahould not be included. in a Rurm ian tational

Committee,”

Concertina TTLE, Ata alleced tiea with rnin CAROL, the following
references are taken fron our files: oo



--- Page 347 ---
14-0000

of OSS:

source, coneorming the activities of Tut
Ruzanian eci-cre priest #:.0 hag set hims

a, Froa a report “ated 2h August Sh from the London office
*TILNA's Tree Roratans are also satiscted (with the now
development sin Brania) thouch mo moderately, They too ars
and KASTE but they susrect Ruissfan intrimue to be
idle for the latest chan ‘The fact that ex-Kinz

L has axcresse4 hie satisfaction: fs aleo vralifyine for
since several of TILUA's man Rare not riven up tho hope
of brincins CAMUL tack to Rumania, Shey have maintained a
corresponaaxce with vite ox-King, hey vould heave much to
expect from him 4% me came back meer. TILEAta followers
any likewise very pivseed with the fact that most of the men
foming the new foverment aro of uss game political color as
themselves, They are slmost all fasmer Xing CAROL favorites

and goed Sriends of some of the menturs of the Sree fimanian

movement . 0 2?

b. Fron aa OSS revert addressed to Yr, Allen W, Dulles from

FA.c,® gated § Kay 15L2:

Perardine the Rowmaulan diplomat we is expected to arrive in
New York fas per rz recent memoranaa! to take over the leader-
ship of tha Ruranta:: movement here, mr informante believe 4
that he is \r, ‘forel TYLA, the ma who started the Free
Rumanian movement 4: iny land. The Fritish are said to tiave
locked upen Sim with disfavor, isa friend of King CAROL |
and of TASTA, It {is reported that tr. TILHA is to enter ‘
the United States 7a Mexico ang fr = believed that he may
already be there con. erring with o& 7

tL.

co. From a report by- fail CHILS2ak fe IShe: - :
| NAYILA micnt be watered down to the point where he ia accept- i
able to the Politics] tartics, owt arver TILA, who ig a King :
CANCL man,® :
d, Prem 2 report ézted 1951, evalusiad as 3-3, from London:
Vasile Liu, the discredived
uP as a bishopt
“THAT, to request Lhe:
ave bean worked out by

*Fron Ts: ancul 1 ietends to visti
apisespal crogier, .Tufs plan seemsiic >

“LED and “ze, Zlena L7PSCU, former tiag CAROL will apparently |

finance L<v7's bishocrtie. . . Informant cained the impression
that LY&T's rlacg are” upported by Tizzel TILEA and Major
Cheorshe. TLIENT, 2 2” : oo :

e. From a report, eraluated ag 3-5 , ecming from Paris in Doe

‘Noverbar 16S;

-3-

be

ok kunt :



--- Page 348 ---
14-0000

“Judgin: from opinions gathored here during the last weots
Source 19 !nclined to believe that General Nicolac RADP LY ts
Teady to repudiate the King, Jn much an action he wouls be
backed by the pro-CAXOL clique Gheorhe RAUT, Prof, Wicolis
- HRRESCH, Col, cheorghe’ ILIESCU, Viorel TILEA, General Ton
Cheorche.” : : .
- S.A member of the National Peasant Party and supporter 67 Talfa
MANTU, TILEA broke away from that group around 1935 to join Alezsndar
VAINA-VOHYOD who founded tho fascist RUMANIAN PRY, VAT DAR TUVGD,
havini: aided CARGL in becomin:: dictator, becane President -of the RATION
RENATSSANCE. PRONT, the totalitarian party ast up by CAROL in 19¥. bas Oo
VORVON was an advoeste ef the "nuneris valahichus®, an wltra-na*fornalist
policy aimed at limiting to 5 the number of Jews allowed to practise
professions or to-attend universities. _In 1938, according to this souree,
who 19 oonaldered usually reliable, TILEA bocane one of tho nalistars
of the CAML dictatorship. another sonree, in reforring to this :e riod,
statos that TTLEA who was thon Under Sacretary of Stato, acted aa like

“Ison botween YATMA-POSTIED and the TR GUARD.

.. 6. & source evaluated aa umally reliable atated that in lata 1shé
TILUA wroto’ to Alaxanter C2ETATANU requesting loan of 30,000 pounds free
tho "resistance funds’ In “witverland which C‘ETSTANU controlled, ‘pon
receiving CARCZTANU's refisal, TTLFA reportedly wrote to the latter that
it would be nacaastry, since he had not -receivad the treatment to which

ha beliaved he waa entitled, "to revise his attitude (towanis CPETZIAUD)

in futuro,°

7. In the ‘interests of expediency we have not made an oxhzigtive
search of the files for information on Mibject at this time alice this
would involve a consicereble delay in forwarding information, we are,
therefore, submitting the above in the fors of an intorim report for
your immediate consideration, '



--- Page 349 ---
14-0000 . ‘

|
ot

'
\ :
'
:
- \ “7 7 :
a . j
Py ?
. i}
! TUM FOR: TO/TONTS
4 SURIEIT Call from 2 '
: ry to put Pad “ersten @y9 foart = has radia axporfence,
: Please secure Sceurtty Clearances on at .
: tT. Ro Yuronlav pubis led BLT.

t do our

2 , Durkee about -and ha
e has

frien the +
onit. They have rm

. ceed
wet
'

: and th ot his views, 3
azo on this and rather thar. -

5
t f these oublirations, he a S a-couple

i m this,

: ne is after



--- Page 350 ---
14-0000

28 april 1993 ut

MEMORARTUM FOR: CIPECTOR OF CBATRAL THTMLULOENCE
SUBSET: . segada for discussion with Mesors. Ford, Brophy ot al.

BACKOWKND s

1. Yor your teforeation, the following aro current facta in’
the “Aneriean ‘Weritezs Foundation take-over of the Crunado for Frosdons

a. The Anertoan Heritage Youndation wlll undertake the
Crusade for Yreedom eaubject Ww reconsideration after a period
of one year;

B®. “PKC has recomended the sun of 225,000 be granted the
Azarioan Herltaze Foundation for ite proliminary works

ec. Two Cl& staff avante will bo employed on the promises
of ANF -- an etninistrative assistant and a financial xan.

AOHDas

2. In your éizexseions with Henry Ford and DtA, Brophy Wednesday,
I wonder whether yor sould mako the following points:

a. The orincipal objectives of the AH¥ procram are to provide

cover for HCPE-77% and CYA through a mitiplicity of ostenslble
sources of funds, fund raising ia a @lotine tly secondary objective. -

bd. For seversi reasons, cover funderaising for tho Committee
fer Free Azia sould be carried on outetde tho Crusade for
_ Freedor activity. a may at some future dato wish to transfor the
funderaising for the Comalttee for a free Asin to some other organi-
gation. In any event, we do not want the Crusade name linked with
the Cosmities for a tree Asia. .

_ 6. The previous Crusade onerations have beon inefficiently
operated, It has cost a collar to raise a dollar. We know that
Aly wil be run on a- “businesslike basia, as have Aly past: ovorations.



--- Page 351 ---
14-0000

d. Wewant o dignified operation. which will enlist. tho

suprort of reprosentativo eroups and individuals, ‘nile we

are interested in securing real contributions fron tho public

. for the Crusade, tho Crusade's primry purpose 18 t eervo a8

peoples.

a cover, It was and io intended therefore that tte tenor be
educational «> a dignified presentation to the Aserican public

of events behind, the Iron Curtain anda request, for the public's
support of NCKE/RFE efforts to yive aid and hope te tho satellite

o...We request that before further funds are estivrized,
a Memorandum of understandiny alonz lines of ‘tha atracied be
gigned by both parties, (Your attention is invite? to the! |

\provieion requiring two CIA staff ayants asstynes AHF staff).

THOMAS W. BRADZH
. , . Chief
International Organisations Divielon

Attachment :
Draft Meno of Understanding -

Orig
lice
lee
lice
lec

10/BrI1WPD-TWB/eh|

= DUL Crane one)
- 10/er I

- 10/ar Il

- CIO

- RI

coe cPhP


--- Page 352 ---
14-0000

Tontative Memoranun of Understanding |
Hetweon Fund and tae foundation

Subject to tho onecific understansing that the Fund shall at all
4imes have authority to veto eithor in part or as a whole eny fund
rateing or other activities that the fuundation may cealre to undertake
din ito condeet: of the Fund's camaign, and equally that the Yund ray

1.

a
3.
be

5.
6.

l
é.

The
1.

2.

3.
he

_Penuest that opecitic Agtion or actions ba taken, the Fund azroess

To provide funds fer Foundation's overhead and maintenance
of a baale Otarl,

That Fouwotton should continue A4ts normal tund-rataing
acti: vittea, but sugn activition other than vraviced for in
1 above anv) J-oelow cannot he finaieed by the bund, —

To apyrove, by June 1 of each year, a campaign budget for
the seat Siscal year besiuning 1 July, terminating 39 June
of tha next year. - :

Subject to Fund! budgetary review and policy guidance, to

vost in the soundation manaveuent and oporational authority
evar the public cunderaloing activities.

7a destynate a cometent Lliatson offieor throuh whom Yund~
Youndation reliatioana will be raintained,

To provide an administrative assistant and a fiseol officer
to work on Foundation premisas,

’

To provide thorough fiseal and other procedures.

To define and provido a Unuication resorve accontable to
tne Fund and Foundation shovli relations be tarninated.

fourdation agreoss

To gubmit by ita; 1 each year its budget for the next fiscal
year following thal date.

Hot vo undertake other fund-raising serivities whieh would
conflict wit: the torms and purossep of this Memorandum of

Unceretanding.
fo observe procedures as provided by the Fund.

fo employ Fund-chosen atminiatrative assietant and fiseal
officer to work on Foundation premises, ~

;


--- Page 353 ---
14-0000

fa

5.

6.

Tr

To have an annual audit by a firm to be doalynated by tho
Fund. : . -

Yo Gxereise management and operational authority within the
framework of policy guidance nrovided by the Fund. The’
primary objective of the Cund-raising activities is to proe
vido a multiplicity and variety of plausible, attributable
sources of funda. The secondary objective is to raise as
large a sum of roncy arnually as is feasible and conatatont

with the abova purpasa,

Provisions of this “emorandum of Underatanding will mbdse-
quently be more specifically dotailed an my be amended by ©
eutual agreement between the Fund and the Foundatton.

fate a FouReation


--- Page 354 ---
14-0000

HOURLY BROADCASTING BREAKDOWN

* Original Propramming Hours Total Broadcast Time

Languog r _ Week Sundays" = Woekdays Sundays’
Czechoslovakia — nh usp a9 12-6 The
Bungarian 91/2 10 65k w/e
Polish 6 5/6 .6 5/6 16 5/6 6 3/h
Fumsniin 1y2 1 30-3.
Bulgarian, 112 21 23/h 2 3/t
Albanian V2 ye | yh 1
3o “/6 3c oo 60 Va “ane

Program Dept. Personnel = N.Y. (Total)  <111 |
dtinich (Total) -L68
579

(Free Lance not Included)


--- Page 355 ---
14-0000

vo 3) Jar 5°

| SI Ch. e tee a hare ote idudtine
LLG Ce hese f

{ . r .
i) a -
: :
i
: Mr, Sradens ‘
: Fllen nays a clearance has been in aince hh Nee 198? on Allen Miehia.
Nothing has been dane in Sueurity on ft and norsibly they can set te tt next
week, O'Cannel an 259) in the one handling tt. .
. FO midein ¢ % oon Wir in Avge SL and found me rathar desoratory info.
. State wae conaldering him for doynent and drapnyed it becnuse of FRI chock.

Bo you want to call Lane and ted]. him clearance haa not been secured yet?

i“



--- Page 356 ---
1400000

SECRET

(then Filled Iny

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT

Vea Keay Joateer. "

7) eg fe

TVALUATION

TRANSFERRED TO
RL FILE NO.

THIS BrrensT9 Apom ane

. FILED
7 SECTION

: "FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO.

SECRET _ : tae

oe 867 var racviow



--- Page 357 ---
1400000

Trorecly refer ta:

11989

Dear bh

Caer pee eeenn cers, ented beet d trains y

‘ - You my be intercated in 4 dispateh which I received nore 8
couple of says ago and watch 1 quote as follows: :

fon January 14, Alexander Booker of the Garman Foreign office
infeomally brought to our attention a map of Eastern Europe .
which apveared in the Lecember tasue of "News from Behind the ©
Iroc Curtain", a ponthly periodieal published by the "National
Comidttes for a Freo Europe”, Tois map which ia show in. .
smsit seale on paze 1 of this periodical, shows oll of Eastern
Germany, including East Prussia, %26 Satellite States, and the
forner Saltic Statee, In the case af the formor Gorman terri-
tories east of the Oder-Heigse lins, tue area 19 simply shown
as belonging to Poland, and its sre-war borders are not sot
off by a dotted line, ‘With reasect to Poland, Caechoslovakia
and fomania, hosever, the territsrios that were annexed by

the Soviet Union during or after sorld War IT aro clearly

. marked by a dotted lins. Furthermore, the Eastern Zone of
Germcy ag well as Zast Prussia are snown in the same colors
as ths Soviet Union, whereas the Raitic and Satellite States’

are sown in white.

PAlt&soozh Booker adnitted that the nap itself was not of great
impertance, he severtheless pointed out that it represents —
‘a tyrical axampla of the one-sided antixierman propaganda’
put >t not only by the National Comdttoe for a Free Europe
bat also by Hacio Free Europe. Sue propaganda, he said, can
. only increase the misgivings which many Germans, particularly
: : ' the ralugees, alreacy entertain with respect to the activities
poe _ of ita committee and on:the cperations.of Radto Free Europe on
: . Germaa soil. Finally, Booker politely hinted that the German .
4 Gorercment would welcome it if the U. S. High Commission’ would .
use its influence with the National Committee for a Free Europe
' to stop dissemination of such anti-serman propaganda in the -
fotcze. A more constructive and objective propaganda policy
oe of tz» comalttee and Fadio Free Eurme alang the lines of a
Loe large> Suropean Community that would embrace Poland and Crecho- -
i : Blovacia as well aa a.-reunited Germany and the other European
_ natiocs would not only contribute to a battar understand ing



--- Page 358 ---
14-0000

between the various refugee eLamants but would also havo |
the full cupport of all Gernios, Sookor added." _

Incidentally, I think you are doing an awfally good job on this
kind of thing, The other night 1 actually read through an entire,
cory. an

Tho articlo on musio for the nasses and the general axnoge of
the attack on the arts is particuiariy elunifieant, [ think. Until
the recent anti-Semitism, this £1627 of culture te the one Meld of
Soviet activity in wiich they wore welnerablo before neutralista and-
fallov-travalers everywhere, ‘Tha textancy of the intellectual to-
Swallow. the Soviet line on oulture, > fall for the Stalin Prises,
‘the high status accanted tha obedient intelleatual in Soviet Bocloty,

‘Fand peeudo-sctentifie appeal of the Serxian dowma of equality ta

eangerous. In a tree society, the istallectual is the origin of
ideas, : . f

Anything we can do to show the sace that avery aaract of Sovtet
culture has been transformed into an instrumont.of the State, that -
tha inteliectual's role is important aly vo long as he is odedient,
that dn fact the product of the Sovies artist would not hold 4 candle
%> the standards set. dy fellow-travelia;s circles in Vestem Burope,
and that tho. Soviet has corrupted the crinctples of equality on which
it presumes to atand is terribly important. .

T am sure you are aware of all the adove but I thought of it:
when I read tho piece in the last issce, and BY comment is just
anothor way of telling you what a good job I think you are doing.

Sincorely,

Oliver Harduood
Qtr. David Powers : 7 2 :
New York, New York) mo, . :
Clo:TWB/eh ;

orig - Addressee
lice - Leonard Stam
ce = TONIC

lce - CIO

l-ce - AT



--- Page 359 ---
14-0000 {

Vins Maadbas Ny ey ne ;
. . . 1

Qe ni be re
“OS

SECRET

Security Infarination

27 Janvary 1953

A

MENCRAMITZ rus ote Cine, INTE PHATIONAL “matsaSt LeaTIONS VIVISION

SUBJECT’s Pxplottation by i of Physicians (Plot)

1. ttteched herewlth the Janusry 17 Washington Post Editorial on
"Communt st fntisenitien, wiloh you recested. . vo
2. tds editorial has’ not teen proviuwsly sent to New Yorks. However,

I should Like to call your attention to the fact that tie material covered
in this: ecitorial nas already been oxploited by RYE, as ovidencod” in thelr.

Guicancesr of 3, 1 and 15 January. . :

-_ WLEN. STERN
_ 10/TONIC

Attachmexts
As (saet above



--- Page 360 ---
1
14-0000 '
'

i SEET «st

a : Security Information

TO 1 Doputy Director (Plans)

| .
FROM. «Comptroller

SUBJECT: Additional Funds for Crusade for Freedom

1

Crusade for Freedom.

. 2. On 2k January 1953 a repregentative fron this office
A, discussed, and reviewed the basis for the request for additional
funds with officials of the Crusade for Freedom. The following

unaudited amounts were Presented for review:

Aan operating bank account overdraft
Unpaid invoices on hand
: Unpaid Commitwents for tha 1952 campaign

: Total bank ovordraft, unpaid invoices and

The Crusade officials have eatimated that in addition to the above
$218,502.73 a further amount of $18,000 will be required for

expenses to close out the 1952 campaign,

3. It 1s recommended that the £253,000 approved by the PRC,

26 January 1953

1. Reforence is made to memorandum. dated 15 January 1993 .
from Chief, PP to the. DD/P and to the memorandun of 8 Jonuary
1953 for the DD/CI gubmitted by the Chief, IO Division wherein
request is made for additional funds of ‘$553,109 for the

commitments to 2h January 1953 $213,502.73

21 January 1953 be mado available to'the Crusade for Freedom fran the

allotaent to the DD/P area for the fiscal year 1953.

vouchered funda is recommonded.

. His, ky

E. R. SAUNDERS. /

' : : : os - . LW. :
SEB ET james

Security Information

The use of un-


--- Page 361 ---
14-0000

CONFIDENTIAL

£2 {RESTRICTF
ao ATION TOS aN) BOTTOM,

iM MILLE CLA.

UNCLASSIF 1

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

CT Wersovar (77 intormation C7 stcnature
(heres -. [77] oirect Repty (J return

T Kersten [“Tprepararion oF repy I pi sparen
(= koreuseence (CJ}recoumenoation (oJ Five

wohed Yer carries re
c tublished tn the ie

REMARKS:

in mide to Ei/P; MYT
Chief, In renee
AN/OG; General Counsel;

er fbut fon
Chief, PP
ranch, (01;
1. Vood, T&S,

SECRET COnFIDENTIAL ( RESTRICTED ~
fORM NO, ee

sep soar 274

UNCLASSIFIED

oth



--- Page 362 ---
14-0000

£
¢

}
}
i
4
i
3
a

RECTRICTID
4 -~ HIS - HUNGARY
: Jan. 26, 195%

‘JOINT! RLY ONE Or ULS, EFY TENTACLES
hudapeat, liungarian Hone fervice, Jan. 23, 1953, 1900 GMT--L a
(Sonmontaty vy Tal Lendvat) ; ~ _

(Suomiry with Quotatt sna)

In the rerort sarricd ty an “Amurtcan bourcuats weckly" tho’namo of tho
banker Varburs wag included omong eeveral phllenthrapie U.s. busine
Varbure wie deszribed ag ano of tho maat zoalous among them. | Tho adfe
tive woulg tave been. truly opt If applied not to Marbure'a philunthropte
activities but to hia bustnece nctivitiec.

"In the htatery of funerlean cupttaliom wu have hoard of mony u olpcwd and
bone bunincsenen, but vow have bean mora cunning or more rendy fdr any
ad every wiskedneau thin “arbuse. By provongion he fa na bankere-and not

Just any sesond-or third-rate upeculator, vt a mender of Kuhn, Loob,

sand Company, the cocond largcot. banking firm in the United Staten...

At tho same time, ho (a lac chairman at Joint, tho Zionist Jewluh |

bourgedis-nationalfet orcontvation.

"Et wild be remembered that the Joint has becn, to the acconpantment ot
thn eulogiea oF tho bouresia prees, acting for yourn under a phtilanthraple
dtoy-utge and with the alleged purpose of providing; Cinnnetel nid ta Jews
In Europe and other countrica, ws

“In reality thio organtesticn-~-aa revealed by the Slanoky trlul. and tho
e6Ke of the group of doctor-wreckors unimaked in the USSH--hae eerved aa
a forward bese o¢ American impertalfem and has curried out, under the :

diresticn of thy U.S. cap!onage services apying, terrortat, and sabatige

activities cpainst the UBER and the People's [emocrazten.

Birda of a Ccather flock tuvcther: Joint to elven anny by the identity :
of the man heeding it. Nr. “erburg, donning the rsbe of the phtlanthropsat
and placing himecl’ in the role of aavior of the Jews, hua been the bosom
friend and business partner of the “est German benker Poerdumongou, 2no

of Hitler'y former flnanzicre and advisers, one 2 the wickedent Nexl

war criminal, :

‘Warburg, the Zioniet leader, afd Pfordorenpes, “the Hitler{te, have
Jointly founded with veat fnftiel enaftal a banking firm in Howburg,
the moat important {nvceticnt tn Weat Germany of 2uhn; L-eb, and
Company. ae . : - a

i


--- Page 363 ---
14-0000

es : aay
RESTRICTED

- HHS + HUNGSRY
: Jan. 2h, 1953
“eThbe au “arburg who, with one hand, ser{bbles huminiutic and charity
appeala fina pocketed with the 2thor--a0 w chiar shorcholder or LG.
Farbontndustrie--rich dividends rugulting Crom the mimirecture of pofeon
gio vor, thio Auvoebwitzdouth camp, whore reversal million: rexple, {nelud-
Ing many hundreda of thousands aC Jeno, were killed. Thia name
arbury who proncheu about helping tac vietima of tho wor {gy one of tho
main architects of ‘the eald war ond, with the golden rain of dollara
he helps to net on to feet again the tloadthtvety and money -hungry Gorman

fmporfallom.

‘Such ia the likenora of philanthfaplety for whom-every life oxtlryitiahed,
every bomb dropped means the elinking of gold. Under the expert -ditece
thon of Mr. “arbure, the princtpal tank of Jotut lise beon spying anil the
oreantcation cr anbotare for tha owerthov of the Peaple'a Benczratie

Thla woo the organization wilch dlrosted the bise activittes or
the drctor-wreekers and yave inetructiona for the extermination of the | -
leading eadrds of the Soviet Unton. At tho anme time, however, it doea
nol loak with contempt upan curtency dcale and black marketeering or
omupelirr. Spying and andotcgo havo proved oxscllent buainesa eles.

rerimeu.

> Throws the: fllegnl emigration moverent in Creehaglovekie, for tnitunce,

Joint m:do a provit af 9 dollara for every dollar invested The damare
whlch ‘Lhese.«rtininala have caused ‘the Cree hoaylovak Pesple'a Republic
would havo covored thu coota of 20, 900 5 room fists or 177,090 cur londe of

wheat."

Jotut, though Important, fo by no means) the only espionage and terror
orminfcation of fmerfaan imperialtem. "tho U.S. Government long ag?

madu in (notitutionual and an cffietal governmental activity of the
organization of ssouantnations sad acta ‘of terrsr. Tho Mutual Security
Act prowldea 100 millten dollaro Sur tho recruitment ints erecd farmations
of "war erimtual and other criminals, who fled tron the USC end the .
Posple's Demrcrnctee," for action agalret thelr countrier of origin.

ftnae the end of the World Wear Tw> the wer ine ndiaries have baci’
tenactously and syetemitivally bullding up thelr tntorwoven and world-
embracing caplonuge notwork."” ‘The gum total Invested for the purpsee fe
far in excesa of tho amount atipelated in the Mutual Securlty Act.

‘The Swisa paper DIE TAT catimatea the annual opersting costa of the
Central Intelligence Acency, employtnz 6,500 po tmanent and tenu of
thousanda sf temporary aplea. at. 300 million d-linre.



--- Page 364 ---
14-0000

:
1

ao . cain

~ HN 6 « : HUNGARY
Jan. 26, 1953

"That agony wan recently piven a new chief, following tho reatgnotion of
Gen, Bedell Cinith, wlth the appointment a tew daya ogo ot’ Allen Dullow,
the brother of the new Seerstary of State, the tmmedfiate dtrector of the
gecrel wir ugaingt the USN and the Peoplo'a Pumeeractea, the rocruiting
otricur’ of -the Rajke, Ezoonylu, Slanskyo, and sthor traitara of the nine

brind, : mo,
: : a

{cotlon ombrncon ecverd] badloa active tn

3 and-dalveraton and commucliged with impreanadve numee, thd
Deanteation known ua the National Committee for a Free

* ono of the many meintatned with 1.8. dollsrg and drocting

f ch oryantvationa S)L over Kurore. That committes, too, haa
boen headed by fllen Tullea, and tte mombera havy tneJudedt Progtdcnt
Eiaenhower, Gen. Clay, And heprenuntativea o¢ thy yellow trade unfons and

af "all Street."

Thet eomalttco hav been the motive toree behind tho variong natlonaL
committoea, Including the one lod by “proven traftora Lika Peron: Nogy,
Mikolajoryk, and thelr aeas:tatea." In Strasbourg ond sther placey

is otandIny ot univoraittua, toeother
toug m.thade of Incendieriam and avnaunsnntion, tho "Groen
fonnl" io alas ono of the-eommitton'a tranzhea, allfed to ~the
eang of tho tnteruotlonad acum 3! adlords deprived of their ontatca.

'It ia but on few monthe ago that the Czechosliak State Security ‘organs
unmsoked a torrertut eroun belonging to the {nternatfonal copbonago*
orgenizntion. The mtburatea or Pury of the lapertiallut Lic-minufa:turera,
thir wailings, the valvaca xf eRe ecming from tho bourgeals politicians,
are proote in themelvea tint the expoaure of the undercover Joint
agencies, the recent Liquidation of Amertcan apy and terrorlat groupe

{In Pulsartu and Palind hua touched the oreganizerg of a new wir to tho
quick. :

“According to deta not quite eonplete, in tho part year alsne 42
Amerlesn eny group und terrorfot srountzationuy huve been liquidated
in the USER and the Poople'r Democraries. Wa must. bo prepered for the
time whon the enomy, previscly because of the now blaw suffered by htm,
wlll try to hern us by even viler meang ; :

* b

iber Ctalin's wloe worde tz tho efrret that a9 long

1
‘We must alwayn remer

ae there fo capitnliom arsund us, there wll) be wrocherg, divergionist ;

apices, and terr-rlota sent by forcign esuntrics ta steb the faytiet
Unfon In the back. Let ue theretsre right wlth «ven greater vigilance,
let us right even more tnplucably againat the enemy's ‘attcmpte to pre-
vent. by oubstapo and subvergion, the Suflding of Sratellem. The
fruatration of hiu plans dy da upon ue ind psn our vigilance,"

RESTRICTED , :

|
q
f



--- Page 365 ---
14-0000

i

1953 BUDOET

“4»Radlo Free Europo foperating expenditures
- a a

: capital

Total RFB

National Cogmittee for a Free Eurepe
Operating Expenditures

Hational Comnittce for a Free Europe
Capital expenditures

Tetal NCFE-

Pree Zurope University in Exile

"Operating Expenditures
Capital J

Total FEUE

GRAND TOTAL

Reserve for Centingency
"(te be held by NCFE}

i .
Te be held by spensor
TOTAL BUDGET

~ SEET
Security Information

,

8 9,525, 302,00

2,931,120, 00

3,774, $17.00
None

f

|

628 631,00
6,©00, 00

‘

in

1

$12,$07,422,00

3,7785527,00

624 ,632,00
816,916,570. 00

100,000, 00

1, 783,430.00
$28,800,000,00



--- Page 366 ---
14-0000

Security Information 26 damery 1953 :
NEMGRAMDIM PORS CHIKP, INTERNATIONAL ORGAN! ZATIONS DIVISION,

1 i
SUBJECTS. _ + Meeting of Poles to be held tere in February

Memorandum on same subject fran CLO to 10/Rranch I, dated
23 Jamiary 1953

1. ROCF: has confirmed that a meeting of ambaseadors and diplomats of the
Poliah Governsont in exile te tu be hold here in the middle of Vebriarys : .

2. The following individuals are schedsleé to attand the meetings

ae pnbaarndors

Papec ok tascedor to the Vatican
Potocki eAsvaevador to Madrid
ZOnczykowSkLesecccsevcesecversohGiacendor id Lebancn

be Ae ento

Norawokle..
Faczynekhee
Pebinskd,
LipeklLesess
Areircevaki
Dombinskt se...

c. Uthers

aretary-Oercral of the Foreign
Office of the Govermont in idle,
eexing fran London
CicchanousklececescccsrsceseeceForer Anrbasgajor to lasnington
(art1l 19k5) °
WELLaLLeecscesccssceecesssessoPorner Consul. to the Enbassy in '
nagtington (until 1945) 1

3. The purpose of the meoting ie to discvee end decide, ratters concerning:
the foreign policy of the Govermont in Exile. ECPE has heard runore, but does
not know for a fact, that the Foleo intend ts ray their respects to the new: !
Adminietration, If thia should be done, General foenkowski (who is returning
fron Candda at the end of this week) would be tre syokesman, since he knows

Eisenhower personally. . ; if

Lh. CPE io ‘in no way involved in eponeorinzg or finaneing this necting.
The Polish Government in Exile has finds of its om which skould ‘enable it to

send delecates.

SECRET WILLIE DURKEE . a
Secuaty iia © Chief, 70/08



--- Page 367 ---
14-0000

23 January 1953

WENGPAUDUM FOR: YO/BRANCH 1 + Miva Ellen Stera
EuBSECTs Mooting of Poles to bo held here in Fadruary

1, John Bresa telephoned r# late today to tayrire whetoer
SCFE knows anything about a meeting of a growy of Poles in tas
Polizh Government in Exilo to be held in February. Bokolouscy’7)
wag mentloned as a member of this group, and 4% Le their irtention
to meet with Poles from South America, and pay their respects
the now Aduinistration,

2, Tha Embassy in London is concerned about visas for trees
Poles and Bob Joyce has asked Jchn Bross whether ve ere givicg any

encouragement to this proposed mecting.
3. Will you find out from KCFE what they know about tata?

THOMAS tf, BRADEV
CrLef
International Organizations Division

a clen

- tddressee
- TO Ponio file

er neny
M ers



--- Page 368 ---
14-0000

23 January 1953
NEMOTANDUM FOR: GHIEF, IO BRANCH T
SUBJECT! Use of RFE ag Playback in avant of hostilities

1, I believe you held somes conversations with the Communications
peoplo about Spencer Phenix's idaa, which he axpressed to me, that
REE might be used ag a playback in tha event of hostilities, will
you let me know the results of thosa conversations, whether our
Communications people think it is possible or not possible, and in
general wnat their ides aro,

2. Spencer Phenix has been asking me about this for reasons
which you know, and I think we ought to vive him some kind of a
definite answor,

THOMAS W, BRADEN
Chlef
International Organizations Diviaton

Orhig = C/LO/Br?
lee ~ CTA


--- Page 369 ---
14-0000

yer f € ke

p- BLO
[in eee, jee 7ee

_ , wes
en? BLU

27 Senuary 1953

(Haller)
MEMORANILUM PCRs Chie?, 10
FROM , Chief, PI/Plann/Cver’
SUBJECT s Cow-ents conceratar Crusade for Burers

evber 1952 Yr, Reietiardt Jfeeussed «14h your divie
sion esritact aby  /C repranentetives with Ur, gucinsr of Gone~
ral Motore tn betroit is rejard ‘4 leneral Motors! con ributione
to the Crusado of Preesas. Mr. Buetner recently reperted to CC/C
tho following infcrmation.

1,

2, Suzanne LaPollette, Maceeine Fdltor of the Preesnan Kavae
sino, New York, tecentiy wrete a letter ta Me, Jordan ci 2 seral
Carton Conpany, Battle Lreey, Mic? fyan, in which ste erttielaed
the Cruoada for Freedexn, tne ainted, cucne other things, that the
promotery of the Crusade are a "mune! of micro liverais ani do not
know anyt: ing about react ing fron eurtein countrias",

3. The letter ig reperted ts have been turned ewer ts: the
Battla Greek newspar er, Livirer, tut fis eentents bheve not yet
been publisted,
have cure
re that

4. According to ¥r, Buckner, LaFcllette's ecnzents
talled offorts to solicit funds for tre Crusade and ke fe
this tyre of invorartion z Lt veeel. ouher eity preupa,



--- Page 370 ---
14-0000

SECRET

Security Information /

22 dar ary 1983 | ny?

2
weg hort, ggery ‘oo

Mateeente ace by Seer voreter

ry

Ve cur frlerda in Mow vem have infor.ed co ¥
cavo aw rb t esc fu sthletic Tub dn tee cn 13 den sry 2753
wo beg uscet of pay Local watlures

Ps +
oe GP

of hig oforess be mypeortenly re
broaccret Ln: Sommer crete, Coselell scored ar
euced bah ot arfaecton ort
Cupid teca cu of et wieloction vit
roney Lees i
WED. ale
bas toca
VuAe

3s Tor friends are aeacts con a escplete res
Troy feel teat more rort cf action shold be te: en to ate
fron coctinuing te ake gich rear 2.

Hi

Gao ie fateh


--- Page 371 ---
14-0000

Security Infymation

26 Jonuary 1953

PEYORMIDEN PoP, TPCUTY HIproToR (PLee)

SURUFCTs Sraft NCFP Policy Statement

1, Attachad ig a croft NCFF Poltey Statement which hay been
raviewid and secented oy tha Fxacutive Committee of RCFF, but which
was sent to us without the knowledvoa of /cmiral Filler aad therefore
should probably not be com-entet on by you to any of our frienis in
New York unleng ym have olso received a copy from another gource,
‘drtral Hiller probably intends to sen?! us this ctatement after 4t
has been arrroved by the oard of Lirectors,

2. You may wish to comere 4t with the old ice-box statement
now in effect, also attached,

3, You may also wish to note Part T, varagraph 2 in thich
mention is made of government surnort., It is apparently the intent
Of NCFS to make this staterent, no4 an iee-box utatement, bul a publie
document and 1f so, 7 think you ought to mate particularly certain

that you-arprove this nort of 4t.

4. Finally, I think yu will want to note the general tenor of
Part III, Perhaps { aa quibbling, but it seems to ma a trifle full-
blown. I realize that NCFF is a seperate government agency just
under cabinet status, but this ravis a little bit as though it woro

putting on the trappings of national soverelynty,

THOM! * Wy ERADFN
Chier
International Organigations Mvision

Attachienta
ta stated,

CIO: TB/mt
Distribution: uw
Orig - Addressee (CPP)
lec - CIO
lec ~ RI Gene.
lee + I0 Bri


--- Page 372 ---
14-0000

For Bill Gurkee

et E159

CORD

MEMORANDUM FOR ‘PHY

footing

1, Today the FRO arproved $252,000 for the Grusade for Freedom,
the money to be held in escrow ant to be paid out on Pranic nopls
sipnature subsequent to an audit by a CTA auditor who wy
the Crusade's books and account to us for Lhe r i

PRU set aside the request for $300,000 for next your's
ancy shovld firgt settle matters
it clean oa a Heritage Foundas

2.
cannaipn on the grounds that the
with the Heritage Foundation and :

tion estimate,



--- Page 373 ---
14-0000

’ ni / TH “y ?

SOL £87

eh

ne, me gts

tk

hg Og.

rs .Y718

POP COLL a 8
SOY ey



--- Page 374 ---
14-0000

ee
TRANSMITTAL SLi”
2l January 1953

oate

Mr. Braden

REMARKS:

M1, Durkee asks "to have you ask
Joan to tell Dorkig

Trust you know what thie means?

TO/Tonic

[EXTENSION
&08o

SEP ra4g 38°68


--- Page 375 ---
14-0000

SECRET
Security Inforniation

21 January 1953

FEMORANDUM CF CONVERSATICN

EVESECTs Crusade for Froedom

Per telephone conversation from Mr. Ourzee on 2) éesmary 1953, the

fcllowing was stated:

"Returns are 2600,000, These aro reterns in centre tanks. Other
_returns reported but not in central tacks. This brings the total
up close to $1,000,000. Twenty-one stztes have yet fo report in.®

SECRET | -_ .



--- Page 376 ---
14-0000

Ira tlort

~ B Jarsicy 1953

MEMORAIVAM FON: DEPUTY DINRECTOR ENTRAL IMTELUIGENC? AGENCY

VIAr Deity Dirnetor (Plena)
Chief, Political and Psychological Warfare

SULSZCT: Additional Punds for tha Crusade for Fréedon

regissted for taraination of 1952. cisipatgn.

As Few
1. fdriral Miller bas requested a sua of $261,105.92 for the 1982 Carpatgn
of the Cranede for Freadores

eterting data of the 1952 cempaions the Cruzats

p750-8ie Of Lele g nount, a total of
$105,234.61. vex cash on hard as of April 1, 1992, ant rv of cash Coom +48.
field ta neatquarters aftar tat dat shi, 628.00 of 08 amount. wera CTA cone
tritativw to the 1952 Campaign, Actusl expenses of the Crcaade fran Apeil 2
thra.ah Secumber 20, 1952, ware £473,439.338, Avatlabi< eazh aa of that date «ss
$59,224.53. Expected additional expenses WD. bo $329,127.35. Additional freris
of 2261,105.9% are tina requested, Not {neluded in the Piecre of cash on has
of Lenn.:er 20; 1957, are the furde in pg Perel revclvizy escount of $8,600,
These fi.rde ean bo deducted fron the total reoucsted 4f a decinton is made tis
the pre Crusade organization Ja te ba tersinated are! transferred to tha

America? Uerdtage Founlatlons

2, Frees April 1, 1952, the
fer Frotor has had available to

pA
o
th

hen wALL tercs total $603,066.73. Te

3. Totsl expenditures of the 1852 Cam
66 wan stent to clear up ronaingag

Otel that of this emcunt £35,902

shoold ‘
ASSL Cusaton ezponsas, leaving e nor. of 7,935.07 experied on the 1952

Cen ped gin
ef tho 1951 Campatvr with lnat of the
tions of the PRC that
Uebel uxpemiiiures

ue A cerpurisen of the totel coat
Cempeiim eenducted in 1952 clearly shows that the inct
the Cruzade be acalod down in aroint Yas ¢
during ths 195). Canpaton vere $1,932,478, tures this year
wil be 2767,936007, Mis vearta ex enditures ams ali 2) than thoae of the

initial sermatien of 1950 when axpand 3 wore $917,002. hecodpte in 1950 vere
Gl

-£1)317,06, vnile receipts in the 1951 Cszpaiyn were $2,012,221..9h0

5e Cetailed statenenta ettichsc. (Tab 4) (Hota Partio:larly item 2 vhiew
cexparor field expensos betwoon 1951 and 1952 Conpatens)

Be 1953 Compaton.

As attached (Tab B) hereto are fdntys? Lerts prepreris for a 1953
Urused: Ca: poigno He nos requerted a mis of $530,000 for gis purpono, This
$£33,C% de en addition to tha cun Pequested stove fer the termination of tha
1s52 Cavreign, In view of the Tequent of the Director of the Central Inteli-

nce Avency that the Anerlcan Rerdtage Foundation take over ard ren tha 1953

+ 29


--- Page 377 ---
14-0000

Crusade Cxmpaign, no action shold be takea on Aciired Viller's proposales
However, it 4s recommended that a gum of $350,000 be made avatlable for the
ranaindor of the fiseal year 1953, to be draw: upon ty tho DI, to finanse
such activities as may bo receanary to transfer tho dirsetion of the 1953
Crusade Campaipn to the Amorican Heritage Sountation ard to prepare the bee

ginnings of that Campaigns

2. Should the énartean Herltave Foundation decide against taking over the
Crusade Campaign for 1953, the present Crussce organization will have to again

ne 2.

de reoxwained with policies an! fineneing dacided,

Co Recanmenmationg.

1. It isa therefore reconmented that the sum of $253,108.92 be nade
available to the 195? Crusade for Frosdon for the renairdor of fiecal yoar
1953.

20 That $300,000 ba allotted to bo used on tha antherity of the nuP in
tha trensfor to, and start of a 1953 Campaign by the American Heritage Foundation
in the flocal year 1953, .

“a Lan a (Zuber

SALMAS W, ERADEN
Chief .
International Organisations Divietoa

S2CRET

Security Information


--- Page 378 ---
14-0000

ayo

SLCURLP SE J Hit

Coccnbar 23, 1952

SUENAIZ OF FUNDS HErEn

Tota). Cesh Recetved . $550,767.81
Less Payroll Revolving Account 2-8 4060200

Expsi 32> Aprdl 1, 195¢ thru 12/20/%2
Avallebie Cush -

1958 Meld Budget

46,203.60

Gpent « Hoveaber

" & Decenber 51, 39!.05

Advencen to Meld YW 940.00
Re vec bn DhT 68
1952 «Leld Com tnent HS, O87 35

AA Covnesh " 25,000.09
Campi ete Printing 9 150,000.0)
Payvoll last hal€ of Decesber Caani treat 16, 000.C0
teLevhons Charga November w 2,700.00

s n Dscenbdex "autina%)1, 700,00
ALtLino a Norexber of 3500.00
® " Docember = n 3,500.00
» MiseelLaccova Hdes.r. " a 10,000.00
CES
Auris Kecded «
:
SECRET

SECURITY INPORUATION

$512,767.81.
T3439 038

3 67,328.H3

$707,505.00 (Sue #3. fab a:

for breakdem)

$330,137.25

$251,103.57


--- Page 379 ---
_ SECRET
SECURITY ‘TiPORMATION

CRUSADE FOR FREEDOM, Inc,

" qnatysts QF CASH RECEIPTS “UD C*SH DISHURSE-ENTS

Deceribor 29, 1952

wo a ee
 FREAB PS 77753 -

ge Mh "295 Fteld Retunto Mise, Total
Felanee of cash ‘on hand 4/1/52 ~£7,371.55 :
8,000.00 Pay Rolt : /e 95 371.55

By

howd - 1,179.00

19946.32 2,226.12" 24,901.19

hy 17,216,006. 50 583.05 178,905.57 26,693,e
jum: 27,28 858.52 685.30 29,978.70
duly a 830.0%. 830,04 $6,797.42
Sugest 133,362.09 > 6.99 906.84 134,937.63 39,0947
Sool Ser 153,350.00 5 2,560.05 138,910.05 32,314.32
= - 12652 746, 5256,632,89

= fb. 09.26)130.18

tres

Total Patd 2959 Fea
Bukonths Ezpenaes _

{Ineluded

2,969.9
1,409.29
476%.99

~ 3,337.52

1105.59

20/52
Easy Advole

in tota1)
24794.33

93.36
146,03
26,143.32 =
4,608.89 '

_, 739064, 124,676.08 -. ~
Tova ihu528.00  44762,39 | RSGAEZ 55767. ATILI998 31,007.96 22582072 ole, 98
——$—$—— — poew SCAU
. : $24,020, 72- stunted sub
Total
ton hand 4/1/52 95,371.55
CASH Receiwad 4A = 12/31/59 spun GE Tne onua T10N
otal : .



--- Page 380 ---
EXPENSES

TOPAL
a eis
TO ns ~ _— 7 739.
- : = = = 1750
1,275, ise) 6000.
. . SO, : 21,050.00 37 er3, && 6000
“COL “ADO “0 LgP00.00 4375,
ney “TiGUT SS” Gi158.65 507,
FL. 74465,00 1660,
7,608,19 259,
6,690,¢0 O30, 1725,
6,200,00 12,389.53 &°0, 1700,
2,959,07 hy! 2000, 2060,
: 22, m6. &? 38,287.40 2500, 2590,
2,759,00 1009, 1000,
9,430,112 750, 2000,
9,854.24 1000, .
2915.88 1é9,
poe, 12 ~
30.835, Og 2000,
6,372.51 leno,
23,168.24 18¢0,
20,609,190 -
£2,193,20 3700,
8,052.56. 50),
436000, 00. 3300, °
- dO, 2400 5 ye
a Seti} Seon RED: TT ‘THT
4.00.59 Tyh15,.52 ;
2 Fe374.22--— — 09935 {9—- -—- -- —-
a7ZS 3,693.24 _
11,819.74 18,919.71
: 2,250, a0 . 3,2. 4e580,4,
E YOR STATE "5,372.17 28,719,99 34,092.16
7 YOK CITY 38, 90,09. 129,568.08 167,988,098
SECRET

Security Information
amare

SOMES Sean nee tee eS ae



--- Page 381 ---
CAZCUINA
DOTA i 760.38

22,829.00

WISSONSTN

WYGITEG -*

1,773.64
WASHINGTON, Do Ce

Federal Exployees)
(INTC

( iseweed ora 65796073

ee

TOTALS $335,077.26

3,250.00"
; . 8200.00 ©

FENNSYLVANZA, EAST )= 8,375.09
_ FERASe ues.

10,558 052

"@ by2s5.e0 -

816.5.

13,657.86
2926.hg

- 3,350.00
bo, 601.u9

6,368.21

7,336.52
5,899.59

1,682.74"

4,285.40
5,076.26
- 2,455.73
75322053
2,723.70

3627622 °

2,898.89

7,062.48

RO 805,00

18,976.L9

10,597.38
1,933.67
16,508.09
325870076
95537605

6,C2b.59 «

2,b32.7h

| 7,819.15

10,126.77
h4455.73
12,322.53.
4,503.54

654U3.63 ..

22, slob

33,859.21

Fege 2 = Uont'd.

$648 78069-8986 855.95° °°

secret
Securit? Intormstion

. 1952

FEES &
SALARIES TOTAT,
2 800 $. 2,350
° 2,000
2,h00 4,800
2,000 4,000
2,000 500
6,000 »C00:"
Loco &,0C0
C00 3,800
1,000 2,000
3,600 7,850
10,000 36,750
500 3,000
500 750°
750 2,250
2,000 L000
1,000.- 1,500
1,200 5,000
1,500 1,500
$99,605 $147,920 ne , B2NT, 585


--- Page 382 ---
14-0000

>
: fu mye at thn!
‘ gomaps da sih £2.
seg"

: wey Ae $e werk comity lerake
‘ Saat
a 2B gee

i TA he

H : Ons wt ere

a ‘

4

}

i

i dk 3 dyterreret witions. Rade

: :

: 4. la idtatea one ealcacss, © Teor

i the catdowsk adres: tha vord

'

4

:

! enadyation, with a knoll toed

3 ef Cha of =) y sauinged ¢



--- Page 383 ---
14-0000

2, As nn empheywa of tha rat thonat evgg
rwagponcible to the mtiemdt uduation, and iso ty
iuder Ate control, ard subjcst to Ate supervision witiin a
general francxurt of action. : a

3. Working the year-round with atate ohatreess and utats acruoh tions, ~
he national renrecentatiw is in an exonllert postticn at earpaign
tins to gewura the type of torpovary personnal ana halup that tho
onadmma and the atate sitnat fon requires. ...

i
i
H
1

yourad
yuu: ty ta?

stiowats

"ot SESW


--- Page 384 ---
14-0000

(we

Pte
SECURITY aL ane On

~ ode

Execcative Vico Chairman |
Secretary ” 3

campaten Dircoter
Secretary =‘
Astuistant to Carpaten Mroctor
Clerk: ‘Stimographer ae

Matfonad Representatives —~ Ieadquarteroa in New York
«tm Labor, Veterans, Federal Eaployoon
“"Be New Yprk City operation and special ansicrments
€. Management Groups, Cozpersta s Appeala and speciul assi¢rents
two atcnogruphispa : . to

_ National Reprasnntativos «> in Field
. ¥ivo National representatives Will be assiped on a restcnal basis to -
: work with sisto chairmen am stata committees 1S ge
a oe .
Aomtstant, ‘ronments Office ~ Accounting Dopartrent ,

Agaiatant Treasurer oi .
. Seerctary ot . :
Chiet Aecointsnt
Ansietant Accountant © i
Stanoprepher “4

Belephone peratar

Stock ¢ 2) Meesenger
. Pabl icity wad Public Nvlations Diret toe
Saerotary
‘Asulatant Directar - Features, Vapazliaa, House Ortans
. Seenotcrapher re . : oe

i a

. Dirontor ew Speakers Duran

fadie ai “7 Diroctor
. Secretary
.

welt 8 gee En
om South

SFCRET :
SECQAL IY: LNPORMA TION



--- Page 385 ---
14-0000

“ GRUSARE ROK FREEDOM
1953 Budget

‘March ~ £5,008 let Quarter = $1K5,000 4

4000 rv-Ond Quarter 10,000
abe . on : ov
dulye xg, 1 (#Printing $26,992)

- Aprvat.. esi _ ;
&eptembor . 120, 0¢o +. 3rd Quarter 269,000

dctevor 196,900

: Rovenbor 60,000, ce th
i December: 5 ES. OO. ‘hth Quarter 22820

: $750,000

H shone 7 wes .

: duly printing = ~ = 23,000

i TOTAL > 1953 $232,000

i It ts requested t.2% tho bidget be meda aveilable.cn.a 77 rterhy

bo tastb with p pasties on January 1 Of 2145,060 to covar tie first

3 qgrtary another re % on AbyIL 1 of $110,000 to ener the
seccted quarter; a toird poyment on July |] ef £260,000 ari th: :
fourth on Cctoker ic? $205,000. . . .

~ . oe . cape : ;
fa addition to tetay 2¢“la-requested taf.dn order ato-kexs cli printing
vvLl in advance of * ‘ps 320,000 day cap .qva} a

July le



--- Page 386 ---
14-0000

be

TOUTTOVS

Alabana

Arizona

Arkansas .
California ~ North
~ 4" - South
Colorado

‘Connecticut

Delaware

Washinton, DC,

Florida

Georgia

Idaho

Indiana -

Tlldrnois - Chicago srea
" - Down State

Towa

Kansas

Missouri.

Kentucky

Louisiana

liaine

Marv lard

Massachucetts |

hHichisar.

Minnesota

“Missiscippt

Montana
Nebraska
Nevada

New Hanpchire
New Jersey

Nev Mexico |.
North Carslina
North Lakota:
Onio

Ol:lahona
Oregon
Fonnsylyania
Rhode Tclard
South Carolina
South Lakota
Tennesece
Texag

Utah

Vernent
Virginia
Viashinzton
Vest Virginia
Wiscenein
Viyoming

Mew York Ltate
new Yor City (vetropelitan)
Alaska :
Canaca

Hexico

“+ Ancnymous
Ulsce

Munich (Contributions in European. currency)
WeC.F.E. (Contributions received by NeCeFeEe

_ and credited to Crusade)
, : TOTAL

oo

12,556.60

5,399.38
22,161619
525 699.21
75872671
1,120.01
36, 896.3

2,164.06
43,801.61
23,996.88
bb, 87.21
11,110.0h
6,000.13
57, 6),9.51

-20,Lh,26
25, 76582
27,837.48

Loh

27,5320h8
10,670.40
9,992.16
23,960.69
19,916.45
103,698.49

OTD obs

10; 5)8.97
15,289.51

B, 76.06

6,008.32
9,172 slils
57,199.56
21,042.03
38,563.78

8, 739-73-

65, 343 obit

37,293.71 -

29,639.08
* 435,052.L90
1s, 867.15
2h, 738.02
1, 66h 89
4h,118.99
75, 729279
15,227.07
6,106,859
31, 21:3.18
17, 347066
8,376.58
23,996.12
7,233 649
158,095.98
139,435.14
80.09
15.77

_ 14,00
a 262.65
“12,933.05
1,999, Uk. 78

5,173.07

~ §,922.09
$ 2,011,229.94


--- Page 387 ---
14-0000

only by tho Corpuratione

| | ors

Janinry 20, 1953

SEGRET

SECURITY INFORMA

Dear Relsvas .
The following io gubaitied fur conaideration but without.

Fecomendation.ov far as theFund’s Wourd 1s concorsed, since .
& gwotion Of banta yolioy ig involved whieh oan bo detornined

Tho Fund now cocupies an entire bullding, except for tha -

"ground flour whieh vontains teo onal) stores and a muvin, gleture

thoatro, uniter @ oubelsaes frun the o.erater uf tse moving pleture
Sbestre. Tho Fund'a cubeloase axpires November 21, 1/56 ut tie

: Fuad hao the. option to earcel on tiowsaber 21, 174s on poysent of an

dndomity of £61,6.¢e Uuring the reocunstrioticn of tre builillcg to

it for Fund cevuzancy the Fund cuntrizuted roughly $140,600. to tie
evet of agphalt tile floura, eecistic tile oellines on certain LLiaa,
Fluorescent Lignting riaturea, portitiuning and alr. Cuslitionizgs, tha
Zund'g offices take up abvat 32,760: square foet eo that dicregording
Joasehold inprovacerts rent paid by the Vund-ef £123,700 par anni :
average 330777 per siuare fects The Fund boo na right of ramsal atthe
Gapiration ef tre five-year terme : :

-Tho omer of the foe bao recently placed the wailding on tru mrkote
aking periea Lo $2,250,000 compared wilh tas avsasced valuation of -
81,150,000. the Fund's lnndlerd is seeking a redustioa da tule sasegse
mont and wo are inforied his buen pranted a redustion in pork uy the owner

“ef the foo, Justifiestion thorefor being tho L.eressed tox burden (the

feni'e lendlurd’. lease ovin; a ret lnaso) unt tce less thes emtielcated

“ ineone fron iia moving pioture theatre. The omer of the fos bee

Pejected as offer uf $700,000 in caali for the building,
in the opinian of to Vidt's counsel tne Fund, if it ounad the

| Dubbiing, would be exeyye fron sow ork City real estate tames in respect,
Of ail the space vecupied by the Yurnd, navoly, t.0 eedund,! talrd,

fuurta,
fifea, sixth and seventh flours. ai sppropr ate azgunt of we tutal

© Valustion ottributsdle to tio wo eturus ond ovvicg pleturd tiestre

on Gre ground flour wusld be subject to taxation, 1952 real estate
taxes amouted to 330,900. . . ,

Tro Fund's eurrent rent of 336777 per square fowt is very lex for
air cond: tioned prujerty in tho decipsvla locctian where tia Fund's
offices mw arte inould too present wener or an investsent: ur .
opemultive purclaour refuse to rened tio runl'e lesse in boveaber 1956,
Tithout » substartial tnorease in ronty the fund woild, Lf 1t mire otill
in e;- ration on tue proeent scale and if the oe tort real! oatato sarnet

_ 48 Bet depressed, ba faceu wit. oltrer @  reatly licreaced rert cust oP .

| SECRET sion .

SECURITY INFO



--- Page 388 ---
14-0000

*. on the 5

the axpenio. of moving tu’ other less desirable quarters whore tho rent

would-probably also rreatly exceed the prosent $3.777. Our difficulties in
1951 in this connection denonstrate ths possible magnitude of that problem,

If it bo true that the building, ‘if. owed by the Fund, would be exempt
from real ostute taxea-(eaxcept for the Commercially loased property which
certainly Could be leased for'mora than thé ‘tax ocat) the operation ef the
building would dost the Fund oonsiderably less than the present annual
‘rental of $123,760. In the abnoncé of a more careful study than it is
possible to make without disclesing our possibie interest in such a

'. purchase the amount of that saving oan be little better than guesswork.

38 ia it should ba. between $50,000. and $75,000, allowing interest

hy ba.b
pital investsht at a two.per cent rata.

The. question ta wiether.the Fund should or should not attenpt to

purchage the building either to safeguard ‘tho right of contimed

or to: affect theestim:ted saving in aonua) expense, or both. If the:
ansver ia in the affimsstive, wo ahall sce what dan be done toward ~ .

‘negotiating a eatisfactdry price and estimating in detail the probable.
annual saving and.adyiso you further. before any compitment is made 30
“that you ean. ap: reve ‘or disapprove the entire deal. If there is a

‘Teasonabio Ghanze that you would ‘approve, I sugyect you take immediate

stops tu oapark the necessary funds so th.t ira satisfactory price

ean be agreed upon the trangaction ean ba Promptly eoneluded. _
Sincerely yours,
/e/ Willian
Williaa L. Digby

SECKET
SECURITY INFORMATION,
j


--- Page 389 ---
14-0000

y nose A I97
SECRET ep AE
Security Information te
iL 15 January 1953

MEM:RANDUA FOR: Geter, Eastern, European Division

SUBJECT 2 Arthur Maimer; younr Ceech political refugee
recomended by Mr. Ortona of the Italian Embassy.

1. Attached hereto ig a letter from Egidio Ortona of tho Italian
Embassy, who is recaszending for our consideration the aboveenaned ~
individual who 1s said to be the son of Dr. Arthur Malxner, formerly
‘the Minister Plenipotentiary of Czechoslovakia to the Vaticen. Also
attached ia a brief curriculua Vitae of Maixner.

2. It is rather “unusual for a foreign diplomat, even though he-
be on good terma with officials of this Agency, to recomend personnel
to us for our use, and uncer thé circuustances I do not suppose that
there would be acy,vay in which you could make secure use of this
young man even if you were to find him in other respects suitable, In
other words, he is Shlown® by thé. very fact of his heving been recon=
mended .to us by a foreign diplomat, And I am also aware of the fact
that this would be a zood cheap way of effecting penetrations of the
Agency were we to foliow the practice of acting favorably on recan-
mendations of this character, Hevertheless, thera may te sone aspect
of this matter which would have sivmificance to you or to Mr. Tian
which -I do not readily serceive, and accordingly I an passing this

- on to you and to Hr. Tima with this thought in nind, For exaaple,

there is a bare possibility that L:cause of the contacts and connet~
tions of Maimer ed his f:ther, a former Czech diplomat, it might be
possible to make uge of him (on an arm's-length basis) in a prograa
of defector solicitation, ~ .

3. I am also furnishing a copy of this memorandum to Hr. Braden

in view of the possibility that aixner might be of same use to Radio

‘Free Europe, assuming that the ocjection of his having beer introduced
to this Agency by Ortona coula be overcome.

“bh. In any case, I shoule anpreciate. your sugzesting a suitable

_Teply to Mr. Ortona, beering in mind tle fact that he has-been helpful

to us in the past and does seem to be well disposed.
by

qa, the Gob en,
Ry FRANK G. WISNER

_ Deputy Director (Plans) :

Enclosures (2) om
As specified,

cet C/I0
; es . . a

¢, . : -
SECRET .

neneiy bb gegen


--- Page 390 ---
14-0000

SECRET
-ROUTING AND RECORD sdHEET

anstauctions: Officer designations should be. used in the * “TO column, -Under each commant a line. should be drawn-acrass shoot
_ and each comment numbered to correspond with the number inthe "TO" column, Each officer should initial (chock math ingutticiont)
"before furthor routing. Th in Routi ing and Record Sheet sho oul be telurned to, Registry.

ae ..
en

No, DB ture? world, |

: AT the bide, O Atirtam |
LUMA aol utihale, Ro

, Chunate 6 wee eacel tae. ;

(OW hnupChe 7 aes ole Se “ .

rue a 4b rr
f fit 'o « a

Ose ld vdviele g ceeds?
a te, gaat te se

FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1952


--- Page 391 ---
14-0000

Hy

° i: Sebel an

Woe HTORMATION

15 January 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR: INSPECTOR GENERAL
SUBJECT? Briefing. Pzpern on NCFE and CFA

1. Before I send this memorandum to Mesars,. Brophy, Ford
et ale, J want you to have ‘a look at it for reasons we discussed
on the telephone today. Please give me a quick reaction.

2. J am alno enclosing a memorandum on CFA which is about
what they would want to know.

3. These are the only copies I have left of these two

‘memoranda and T must have them back. .

[¥ b
THOMAS W. BRADEN

Chief
International Organizations Division

“2 attachments

TS 85308
TS: 85340

Wa siete ie oe

oe Te. COPY OF 23. canes



--- Page 392 ---
14-0000

a - SECRET

\ Sacurity igevanain
.

RFE has, from small teginnings, ‘for FArpOses only conerally dofinod,
erown J into a large inatitstion orranigod ae followst .

NSPE dg a non-profit men mborst nip corporntion, oryanis.d unier . .
the lawo of New fork State. Intimately asseciated with it aro tired oo
: soparate corporationss. the Crunaco for Freodo: {the fund raising
\ _and covor rechanian), the Free Ncrope intiveraity in wdle, and the
{ Fortusuese radio relay installation, Narote

The Camzittoe's nujor divisions, fanctions and budret for 1953 are av
i follows: :

a. Diviston of Genural Ade

rtraijon ~ Fudget for fsenl year
Wry = :

; thie isa hoacquarters adsinistrative unit dn NOrEts New . “
York jwecouarterc, Tt ds not an overeall advinistrstive unit, ere
ag each subdivision has its. ow acaiatetru tive organications . °

be Diy REISE ge of fudere ! felations « tigcet for fincal year 1933 - . oo,
yey ; " oe

1¢ Divieion of Bulrre Relations iu the polttical centor of
Through this Nvision, support ig given to the various:
on irre orranigations anc to individual esizrese

at

™ the past two years, this kivision has Btteanted o- vith

conspicuous lack of success -- to create unified refugee cre: pe
It ip at present in the preeess of reviewing anc revis ng its
telations with iedivéd.iab overes and «clere orgarnizatiouse It : '
is atternpting to exercise c cial control over those - . F
orpanisations and te cov using entgce groups and “ . ¢
dduala in a way wi leh tribute mora postiively to

psychoiscieal warvare efforts. This iivision of Mors is the

nost responsive t2

Ce Tiviston of 7

nteli
Z

ectual Cooperation = fucget tor fiscal : : ;

The activities of this Mvision are princtzally clrected to
the tuilding of intellectual resources W:fch w411 ensure continuity
wit: the past and witch can te used when the aetallite countries
are liverated. Tho Mivision's ac ctivi ties consist of:

ate wat:

1. , an outcrovth and enlareniont
of th caehy my TT. was croated by Koodrow Wilson
tn 19S. te ain is to javpare basic naterlals in order to
neat tho minimim needs of thoge who will be charged with the
Frorgant zation of the. Tanebian area.

2. Other Studies of a niséellaneova nature veeful to the other
divisions. of Tes FE and to-otudents of Central Europes

'
j
1
&
j
‘
3
a
i
i
t
Fe
g
E
g



--- Page 393 ---
14-0000

i
Doaration
-2-

3. Scholarships to American universities this year will be
2. 80005 to HYENTy malifiod exiles vic have eicned a pledge
ae “. to return’ to their homelands after liberation.

. be Textbooks to replace Communist textbozka are boing pro=
pared In eteckpile and manacript fern.

8, . The ‘d-Eurepcan few Project, which digosts and annotatos.
roa 4

- eurrent fertatation i@ iron Curtata eyuntries.

Accesriona fist, whish publishes a .
y of current publishat material _— a . i
ed in the Library of Congroste

dy Free Eerope University in Exile =

-Swo hundred extle students, all escagecc, are provicod with - : 4
board and locsinr at the Universlty in Strasbourg. Rach student :
attends the niverstty of Strasbourg for his or her fonial educations

The Free Univereity, in addition to providing board, lodging, and

tuition, condueta corrgos ant se.inars dealing, with the countries

of orlzin of theca exile escapeos. The vniveratty operates on the

theory that thase younr people ara hein: equipped for futuro loaders

slip after liberation.

t for finenl year 1953 <

@. Research and Publ! cation Sarvice = Midget for fiscal year
TOU 2 Gee eT
afi) 2 gig tg oe mot
The Cornittce for Research and Mublicationy wae ereated in

Nevesber 1951 to make availolin in currently fal for infomation

abort the satellite countries. It gathers information frea four

basic. sources!

Le The analvets of 270 Comunist newspapers ant poriodicalas

oo 2. ®FEts overgoas inforsatloneretiering networks

3. Honitoring reverts fran an neg Jor satellite radio stations.
‘The analysis of tre 10,000 at ‘ satellite

area rucelved annually by the Lit . exesce T @ Cote :
piled information is used in the following wayss : a :

ED a ree ree eT i: HEAT CLS hee es Has Een nee

a) Within NCFR = Daily- digest of all Iron Curtain infornation. :
.These are prepared for the use of RYL's Doo
New York lanmase desks co
b) Weekly trend mectings by RFE = RPS deak heads to discusa : ve
the interpretation and use in racio programing of events 7
in the Iron Curtain countries;

ovameT

eNO PR an Abe ADEM ora


--- Page 394 ---
14-0000

SECRET

Security fiformstion

e3-

c) Research pro rJocts on spect fis 4errets for RMS's Mew
York and Munich lan-wago ¢esss. Sally noritering
hichlichte mumarize majer evacts in all satetiite

- countries; .

mation Liles to the

tien an¢ inlcrs Roe

-)) RPS also makes avallatle ite 4%
Divictonn of Jatellectual Cos
Lationsy :

r) A "Plack Tock" prepared every six months, contains
com-unist attacks arsinst C7LAvWry

_ f) To the ceneral_o
in, a
tarcet

“Wh? rese

* Shes have seon aise

of conunications
tributed outside the Commitzes ¢ total of 47,500 -
reople. Fere Tanstac in ese af the major

‘tonguae of the ted to

sore .£,000 exiles in 89 coe
ortit, These bulletins, 4
are the only caonplete and
about their captive haselants ay : tesa who

have escaped,

Hones ie

Radio roe -£: eropels main breadec.
leeated in Munich, 4 rol
alco in New York and

broadeastin= tine 18
vainly to Czechoslovakia, ‘hinvary and }
Caria, Rumania, and Albanis are preparec aged fran New Tork.
Rew York exerciner policy control ever 27. adessts t»:
Cally muidances an¢ a teleetipe syste: tetwecn Munich ant New York.

facio Pree Purepe ‘as ite evn infer etton section ts rree
vide ite broadcast materials. It has. ccrreepondents sai of ees
in London, Paria, toekhclm, © Pin, Hantrors, PrarkNriy galstures
Vienna, Linz (Avetria), Vels (A.strie}, trez {Austrizg), Sore,
Trieste, Athens and Istanbul, these offices produce-om averace
of cver one thousand reports per corth. In 22sitie ork
Yor broadcasting cones from: 1) satelifve cress pobliostionsy
2) RPE'a nonitoring service of ostellite ae Russian drnaccaste

. 3) Anfcrnation from the Division of ksicre ielatiors, reirate

letters, news sarvice, the Bt, Vea and others.

Crancr

secu


--- Page 395 ---
14-0000

forerot ne Ae a cureery outhire of RCFE ant a hriaf reeont of our

to eclvn adnpiniotrestive > ate tio nMctim, tho follows
trie’ outliino of the rafor pevcholocicel pro Leng we face wi th NOFhe
PTL fe pet went it cooclt he'e- cn inte-ral and-bnlaneed part of the total
promman for ceriine wi tk extellite nations of Eastern Surcpee Tho top
is of HCY havo no Cotet led eorprehenalon of i.%. policy, nor eny undere

- Of tuas theg ean eortriiate te its development and eperstlone inezy cive
eomvice te'ta iden of chtal 2c p6lley geidance. fro vinston. Their
orrarent ettitcce han been teat lbey cen sake a teip te wawiington, daterzine
rete” fe, anf reform to, Sew York with the Job dono. Thie pushe
Lalitr, acer to thetr deopescated su 0 ioverm.ent intere
terete, bez * end then: ta res rtr to oy Uelr relo ant to develop

mere (fone, or reoavenn 01. © OLED.

there hain beet eonaldernble ditfieulty
ans, For etazrloy,
P Lilsry we have
receive? re Lirt of Her r 3 of the Staff
Frec tive port ttons or the f irectors. fven nora inpertant than tile
fe ‘ve fert t ce heata of fiviatons are prevented fren having contact with

“ua, excont on ocenstons wen Admiral otiter is ovt of tom. 49 8 rosult, for
? ,
has conaiderai-le problens and 1a

£2 4 remit af there a
Sorkin 2etnye

inetence, Mz, Lanc, the head ¢
arvicse for the Mllest liaizon, ts ated fron dealing wi sersonallye
is looked

seats every attenpt | to seal ul

“In his orrantsation
iw outaide
tine affairs
meer Pentex rine other rerbure of
‘drectere suprert Adatral
feal qutside the “oars.

tte baer€ of! rt nietor, tart
iédler in his rv: tanec to ¢

ation end commen study hes clasr reflections in the

orcemiceticns Utsclf, MOST fe net en itterrated orconization. saeh division
operetes rcrcrately, sithoct ary rec] relation to other div Added to
thie, tre Lack of a clerr méerstandinn of the Cormittee!s vurposes and of ite
place ints totel reycholecical warfare. efforts ef the dinited States has lod
te real etesatisfection room: tle Tivteton hesda. Tisy are racicve to know
wat Liey are doing, to intevrate t'etr oun efforta and to cooperate to the

*o forzulate our own am! KCPE'A ideas, wo have been and are enrrying on

dleezerions with the officials and werkinzg persennel of “CFE, In sae of |
thes2 ciscussions, ‘irs Praneis nN, Stevens of the State Lepartsent, has been &
aireet perticirant. ; , .

Tile Lenk of eons :Lt.



--- Page 396 ---
‘poor
/

nomtd one,

* the subject of pressure, “F. 1g most velnornsie of all }

SECRET

Security Information

weSe

“These Ciso:ssions have evvers! a wide varioty of obiecte 10h con

conaratiy ‘be denerstod co follarrs ;

Jaco aya wiole In i:wriean policy tovard
eat te Xorlom policy what: neat cations

(1) Ww at in
tho ratet lite nath
ary Linnly?

ma

1g

(2) How con RORY, ofsrecially tha ° tlona,
contribute nora ofvcetively, te pevuholocieal arc poiitient werfare,
mot only fer afreete & taing wet in te rec Vorle? -
for exreple « How ean B2eTelyY engace in word cua in -
tu pattem of tty svces|estyl gotions ab ve .ti ted 2 lave
Lator hearlnve atc ve intersetlonal red Crees vacgt.. Toronto?

(3) Should NCTE oo-thenus toa wi Sere eceneth
eaie otter technique bo dvr ley Me Ah
offeatlve use of o.terep for eye cal war are pergesuel

ax! lublicattese “senior, we Aviston

(L) ila can to Herteureli

Gf Intwiicetual Cooperation, ay? wo Prec Nias sity vost ecctrilnte
te tto.o offerte? ,
(S) Ta os effiete: trod? hat, Tor evecpie, is the

vision of intionp? cealince with e-ipres on

fleet of the !
tho position of

(6) How ean wo mive sree PL teidanso t GPR? Mat kind of
inforsation ie want, for anole, WweUF.? shes 6t.cles a ccane of
overen.im: ja@edir: can Le mace avallar - igf@ ean éArerican ond
Uritish lucutdona in tie sew Lito Lest provi. 4 ace infomation
for Pr? .

tee that should te

There a:cy in accittony 3% ¢ sreciile current p20
They ares.

(1) FFs pest
turope in Teens

fernratisics Ties Froups he 3
betweon the Cl aml the £ 3o “rorsit, tot: javttes, % t
the SID, aro Looming nore vocifarovaly nationiiciic. 77%, 228 an
asaricen creration in Germary, Lneludiny the Yolee ef sxeriec, will be
e of ite
Fantern curopesn personel an? te nature of ite troaicert! ‘Tote
Problems are the subject of. earch) atudy at Use present tine by NOPE,
anc othorse _

73 Adeularly



--- Page 397 ---
14-0000

‘ee

. Should RFE. be forced out of Germany -- tts facilities. in
Portygal cun le expanded to take over the Seb. Propracining can:
be noved to Londen anc Paris. In addition, HFE har asked us
ser the ae thee of thetr eats a station in

; to enable 2

The Crasace for Freed: fy the fund
FE and CPA, $s" ‘pretty och out of
fa eeparate cons ae the responsible
& Adeiral Mille terally washed
as oF any atte: pt te control or S activities. As
af it has veeore a Rich presetra, Durceraising outfit wiieh-
wnsion of the re ns Jor its existence or
oof riblictty ch she be untertakens
no ja Pecarel of NCFE, it te looked upon with creat
eiepticast ps much apprenansion. The single etrencth of the
Crusacea Lor Freedon io the fact that £1 ¢ces raise sioney from
: leans, not much monay, tet stil? sonra 23,900,000
S$ have contributed, This fuct is a powerful veapon.
Sap, Adena:er's pa rtys the Rumcestoky in _defenc:ing RFE

the Crusado
conducted next year ty the ‘re C. i. Vandeturg
S thet ory anigation } has stated ne would ta eon the Job.

TART .
g Loney

Security Information


--- Page 398 ---
14-0000

CHUSADE FOR FRNEDOM ©

2950 CAMPAIGN | ©

1. The Crusades was- launched by General Dwight D.. Eisenhower. on a
nation wide broadcast. oo . ‘

- | @. The symbol of the Crusade, o ton ton World Frovdom 3e1l, inscribed
with a quotation from Linnoln, "This World under Gai shall have a new. birth
of freedom", toured Uie United St:tec from coast to.ouust. The "Frodo? _
Bell" was cent to Berlin to become part of a "Freedom Shrine", and tolled
‘there over an. internitional radio hookup. 7 :

-3e Freodon Scrolls signed by 15,000,000 contriautors were taken tw
Berlin to become a:peraanent part of the Froodom Enrine. .

4. In the United States, local committcos wero established throughout

. the comtry. General Lictus Clay was appointed chairman of the Pund raieing..

oampaign of the Crusade for Freedom, tir. Abbott “ast:burn, Chief, Publio
Relations for‘Genaral Foods Corp. was appointed as the director. Ansisting
companies were: Fund raiaing - John Price Co., Inc. ~ Advertising ~ Hewitt,
Ogilvy; :Bonson & Mather Inc. -Small mass contributions were solicited.
Contributions from large individual'donors were solicited later, in order

- to afford the fund “raising campaigh“a broader continuity. Literature (sanples
attached) of ‘all kinds, explaining Radio Free Europe were distributed.

S. Financial results were as followat
Expensess 2917, 000.00
Contributions; $1,317,000,00

1951 CAMPAIGN.

_ The 1951 Crusade Campaign wag begun by the launching cf balloons into
Caechoalovakia and Poland containing pamphlets of encouragement to the people
of these countries. Copies of the message and samples of the balloons wera
used to solicit contributicns in the United States. Publicity dealt largely
with Radio Frue Europa. Free magazine advertising was widely used for the
first time. A coast to coast telethon. was used. : : :

. Inadvertently, through mistakes of the etaff and the failure to adequately:
trief community leaders, the Crusade mistakenly implied that the Voice of

America was ineffective — that only Radio Free “urope, the privately supported
radio broadcasting station, could do an effective job.

ee


--- Page 399 ---
14-0000

After conferences with the State Department, it. was agrood that VOA
and RFE wore complinentary activities and that-in the future the Crusades

(1) Would not put-vut anything which might be interpreted:
a8 a critdoiom of the Voteo. Tu that end, an attached leaflet
' was inserted as an insert in the Junuary 19Sz "Crusader", a
newsletter witch was sent out to the 8,000 regional chairman
of ‘the Crusade for Freedom. It was intended to acquaint the
. Fegional Crusade organisations with the faote absut the Volos |
. Of Awerica and to offset any criticlan or unfortunate comparison
- ~ between Radio Free Europe and the Volco of America.
Pinancial resilts wore as followss-
Expenses; $1,932,478

Contributions; $2,011, 229.9)

1952 CAMPALON

‘Tho 1952 Crusade Campaign was. begun by General Eisenhower, Adlad
* | Stevenson and Henry Ford, Il, the 1952 Campaign Chairman. The Ganpaign
was endorsed ina letter from President Trumani =~. .

"I understand that on the success of the 1952 Crusade reata
the plana of the Crusade for Freedom to build mre radio stations
in Free Europe and Asia. If this can be done, and 1 believe that 1t
will be done, ‘the Free world can noro offestivaly get the truth
behind the Iron Uurtain. -

"It 1a essential tnat the people everywhere Imow thit we aro
working for peace, freedom and prosperity for all mankind."

Tho assistace of the Advertising Council was enlisted and for the
first time outdoor billboard advertising was used. Records were made con=
taining 2 fifteen minute progra:s'on.“The RFE story" and spot films were’
arranged for televivion with narration by Henry Fonda. :

Por the first time, fund raising letters seeking large cont’ butions
. Were sent to all leading corporations. we

The Campaign was highly organised on the looa) level with state chairmen
in almost every state. The Post Oftice Department permitted the use of a local
post office address for receipts. Endorsements were obtained from many organ=
Asations such aa the American Legion, VFW, CLO, National Auto. Dealers,
American brewers Foundation, and Catholic Yar Fetcrans eto. For fund raising


--- Page 400 ---
14-0000

-j-. oo

pur;cses ona maad scale — a frecdanram to be sled by contributors
has been distr:b:teds These freedongracs, tranelated into oix languayes
will be broadenst over Radio Froe Furopos



--- Page 401 ---
14-00000

7 “S gEnnET To
“Cemation ‘

13 January 1953 |
|

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY CHIEF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STAFF

SUBJECTs - -Request by the Directors of NCFE for a statement from
the responsible officer in CIA that NCFE has no respon-
sibility of any kind for the initiation of, nor for tho
payments in Fespect | to radio equipment known as the

NB-50.

“Le The enclosed letter, is as you sugceated, drafted for the
signature of Mr. Tracy Parnes, which when stened, should be transmitted

to this Office for New York's attention.

2. Two ‘versions have been prepared. Both should be signed, the
sterilized version will be sent to New York, the unsterilized original
will be retained in cur files.

- Chief
- International Organizations Division

Attachments:
As stated above

ay

ston



--- Page 402 ---
14-0000

a 3 COMPILE

Securily tfew runtion:

Prange sfuraterl

ee, “ "42 January 1993

MEMORANDUM FOR+ Deputy Diroctor Central Intelligence

FROM ~ t Chief, International Organizations

You may wish to spoak to the Director about the fact that
Charles Moore, a very close friend of mine who ia Diroctor of
Public Helations for the Ford Motor Company, called me last week
to cuggest that hia boss, Honry Ford, would like to be asked to
become President of the Weritage Foundations .

I think thio lays to rest any fears wo may have had of Mr.

Ford's “(in roality Mr. Moore's) criticiam of the Crusado for
.. Freedom leading to Mr. Ford's becoming Anactive on our behalf.

The Director might wish to call Mr. Ford and ask him to
“becomes President if it is feasible for Mr. McCloy to become
Chairman.of the Board. In discretion, the Director may not
wish to mention to Mr. Ford the message passed to me by Mre

Moore.

THOMAS W. BRADEN

Seeviiry Ip Iiomation


--- Page 403 ---
14-0000 :

sey,

Jame

yoeven.

Ae TS

3G June
3G dune

3G dune

3G

ding fu
100 fn.
sae

are at

Fal investment

eriginal cats.

a
- #

; aa :

siete



--- Page 404 ---
14-00000

“a2 LA She amount of G eter *ay,407. se

Acquireds
Prior bo dniy LT, 30

Currest Ficcal Teer

POWRUGAL

S1,861 992.26 51,231,612 .82

261,727.29 415 30962
hig a8 213 68 te hooky HL S372 21 710, 112 ah

get as it wpplies to New York, Munich

Totel

50,943, 0bh 090

25°00, 957 00
2,05L BES 413,279.90
62981120... SD yey GO 600, $12,577, 280.99



--- Page 405 ---
14-0000

oo
4

‘ 4

y



--- Page 406 ---
14-0000:

a omaser

orbs di:

through
cone timer

‘ fons ard 1.
2. Covermns
1
~ . BB
‘ .
i



--- Page 407 ---
14-0000

_ following question: Should the

-that all cerds be laid on th

7 January 195)

MEMOKANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIKECTOR (PLANS) ~ : \

SUBJECT: RFS in Turkey 7 . - ;

2 decide or cause to be decided the
tational Comaittee for a Free BRurop:
in its approach to Turkish antavrities exploring the pogsibility of
creating an RFE station in Turzey contact Turkish autnorities asa
non-governmental private Comnittee or as a CIA-finaneed institution? | -

ACTION NECESSARY: WA1l you plex

. Background

l. The State Department haz asked that RFR not apsreach Turkish .
authorities until VOA's attempt to get into Turkey has been accepted . ,
or refused by the Turks. Pre. Senartment has now given the Voice of ,

America until-15 January to contlude its negotiations with the Turkish
Government. These negotlations appear to be leading nowhere and, on
the assumption that VOA will. not gain entrance to Turzey, the Departe
ment has authorized RFE to bevin negotiations on the 2rove date.

_ 2. Bob Lang, 8411 furk2e end M=. Wadsworth, former As
to Turkey, as well ag the IE Livision have all beer in on di
as to hew NCFS should esoroach the Turks. Mr. Wadsworth counsels ~
table, and ha bares his ressorirg on
his velie? that the Turks will xigw shout it anyhow and that RFE is.
likely to get further if it comes clean. The NE Divieion on the
other hand hopes that the apnroach can de that of a norivate committee
and that no mention need be made of ClA's interest,

3. Your advice on the atcve questien will not constitute approval
of the ovilding of a Turzish station or at operations om Turkey. By

PR? decision at the Lest nearing on NCTC's budect these suestions in
Turkey must be brought back here for apcroval if the aunitude of the

Turks is favorable.

HOMAS W.
nl Chief uae
International Organizations Division

Sey
SECURITY INEGI Tipe

