
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10250-10199| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

; i

22 June 1951:

The Subject is a covert employee of this Agency now in the

c Stetes for four weeks training and being considered for

- Staff C/ICB in a highly sensitive assignment. Immigration
ities may submit avestions throuch this fAeeney which will
wered by the Subject, but recuests to heve the Subject tes-
ir oper court hearings must be refused.

1. is receivec by the Alien
iffeirs from the Tf turelization Service
ference to your re.ve 195) te ascertain the
s of the Subject's s frency and prenere 2
rm ey
to TENS.

2. On 17 dure
e

cPfiee intervieved |

2226 " ruilding, Panama, Room
220 Tuerters "I", ration reouest.
following information was o - interview.

ck

a. his Avercy,
is now in the United States (New York City) on home leare, and
is scheduled to report to Washington, 3.0., to comzence four
weeks of covert trairminsor 6 July 195,

b. The Subject is presmtly under consideration by Staff
C/TCB for an assignment with a highly sensitive project under
the supervision of Staff C/ICB. Under this proposed assign-
ment any publicity or notoriety that the Subject would receive
from testifying publicly on ovestiors of Tommmnist associations
of which he may wid ultimetely preclude his
fuvoure use with and would probably jeopar-
dize his future of this feency.

verialize, the
Sone Jon epproxi-
a this nosition



--- Page 2 ---
14-00000

thet from a WH

: @ controlled inter-
orded the Sub-
ver, would

€ objections
cf the Sub-

anv actien

us is
st ; Sub-
ed igh sensitive one and
whi the Subject may receive would

few er consideration on this project.

TaNS contact of the Subject wevid
fter cerefully considerine the imoor

be recuired. 1
be considered as af employee of (= Tivision regerdiess of
ther or not the mropesed Ctaff C/TCR essigrmert materializes
and any action in the request received from TiXS should be

closely coordinsted with both Starf C and

6, Mr. rPoi, Alien Affairs Steff, SO, contacted -Alliam
4, HOGAN, Special Assistant to the Commissioner of Immigration and
“Naturalization on 18 June 195) requesting further information re-
gerding their memorandum of 9 June 195) on the Subject. Mr. HOGAN
*pieined thet I°NS has a list of possible irforments which contains
the Subject's name. 1e people on this list are beirs cor: vacted for
s wher specific cases erise i

use on 4 contimt
fall in their par area of knowledge. At th

m,

T’NS hes no specific case forwhich they want to cont
but they just

OW uv he would be available
ious Commr

Tee



--- Page 3 ---
14-00000

PENMTUGTON
weutd note be cor-

-, Stated or 18
Commissioner
rsatiorn

oN re iheeue ch

Pane: “ay ont al
nthe part of ject!

answers be returned to a uT\ agreed
3 aving g the TENS veople contact the Tubjedt 3
throveh this Agércy and also indicated that the reported security
breach en. the part of the Eubject's father woule be taken inte
nsideratior and an attempt would te mede to determine the extent
ce ‘the Subject's relatives or accuai neces know of ‘the Subject's
employment by thie fgency. Mr Staff C/ICB, also

rreed to the proposed rrocediie anc requested that eny and all

t taken be coordinated with VH and Steff C.

retion

recommended that the attached memorandum to J4NS and to
WH Division, with e cartor copy to Staff C/ICE, be for-
that no further action tezeken pending a report fron Mr.

arding the seriousness of the security flap from an cper-
: etandrod nm.

to TENS
to WH with ce to Staff C/T

anne


