
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10217-10225)

Fee ng oT eater eee ere eee ene

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

yA SPAICH | Sticiic |
"chief of Station, London for LcPIPIT —~ ob
Coe

et wm LT

FRO

Chief, WOLIUR
SUBLET ©

RYBAT/DTDORIC/PLQRPHONE/MHPRORE/STFLINPLAM Training
ATTICS REQUIRED - REFiRtCS

REFERENCE: DIRECTOR 294821

1. Being forwarded USC are copies of the QRPHONE/1 training
report, the JBMINIMUM evaluation, contact reports of meetings with
QRPHONE/1, a WOGEAR review of QRPHONE/1's book and some notes made
by the STPLIMFLAM Headquarters officer, Harvey B. DAITCHMAN (IDEN),
efter his meetings with QRPHONE/1. These are for the information
of both LCPIPIT and London Station and, taken together, should give
you both the flavor of the variety of measures taken to assess the
operational potential of QRPHONE/1.

2. During PAUPEROS’ TDY at Headquarters we discussed the
necessity of having QRPHONE/1 undergo an intersivs seven day
STFLIMYLAM training program to be conducted by DAITCHMAN. It is
our opiaion that in order for this training to be of maxinum
benefit, QRPHONE/1 and DAITCHMAN ought to be ensconced in a
safehouse facility which provides security, comfort and an
atmosphere conducive to learning. it is important that the
training be conducted in a locale which will allow QRPHONE to give
bis full attention without being disturbed by his multitude of
business and social contacts. Therefore, ve recommen that LCPIPIT
rent a cottage or beach house away from London for the duration of
the training cycle. In discussing this with QRPRORE, he readily
agreed and indicated that there would be no difficulty in getting
away from his family for as long as ve thought necessary. He

A

Attachzents: Aas £3

A. As Stated (u/sa/c) ie.
B. Iden Sheet (u/s/c) ri

Distribution:

orig. & 1 - COS, London for LCPIPIT (w/att)

ZAI - COS, London (v/att)
. <i

LASS'FZD BY,

€3 COPY

OEPY-1814 ‘ 4 om 1972
a rere y

Lt - B/BC

aera


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

5

‘ : NT : + yp CEASE CATION DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
: ~JNTINUATION OF - . SFGiic oearen
a wOSPATCH =” « DEUCE fies 1814

we =
fs 7

erm ae

7
_

gisply would tell thes and his business contacts that he vas
traveling on the continent. Please advise us of the dates which
are determined to be convenient to PAUPEROS and QRPHONE/1. The
Headquarters officer would prefer either the third or fourth
veek of September, and certainly not before.

3. As indicated fo the refarence ve eclicit coments frou
LCPIPIT and London Station on the results of our varied asscssnents
of QRPHONE/1 and our decision to move ahead in the new operational
directions described in OEP¥-1661. We view the coming year as a
trial one for these purposes and the Project Renewal has been
subuitted with that understandirg clearly described.

4. @ QRPHONE/1 might refer to conversations he had with
¥. weELQUreT (®), PAUPEROS should know that TELQUIST used
. the alias “Bob” in all his seetings with QRPHONE/1.

Allan W. TEUTSCHMAN

2e - iat -~/Stf1

SF se om rmmneron | SEGictiiual c ——



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

WOLIME

‘ Caplotica of training

for QUEGE/1,

Frou Clef,

pie i

7 Training Progyeaa “SHAW”

° > Meng for Directer of WO}!

LD.
_.9 Gntad 23 bny 1972;

“i @ibgects “covert Sraining for

WOLIME

OS copy

7 [te O€ Pw 1814

» FICS brocgnt @ condwich with him
to the instroptor. Thus,

vemion of trainee end tastructor.
eement of his dogarture. Rencabdering that


--- Page 4 ---
owes

ras

Sayer Ts ays

rfl 4 alter caenl tls, L
ny A eee dani
git ds ids ded i ETE 3
(HE ERIE i ial
7 RE an sh lee
TRA Tag eh Ha
og Hadd ietaateapy tte sahetany ie)
te eared
ao va ee ce et
Bee ay
338 den

14-0000


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000 t

. ode aL
hl ne ae ‘ . ;
Gonerintion, access, hours of evaiiabdility, the opposition, prea end

coy e& to saltchility ~< At ima all thers, He just didn't like to
writs cut that ugaa vaich he could report orally.

off in 43g tius. Ko pause for thinking, no panse to
oF Cub the window. Just stralpit witing, mnaluf_
Mind en& pca wore ep ong. Gene thing forAisorsk ~  ~
] ouch maating = co pause to think, té review.”
9 © Fona-bor <= just es Ihstypo printout.

thoy must bave a certain royort ty a cartain -

ert 46 in writing, they mst be firm, Yor auenile, :
ecoting in the devolop otal acrics, tha instructor ©

ehct reyort first thiny in tha corning. Do you .

ow froa this oftammoca's training sazzion to do 1tf*.< .

ebove, FHOSB pecforre’ to save tho training |:

“Z wALl cate tirs to write ft". “

o «SS Six up Chis Atcwe Ehin BWR fools thet an orek

ke finds it a little difricwit to bring hicself to
& written report. Told dsfinitaly that he m-sh write ..-
Given @ deadline, he socta the deadline end the rezort fo :

\ , a
Terine to sacsionionas no Petting! ta nlointarsnatotions, .

peace
Felgee .
eee
f

E

a2,

yer Fo duping to excclestons, mo patna mos



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

PBR

those axe @ typical Koo Yorker's bihite. - ths tastvucters” uo,
Oss & log Torker, is guilty of the idoctical actions. Yo are highly -

by & bipsie a6 lcséad bike ww
eplag tia wroag way. Guily tha lerga heavy fila casa the fustructar on
tas qosrying kegd hin tras being knocked Flot. a Lglteees

290° Yoverthslets, PUTS ta now Fully cognizant of the eppearence
is cottons create and will vatch 4% in the future.

Ga Casi offica. ihey ent on difrorent pons fur @ three wry conversations
hey Jo ropld were Piciia’s moveucite, = *
“thet t203 be mud @ Pricnd of hiv, he hordly pausad to speck with hiu, a
us. WEN ia? “Tidy 46 Giin'S lock Iikg

i
i
!
H
i
i

exc ment


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

vam

Rear can ee

dy fzlends or acquaintances. His choico for the nezt mesting
% a. dapressively miod new rectaurent near tha Lincoln Center
Porforming Arts on the Hust bide of tan. ‘this restcurent vas
the actaite corplex. fis was thus eble very sscothly to
to ths ecfesite fras tha restaurant for the reondting

cafully opere!
eyurce commnts froa the positive intelligence. sig

- Jastrvctor's Cororvaticn: FIG is a pron’ mn, both es 0.

@8 Oi Craratore bo was very discreet about it,

Yuzy cirousspoct, he did, nevertholesa, let the instructor beow tsb -

; he bigp om ocesaien beam hendled with Jess than pure ezniuses
*)-Bis, ixg the provice# itis, 1a noted not to déa-prada FEL, BS ta :
Blerd Both deck anf flold officera thot this non, boing very sure, - .

“pectttvay E2tinite end ctamzs hopes to be handled fn e raunar 08
would Reve those seme words apply. as

Be ne A very good man,



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

~ genet DN

18 July 1972

 MEMORARDUM FOR THE RECORD
-- SUBJECT: Hooting with QRPHONE/1

2. met with QRPHONE/1 for much of the 12th of July

and wearing tvo hats. Wo first went through tho third phase

of the training exercise in which I had been playing the role

of an agent prospect whou he was to assess and recruit, aod then

later in the OTR safehouse I identified myself as the Headquarters
. officer responsible for his project. Incidentally, he did an

excelient job in all three phases of the training exercise and

‘ @id particularly woll on the recruitzent itself. QRPHONE/1 is

clever, imsaginativo, has an excellent grasp of this espect of

- teradecraft and handled himsolf particularly woll in a a complex

and Changing training sconsrio.

.  @,. As the Headquarters staff officer responsible for his
reject, X described in dotail the reasons for the long, sorious
ook at his porformance these last several months, the changing

intelligence and operational requirenents we face, and the care—
ful perotiny he had been given as we bogan to map out new direc-
tions for hin, all of which ended with thia advance four-week

- training progran, testing, and evaluation asd substantive

briefings. ‘Be said he was a bit confused by the WOMUSE brief-
ing of lest week so I explained how that tied in with this evoning's
planned discussion on the China prograa.

le 3. We discussed his itinerary, personal plans and the”
pacing of the next several months, all of which wero clarified
to his satisfaction.

e a. He will be debriefed on 24 July at 1000 hours at
the OTR safesite in NYC folloving his return froa the
operational trip around the country. ren

S° Bb. I will meet hin for the final operational briefing .
; | Session at 1000 hours on 26 July to the same OTR safesite.

: Diet FROM GEEERE fe: SS,
*- @$ & @. 15852, £:
1), 2. 6 a e

i


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

ee ain Lo ee ree

Se StH

- 2

at
i

| 4g, Be whti cepare new York the night of 26 July
on the 8:00 p.m. TWA flight to London.

da. This will get him in London in time for a
previously scheduled ops seeting with PAUPEROS on
27 July. He leaves on 1 August for a one-month
vacation touring rost of Buropo with his fanily and
Spending one weok in Halta.

: @.. Before the arrival of PATTCHMAN 8 @iscussed other
‘operations matters as follovs:

@. His friond in New York city, Richard Ward,

“(apt. 11K, 372 Central Park West) recontly returned
‘from Hanoi and Paris with the manuscript of a new book
written by Cambodian Prince Nordom Sihanouk titlod
wee War with CIA.” Sihanouk gave the manuscript to

' W£itred Burchett who gave it to a North Vietnamese
: £elend to give to Ward, Ward was asked to find an
‘American publisher and he, in turn, asked for QRPIRONB/1]'s
‘help. Burchett is an old friend of Ward's and stays
‘at his apartment whenever he visits New York. Tho 7 Te
fmanugeript has alroady becn given to a publisher in i
Europe. QRPHONE/1 asked if ve would be interested in
-8 copy. I told his to get one if he could do so
‘Without straining his cover.

db. His friend, Lyle Stuart, the publisher, has

* Been trying to buy the American branch of the Oxford
University Press, and apparently is about to consummate
‘the deal. He offered QRPHONE a job as his European

: Representative if the deal goes through.

‘Ne. Per TRUTSCHYAN! Fequest I asked QRPHONE to sive
his instractor a copy of the long liat of names and

’ erpganizations given to him by Sibecho. Also per Ken's
Pequest, and in ansver to my question, QRPHONE eaid he
. Feceived the magazino published by the Turkish party
‘Gm Collards Book Shop ia London.

. 8. . From 5:00 p.m. until a littlo aftor midnight on ...
13 Jaly, parrcuvan Of FZ Division briefed QRPHONE/1 in sub-"
stance on the 67TFLIMFLAN progran, our interest in having ty
QRPHOWE/1 pursve such a role, and explained the great amount -
of dreary work that vould bo involved in learning the comaunist
Gialsectic thoroughly if the whole venture were to be success-
ful. J will make no effort to condense these seven hours

conve


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

SERRE UAT
_ 3

“of etheren} a@iscourse, but GRPHONE was “fascinated, captivated.
by &¢ and clearly laoterested Aq, pursuing that long murky
path to “enlightenzont." did an outstandifg job in
_ Setting tho stage, describing the target, and thon explaining
“step by step-how he and CRPHONE/1 and PAUPEROS would work
together as the opcration PRT ASE: » Regarding QRPHONE's
tpcoming trip in the U.S.. explained exactly how. - :
QAPHONE should act as he adete each of his friends and how .
be should develop his new-found “interest” in studyiog . +
Marzist-Leniniss as he acots with those various people. - .
was very responsive, took notes, had ideas. of his
own, but more importang PSAYTEAGANOFY appreciative of the
‘ tactical advice that ited. QRPHONE/1 will meet
the following people awor the noxt ten days.

a. Richard Ward in New York City.
: b. Libel Bergnan in Nowark (on three different
Occasions)

6. Benjamin Blake, Milton Henry and a fellow
‘pared Boggs in Dotroit (he's with NAR).

ad. Don Pright, Herb Block, and Sidnoy Lens all %
_ in Chicago. |.

@. LPWEAKLY/1 and family in Chicago
2. Davida Fineman and Saul Landau in San Pranotsco.
@. The Hartin Luther King Foundation in Atlanta.

Se “6, All of the above were carefully chosen because of
' who they were, what organization or philosophy they repre-

‘ sented, or their interest in the Chinese, and the extent to
watch the whole would knit togethor and form a viable base ~

.:) se a8 a springboard then he returns to

aycstiaith ie} QRPHONE to join, or in some cases rejoin,

Ksotst study groups in London including the one conducted

- by Hanchanda. The role that QRPHONE should play with these
groups, es wall as others in Europe who wero singled out
@uring varicus parts of the conversation, was also spelled
out in detail. By the end of the evening CRPHONES had clearly

. im mind what it was all about, what he should do next and .
the purpose of our reconvening on the 24th and 26th to decide -

finadly what it all amounts te. ae

Skbiiesj::

.
>
det etememmens sent cmae



--- Page 11 ---
14.gg000

ae

rae ’

- ' $, & asked QRPHOWE to call on the sterile line
using the “Mr. Stanley" indicator 91 Monday afternoon, .
31 July. This is simply to check in and let us know he is
on the way end how things havo come thus far. He calculated
that ho needed another $500.00 for the U.S. portion of his
overall trip since LCPIPIT apparently had not anticipated
this when he was given his original advance. I arrangod
‘through the good offices of* .4n New York to get $500.00

to QRPHONE today.

“ “ 8. QRPHONE asked if we had any intelligence roquire-
gents for him to pursve while he is in Malta. I said Kon
vould brief him on those roquirenents on the 24th of July
4f we had any. Incidontally, QRPHONE mentioned that Libol
Bergman cones to New York City every Thursday and told
QRPHONE that he could be reached on telephone number 265-2500,
QRPHONE said if we cared to we might want to track that
gusber and sec where Bergnan hangs out.

Andrew F. TELQUIST



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000
‘

SEERET/RVBAT
31 July 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Final Contact with QRPHONE/1 in New York City

1. As arranged previously, I zet with QRPHONE/1 at
the WOMOLD safesite in New York City from 1000 hours to
+1230 26 July. The neating was intended to wrap up loose
ends, convey our decision to pursue the STFLIMFLAM prograa
(providing QRPHONE/1 bimself was amenable), and to make
clear that we expect measurable operational progress withi
the next year. can

2. Although QRPHONE/1 had been debriefed on 24 July
by other Headquarters officers regarding his trip around
WOCORK, I asked him to review it agsin for ay information
so I could put it clearly in perspective as it related to
our plans for him in the coming year. I'11 not bother with
the detsils here because such have already been written for
the record elsewhere, but suffice it to say that QRPHONE/1]
was both pleased and relieved at the reception he got fron
his old contacts because of the reflection tnese receptions
had on bis own bona fides. The allegations of his BKTRUST
affiliation which had floated throuzh Europe were never
mentioned by his WOCORK contacts; on the contrary at least
one of them urged QRPHONE/1 to return soon to WOCORK because
this is where the action is. This sane individual gave

reading materials on the Cornaunist dialectic and
urged hin to study thea closely. This greatly inpressed

because it showed how accurate were the briefings
given hia by the Headquarters STFLIMFLAM officer and
demonstrated that we knew our tactics.

3. I then reviewed with QRPHONE/1 the reasons for our
long close scrutiny of bim and bis performance these last
several aonths followed by our selection of him for advance
training, testing, and redirection in the strong hope we bad
that be would accept this new task because of ite priority
iaportance to our national collection requirements. I asked

wVEd

.
*

i
i.
Fl
1
|
sib
v,
i
“4
4

cE
SOURCES

|
|
|



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

4

i

j -” o . ~~

ne SEG paws

QRPHONE/2 his impressions of it all, his reaction to the
STFLIMFLAM proposal, and whether he would accept its
Gemanding obligations. QRPHONE said he certainly would

and that he found it a real challenge to his intellect and
his operational skills. The tedious rtudy of the dialectic
would not deter him. His only concern was how he’ should. -
actually play it es he developed relationships with .
Gppropriate party members and, ultinately, the Chinese in
8] « -I pointed out he needn't concern himself with
the last point because tbat would be part of the purpose

of the ten-day training program in SMORANGE in September
which would be given him by the Headquarters STFLIMFLAM
officer. I said the training would require total emersion
for ten days straight, probably in some secluded beach
houge on the coast where all involved could reside full
time. He said this would present no problea cover-vwise;

he would siaply tell his family he had gone to the continent.
I said that PAUPEROS would be workiag out the details of
thia with him, probably after bis return from vacation.

4. I said that given QRPHONS/1's past performance,
his credentials with the radical left, and his apparent
interest in vizgorously pursuing the STFLIMFLAH progran ve
expected to be able to measure in six to eight months the
likelihood of his being able to achieve all the STFLIMFLAM
Objectives based upon the progress he would bave made by
then vith bis Chicos contacts. Should it appear that the
STFLIMFLAK operation would not succeed we would be discussing
alternative courses of action with him by the end of the
year. He dic say that of all the countries in Europe where
his STPLIMFLAM and radical left potential is probably the
best, Italy would be first and Denmark second.

5. I told QRPHONE/1 that his meeting with PAUPEROS
. had been moved to 31 July as he requested, reviewed his
European vacation plans and his Malta trip and wished him
the very best of luck. At this point QRPHONE/1 certainly | ._.
geens willing and able aggressively to pursue our operational
plans. We shall see.

ot _ Andrew F. TELQUIST



--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

OTOP De eee create oan :

‘
WOGEAR Review of African Liberation Movements

: En general, the author has done a reasonably good job
*, describing the i.istorical development of the various African
liberation movements, especially when one considers the com-
Plexity and number of splits and mergers that have occurred
, Within and among the movements over the years. There are
several glaring inaccuracies, however, in the author's con-
. Clusions about the current position and effectiveness of the
+, Several Portuguese African liberation movements.

_ Regarding Angola, the author characterizes the MPLA as an

_ Adeologically-oriented group (i.e., Soviet doctrine) that has
‘failed to grasp and utilize to its advantage the tribal realities
“that exist in Angola. The author fails to acknowledge, however,
that the MPLA has had some success, albeit limited, in building

a movement that is national and multiracial in character rather

*. than tribally oriented. Despite its urban intellectual leader-

_ Ship, the MPLA has had some success winning local support’ in

* pural eastern Angola.

; + By contrast, GRAE ranks a poor second. From inception,
its primary base of support has been the large Angolan refugee
‘population of Bakongo tribesmen who live in southwestern Zaire.
Although the organization has won some support among Bakongo tyr
kinsmen across the border in northwestern Angola, it has failed
to broaden its base because of its thinly disguised regional
and tribal make-up. Moreover, Roberto's unwillingness to
delegate authority or compromise have produced chronic disputes
-at the leadership level. The author's conclusion that GRAE is
‘a formidable force to be reckoned with in the future of Angola
- ds contradicted by the fact that the MPLA is by far the

. largest and most effective of the three nationalist groups _
opposing the Portuguese in Angola.

MOZAMBIQUE

. The present FRELINO leadership does not appear to be in the
: tate of disarray in 1972 that the author believes it is.

Although some differences undoubtedly persist, the present
leaders seem to have closed ranks somewhat since the departure
of Simango in late 1969. For the present, any internal squabbles
that may exist are not noticeably affecting FRELIMO'’s fighting -
abilities inside Mozambique.

RHODESIA, SOUTH WEST AFRICA, SOUTH AFRICA

- Reasonably straightforward and up to date. No serious
‘deficiencies.



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

Direct Psychological Assessment
°
ORPHONE/1
The psychological evaluation consisted of an extended inter-

view and the JEMINIMUM test. His intelligence as measured by the
JBMINIMUM is within the Bright Normal range by U.S. standards.

‘The test scores were not as high as would be expected in compari-
‘-son to his behavior and life style. The discrepancy could be due

‘to the fact that he suffers from inferiority feelings and is

J.working overtime to compensate. He gets considerable satisfaction

and mileage out of his authorship; however, it takes a great deal

:- Of his energy in order to discipline himself enough to write a
“~book, His talents are much more in the field of journalism.
’Mentally alert and very perceptive, he is aware of what is happening

around him, These same traits would serve him well as an access

Jagent, However, his reporting may reflect some distortions because

is memory is not strong, and he tends to remember those events
that are of interest to him, He naturally has good manual-

vmanipulative skills, plus a practical bent that should enable him
‘to easily and effectively learn and carry out tradecraft techniques.

' Emotionally, Subject is fickle. “Out-of-sight - out of

/ mind," describes the way he relates to others. The reason for
‘this is that one of his primary needs is to be accepted and
“Liked, Most of his life has been spent seeking acceptance, and
‘because he is emotionally dependent he rapidly and intensely
“becomes involved, If separated from someone with whom he is
‘involved, he has difficulty maintaining loyalty, and begins t to |
ook for another way to satisfy his needs. .

- "3°. An important fact which his case officer should remember is.
hat he is not motivated by an ideology, but rather by the person

who represents a particular ideology. His relationship with his
‘ease officer is of prime importance. To ensure his loyalty to
‘the organization and consistent performance, he will need intense

handling. The problem is that he may balk since he resists

‘authority. He has the tendency to think that he knows it all,
.as witnessed by his never completing a degree.

OT A ph EPRI LE Hn EAT RD SER AES TEOMA R ES SO Et



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

ee :

iHe has worked hard to establish an identity for himself, and could
+ not cope as effectively with a new one. .

Gonéiueton: :

. . Subject is a bright, extremely ambitious, and aggressive
individual who appears to be motivated to work for the Agency

by, three needs: 1) a need to be accepted and liked; 2) a material-
‘dstic need; and 3) as a vehicle to be vindictive to former loyal-
ties, t.e., the far left or radical movement in this country.

+. Though he is capable of switching loyalties, and his life

history attests to this fact, it is very difficult to predict his
future behavior since so much depends on his life circumstances, .
One statement that can be made is that, given his personality, Lae
it is very doubtful if he would return to his former allegiances. ‘
,,But-if not personally involved with someone from this agency

ae ‘who can give him acceptance and support, he is likely to Look |
elsewhere for his need satisfactions.

ean, -


--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

:"’" Notes on QRPHONE by Harvey B. DAITCHMAN

-

< °° 1. Revolutionary Image: Discussed. briefly how it -is

': obtained. Pointed out there is a pattern to it which is dis-
.cernable among revolutionaries. It is ustally issue oriented ~
‘in the beginning, the war being one of the key issues, and it
"gradually evolves into a desire to engage in practical activities
-which usually expressed best on a continuing basis through work
in an organization. Also connected with this process. is the
gradual development of a different "outlook." It is usually a
mixture of idealism and Marxism-Leninismsocialism-Mao Tse-tung

- thought. Usually unstructured but developing.

-.)°. « It is possible in this stage to move from one group to
‘. another without any particular approbation being attached for
this transience. This is particularly so if one starts way

- outside a M-L-ist group and moves inward towards it. Quite

a different thing to start in a M-List group and go out.

\-. Also in development of a new outlook one comes to study

a variety of revolutionary literature. This can take one into
dafferent areas, anarchism, GW advocacy, revolutionary nihilism,
socialism, Marxist-Lenism, etc. However, to get to latter

(at must be done logically.

:°- 2. Tightly Structured Op: Emphasis upon tight, controlled
contacts which seek to accomplish a specific purpose--collection

of info not necessarily one nor always one. Purpose is to lay
‘ground work for future developments. Purpose to establish certain
contacts which can be later used in either positive or negative
fashion. Structured conversation is also essential. It too
should seek to accomplish something, directed so as to be useful

to future development of op: e.g., desire to have an explanation
‘for an action to be undertaken later--so bring up in conversation
with someone so that can use that conversation later as explanation
‘for interest in a subject, knowledge of a subject, etc. It is
“checkable, .

: :3. Study: Most important aspect in opening phases of op.
“Without correct study and without development (understanding)

of “correct outlook" one will always be a dilettante to the,
-outside looking in, someone who is useful to them “under certain

: conditions," but not someone who is reliable, and not a dependable
revolutionary. This is really the key, the ideological tool,

- 4t will open doors that cannot otherwise be entered.

. ..14. Contacts: Those to be exploited now and those to be
‘used in or for future time. In the beginning the contacts which
are developed are to be used as a means of building his
‘justification for having begun the serious study of Marx,


--- Page 18 ---
14-0000 Rory hoa . t

Lenin, and Mao.’ This must be discussed with people so that many
are aware of it. These conversations will be later used when he
explains how and why and when he became interested.

5. Diffuse Nature of Op: In beginning op has a diffuse
nature. It is necessary to make many contacts. Some will be
-more useful than others, but all have potential for use in
one circumstance or another. Since we have no way of knowing
how or from whom the Chinese collect their intelligence, seek
; out, or otherwise spot budding revolutionaries we can assume
- . that some one of his acquaintances will report his interest
“4m Mao, etc. We can assume that through some of his activities
Chinese will build up his dossier so that at a later date when
‘we go directly to the Chinese for help they can look in their
dossier and see that x number of months ago, etc., various
things were reported. Etc.

-.» @, Ops as a Process of Development: Permit no diversions
or detours which might become permanent. This would include
targets of opportunity, etc. Must always maintain correct
operational line and cannot reach target by following various
diversionary tributaries in the temporary interest of collecting
. Marginal intelligence, Must be prepared to sacfrice. diversionary
-. tasks in pursuit of main goal or objective. If tangential
things are folled up we then have a different op, and a new op
line, must be cautious with this. Ops line serves as guide for
whole op from beginning to end.

a 7. Tactics in Op: Must always be carefully thought out so
as to insure forward development of op, Something must be seen
-, emerging or useful, or having potential future value for develop~

"ment of op, otherwise it is pointless to undertake it. Tactics
“are details. Details are most important aspect in day to day

: rvunning of op. They must be paid attention to, must be contrib-

- utory, must be carried out in correct sequence, and we must keep
in mind that at one or more points it is these details which will
: be subject of the scrutiny of the opposition. IT IS INPORTANT
THAT THESE DETAILS APPEAR LOGICAL TO THIS OPPOSITION, even if they
_, may seem illogical to us at times. Our logic is not the same as
communist logic.

. - °8. Ops is Step by Step Process: Op should/or can be nae
divided into steps, phases, stages, segments, whatever. Each

phase should dovetail into the next. To some extent a general

_ Outline can be developed. Each of the major phases should

- be sub-divided into stages so that they can be dealt with step -

. by step. For example: Three broad categories:

1.<-18t Phase: All initiatives are ours. We do all the work,

lay ground for future stages. We have a flexible line which 7
- permits making maximum contacts to be correctly exploited. We

’ give training. Also devise concrete activities for him to carry
‘out. .



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

. zuc Yaase: Chinese and others have shown interest. We

will exploit this interest. After he has completed first phase
we will begin to make structured contacts with the Chinese. In
these contacts he will show that he has a grasp of the ideology,
is interested in learning more, desires to study more intensively.
Will use as negative examples: his book, Panthers, some aspects
of Bergman's behavior, the unstructured and undisciplined nature

. of most revolutionary activists in U.S., particularly among the

blacks, or whatever may seem appropriate at time contact is
made. However, will seek their help to further his study and ~
will indicate recognition of need to return.to U.S. in order

’ ¢o undertake correct role in revolutionary struggle. At this

stage we will have an idea of interest of Chinese. We will be
able to determine whether we can expect progress or not. If

’ they prove willing to help they will then be asked to guide

his further study, to help him. Through this help they will

be able to see the development which has taken place. We should
get a good feeling of their willingness to guide him after a
couple of meetings. If we are shut out then must make ops

‘Judgenent from that point on--can always target against Soviets

and use Chinese as negative example. If they are interested
we will then lose some aspects of our initiative, but in‘ essence
the more initiative we lose to them, the more they try to

‘direct him, the deeper he becomes involved with them, which is

our objective--one of them. He must continue his study.

“8rd Phase: Continue his study; continue his contacts all

around, but by now should have significant contacts and can
- dispense with the more general "sparrow" approach. Once certain

of their willingness to help we ask about a trip to Peking
to study after which he wants to return to U.S, and take active

: role.

. "Recognize that this may be a sticking point. We don't

‘want him here. However, this idea has to always be in the

forefront as far as the Chinese are concerned otherwise they

_ have little reason to be interested in him. This MUST appear to

be ‘his goal. We may be able to circumvent it later for one
reason or another, or it might be useful to bring him back
temporarily. This decision must be reserved for that time.

ae ““Phese stages and sub-stages must be further divided if

we are to understand the operation correctly and are to carry

at out correctly. Each action he is asked to undertake must

be seen leading to something concrete in the next or another __
step. The whole op goes STEP BY STEP. We do not insert sos
unrealistic objectives, or those which would be desirable but
may be difficult. This is a waste of time. We only seek to

’ . do what is possible--possible is what can be turned into reality.-

an “Emphasis must be made on "step by step" approach and must
be maintained. Otherwise we can trip ourselves up by trying to
accomplish something which is out of sequence FOR THEM. For



--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

exasple: He has read Marx and Lonin. We might say he's quite
familiar with it. We could then say that he will read Mao and
after that he will be able to pretend to be a Maoist. All of this
is true. He could say it’ and act like he and others thought

a Maoist should act. However, appearance and essence are not
synonomous. It might appear to non-Naoists that our troop is a
Maoist because he can talk as good a game as anyone else--or
better than those who have not studied as uuch--but the essence
of being a Maoist is not contained in such superficialities.

. Nor is the essence of being a Marxist-Leninist so contained.

He cannot, for example, bloom or emerge as a Maoist and find
acceptance with the Maoists. They know the process it takes to
get there: "Several years of assiduous study can produce good
results.” (Some Chinese quote on studying Mao.)

. 9. Their Weapon is Also Our Tool: Once we understand
correctly how they wield their weapon, the dialectical method,
it can serve as our tool to pry our way into their camp.
Through proper study and understanding we can deva op and promote
Q's superiority among his friends and acquaintances. To Marxists
he will be much more acceptable and his intel product will
probably be enhanced since they will talk on subjects they might
not have touched upon in the past, he will be more trusted, and
“also he will have better recognition of key developments in
Marxist world turough better understanding of their reality.

“30, Some activities which we might consider enroute,

eet : a. Start His Own Study Group: Chinese would be very
interested, Unlike most study groups with which I am familiar
. he would stress study of ideology--in correct way. However, to
prevent them from profiting from such study they can be tied in
knots for months dealing with a variety of ideological problems.
. There is no point in our developing for their use good
_’ revolutionaries. However, it would provide reason for frequent
. contact with Chinese in order for them to help him in the
development of his group. Would probably lead him into contact
‘with other interesting types. Might have it for “Americans
only" abroad--to avoid problems with Brits: whatever:

Poy b. Might Talk About Starting a One Man Institute for
Studying African Revolution: could put out a four page broad-
‘sheet for peanuts. It would discuss various African problems.
His book gives him good reason for such study. He might draw.
“one or two people to him. Can use this too as basis for approach
.to Chinese. He will have come to recognize that he had not
painted the true picture of national lib struggle in his book
and through his broadsheet he seeks to rectify some his ideas.
aac c. He could seek to do another book on "The Dialectics
of African Revolution." Here again the help of various communists,
- Marxist-Leninists, and particularly the Chinese in providing
‘guidance (correct guidance) would give him frequent access and

contact--providing the Chinese are willing to help.

:niecerNe eT wn ernest

sent meee ni =



--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

7 d. Start a Broadsheet for American Revolutionaries

Abroad: This would give him contct with a wide variety

“of radical U.S, types abroad. It would also have feed back

into the American scene and in part fulfill his requirement to

_ have an active role with U.S, revolutionary developments, Etc.
Etc.

+

we e. There are other activities which he might also
undertake. The above are a few ideas of what we can do to

’ “promote" QRPHONE. He can do a number of different things

. at the sametime since much of it overlaps and is hence com-

patible. However, each must be structured, carefully handled,

‘with great attention to the details. STEP BY STEP.

.'+ Some Words of Caution: Our experience clearly indicates
that it is incorrect to rely upon either the agent or the
station to provide the impetus. This seems to be true for a
number of reasons. Case officers change often, chiefs of ops,
bases, or stations change--there is not much continuity. We

- are thinking of a long term operation which, as it grows,

. becomes very complex. It is not easily understood by someone

_ who gets involved after it has been going for sometime. It is

- even more true of changes in station leadership whose attitude
is largely developed on his subjective feelings from reading
only cable traffic. The initiative, the operational ideas,
«ete, are best kept in Hqs. There is so much more information

’ here to work with, people with whom one can talk, staffs, etc.
Also most officers in the field simply do not have the time to
sit down and plan in the kind of detail that is needed to

. continue and develop the op. It calls for solid knowledge of

. the communist reality in order to insure that no errors creep
.{in those contacts he may make. It calls for someone to have the
itime to read, study, certain publications, articles, etc., and
“then to figure out whether or not a given publication or article
can be used to make a useful contact, write a useful letter, etc.
_'If so, how, and then go the field with the idea, and concrete

+ | directions about how it should be used, Case officers most

"" likely won't be exposed to the same material and probably wouldn't
; have the planning time necessary, or the various resources of
mas to do what needs to be done. . wees

” this is not to suggest that the field has nothing to ‘say.
However, if the understanding can be clearly made that this is in
fact a joint operation, with Hqs having an opportunity for big.

* dinput, with the understanding that the only thing which matters
*; to all concerned is the correct development of the operation in
the given concrete onditions and not either the Hqs or the field
trying to establish some kind of supremacy of rights over the
other--there is a good chance of success.



--- Page 22 ---
Tg00000

MTD
3
‘
5
f
t
t
i
'
1
!

st

Under Separate Cover Attachsent B to OEPW-1814

IDEN ~ Andrew Ness

J igre cag YS
1 SC ATT IHOEPW-[I¥ PS bua =127=


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

& . - : Sed aiidy

Agent Profile - QRPHONE/1

QRPHONE/1 is an American citizen and a singleton agent
who has been a recruited asset for some seven years. He has
extensive contacts among lettist, radical, and communist
movements in Europe and Africa and was able to/sustain his
relations with many such figures for operational purposes
in spite of a formal disassociation some years ago.
Originally a member himself of a radical pro-communist
group, his disenchantment with internal personal and
political dissension in an organization to which ne had
firmly committed himself led later to his acceptance of an

operational relationsbip with the Agency. Although tarzeted
after his recruitment at the plethora of new left and radical

elements in Europe, essentially for intelligence collection
purposes, QRPHONE/1] has recently been redirected toward the
Chinese Communists with a view to ingratiating himself and ,
seeking their guidance and support as he demonstrates an H
interest in more effectively acting on their behalf. Our
ultimate objective is to precipitate invitations to Mainland
China which will lead to successively higher ecbelons of
contact within the Chinese Government.

To prepsre OCRPHONE/1 for this demanding task, extensive 4
retraining, assessment and remotivation were recently . vy .
accomplished and selective recontact was made by him with
bis more influential and pertinent communist contacts.
Reactions to QRPHONE/1's alleged desire to more fully commit
himself to the communist Chinese cause and the assistance
rendered thus far by these coununist contacts are encouraging
indicators of the potential success of this agent to achieve
our goal.

Although a complex man to manage operationally because v4
of his own background and the mix of his ideological and
professional motivations, QRPHONE/1's intelligence ana
personality are such as to well equip him to meet the

~ challenge of the tests the Chinese are likely to throw his !
way. He is based in England, as is his case officer, and ad
operational meetings: are held in secure safe sites, sometines .
on the continent.’

QRPHONE/1 has produced numerous intellizence reports
on communist and radical tarzets in addition to his covert
action functions as a journalist and author. His long-tera
tenure with the Agency will be determined in part by the degree
of success of his new Chicom directions.



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

esr ae sct

e o> ay Of .
Po  Seenict IDA :

i

1 August 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
. SUBJECT: Meeting with QRPHONE/1

1. On 24 July 1972, Andy Ness (in alias as Andy),
Frank Falko (in alias as Frank) and the undersigned
(in alias as Ken) converged on the OTR safesite in
New York City to meet with QRPHONE/1 in order to debrief
him on his trip through WOCORK.

cee ene eben pt eheet retnnten

2. The discussion was started by having QRPHONE
relate the details of his trip on a city by city basis
describing the people he met and his reception by them.
It should be noted here that several of the individuals
that QRPHONE was to have seen were out of town or
unavailable, however, QRPHONE will correspond with these
individuals in order to maintain his relationship with
then.

1

NEWARK

4
H
4
,
i
‘
1,
5
i
i

QRPHONE met with Leibel Bergman at his home
and stayed overnight (14-15 July) as his guest.
QRPHONE told Bergman that he had decided to make
. _ a full-time commitment to the study of Marxist-
fo oS Leninist (M-L) doctrine in order to become more
. proficient in M-L theory and would like to join
the RU to further this ambition. Bergman's reaction,
according to QRPHONE, was enthusiastic. Bergman
gave QRPHONE some M-L literature (which was the
same as the literature Andy gave him several
weeks ago to study) which he felt would be helpful.
Bergman stated that if QRPHONE was really interested -
in becoming involved in the M-L movement he should .
return to WOCORK because that "was where all the
inconsistencies were." Bergman invited QRPHONE to

ee stent eeepc nat nentes meray nee ecnens sean ae seen ena nt

She Se ACRE MSEENA IAEA SEMANA a id ALU RACE ORDA ARRON ATTY SATAN TERT ANGE Seton SANE ARRON MUNIN ROUEN Nd HILAL Tae OR AREA LETS 8 oy

QRPROVET 2Ao\

SS Giset eke ETS

b

L


--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

U 1

lamer KS

take part in some M-L study groups but didn't
say what exactly would be studied. The
j following are some general comments QRPHONE
H provided about Bergman. Bergman doesn't like
Newark, he has been mugged several times and
: would like to go back to California; however,
i . that is not possible at this tine, so Bergman
i will instead move to New York City. Bergman
: is pleased with the current development of the
j RU. He said that the recent trip to China by
i several RU members was successful and that the
: . trip had been pleasant for them. QRPHONE
commented that it appears that Bergman does not
have the same control of the RU that he formerly
had, although he is regarded as the "guru" of
the RU.

ce ree nee cereeenrrinaet ere nenveaatmetenemecetinng: citer tegeeemnenn na eR
. .

NEW YORK

QRPHONE said that Richard Ward is attempting

to sell the English language rights of

Prince Sihanouk's book My War With the CIA.

Ward had been trying to get Lyle Stuart to

purchase the rights but Stuart's antipathy

toward Wilfred Burchett, "that old Communist"
according to Stuart, was too great. Burchett
apparently wrote the forward and Stuart doesn't
want to publish anything with his name on it.
QRPHONE, in our presence, called Stuart and
convinced him to at least read the manuscript of

the book before he turned it down. Ward has a

South Vietnamese student living with him as a

combination houseboy/companion. This student,
whose name is David Truong, is the son of the

South Vietnamese presidential candidate Truong

Dinh Dzu, who ran in the 1967 South Vietnames election
on a peace platform and who is now in prison.
QRPHONE said that this student has amassed a large

collection of books on intelligence, that the

books are expensive and that he doesn't have any

idea where the money to buy the books came fron.

He also said he doesn't think Truong has

immigration. papers to stay in WOCORK legally. I
‘asked if Truong was in any way involved with the

recent attempt to hijack a plane to Hanoi. QRPHONE

stated that Truong knew the hijackers and might have
- known something about the attempted hijacking

because the hijackers had also stayed at Ward's

apartment.

SEGRET/RVBAT

epee ename meh 8 ARO Shos 8.2 ByPA LUTE HIS EE TCA EAE RAE AIRE RIN REED TGA ERs OREN NER EAS AER AIR ALE, Gt Ne AOR Co ae

oF TPE oR cd toca Sh ATR Atha nti eggs Se hae CS” tan ea



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

es

z
8

~\ uieccapataal “~

Ward is going to France soon for a vacation
with a girlfriend he refused to identify because
he feels his apartment and phones are bugged
“by at least ten intelligence agencies.“ Before
he goes on vacation he intends to stop in Paris
and meet with DRV and PRG officials as well as
with Wilfred Burchett. (Ward also met with
Jane Fonda prior to her recent trip to the DRY).
Ward will try to visit.QRPHONE in London sometime
in September before he returns home. Ward -
claimed that a "wealthy benefactor” gave his some
$1000 to cover the cost of his vacation. Ward
himself is broke and makes only about $60 per

’ week salary. ; .

DETROIT

QRPHONE was unable to see Milton Henry,
leader of the New Republic of Africa, who was on
vacation in Japan. He did manage to see
FNU Boggs, who is apparen:ly no longer involved
with radical organizations but who is acting as a
clearinghouse for black and white radicals.
QRPHONE characterized Boggs as less doctrinaire
and less dogmatic than he had been in the past.
Boggs' feeling about the black radical movement
is that it is in considerable disarray.

CHICAGO

QRPHONE saw LPWEAKLY/1 who told him that he.
was trying to get an invitation to visit China.
LPWEAKLY/1 told QRPHONE that if he went he would.
see about taking him along. This was the first.
that QRPHONE knew about LPWEAKLY/1's plans. ~~
QRPHONE was unable to see either Sidney Lens or
Hal Block because they were out of town. He did
corroborate the fact that Block had recently.
been to China. QRPHONE spent some time with
Don Wright, who was a member of the RU delegation
to China. Wright is now a full-time RU official
responsible for organizing RU cells in the
Mid-West and seems committed to revolution
although he doesn't speak in M-L terminology.
Wright stated that one problem now facing the RU
involves national exposure, i.e., getting
minorities to become involved with the RU. This
is a change from past RU philosophy which was that

SOMO

]



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

come

er res
~ Cause j | hi wd _

minority groups shouid form their own i
organizations separate from the RU. QRPHONE ,
said Wright is very bitter toward the Black
Panther movement and thinks that Eldridge
Cleaver is “bad" and that Huey Newton and
Bobby Seale are "corrupt".

oe eaten cae cane eee cere avnmemtinat nee

SAN_ FRANCISCO

In San Francisco QRPHONE stayed with .
Davida Fineman. The mysterious M, who appeared j
in several of her letters to QRPHONE, is Martin :
Nichols, a Marxist scholar of note who translated
into the English the entire Fundamentals of
Political Economy. He was once a member of the
Rw

Emotionally, Davida is not as depressed as
she was several months ago, even though her brief
exposure to the world of labor union organizing
was a failure. Her comments about the RU were
to condemn the Bruce Franklin group (Venceramos
Organization) which she said is going to bring
disaster to the whole RU because of its :
predilection for violence before the groundwork . ‘
for revolution has been laid. Fineman feels that bo *
Robert Avakian, a high RU official, is less wild 4 tl :
and erratic than in the past and has in fact po
become a good M-L.

QRPHONE saw paul Richards, Hodee Edwards‘
son-in-law. Richards is a former CP member from
the Mid-West, which he left because of the people. :
He feels that the Mid-West is a part of the 4
country where the Government ought to test nuclear - i
warheads. QRPHONE also met with Earl and Lee Rose. .
Earl was in the RU delegation to China where he Poss las
must have caused some embarrassment to the ae
delegation by his naivete. He attempted to meet
African revolutionaries, particularly members of
. the MPLA, which he didn't realize were Moscow~
“G oriented. Rose asked QRPHONE to write and send
H him material on the various African liberation
movements. Lee Rose works for Bell Telephone
Company although Earl, her husband, is unemployed.

ae

ECT /YBAT

ns entneh enleetetn ences seedpelerne

|
|

3


--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

meme,

cit cin tee eee eee com ecnenmeemanit amar erits’ Fiye AEM

i
i

yet eee nee se rte ane Repent

‘ Grenada liad

ATLANTA

QRPHONE went to the Martin Luther King
Center for Social Change, formerly the Martin
Luther King Foundation, where he met with
Tom Porter, the head staffer of the organization.
There was recently a split in the Center and the :
Executive Director, a Dr. Scott, was forced out id.
of office. The office is still vacant and,
according to Porter, will remain so for the
immediate future. The reason for the continued :
vacancy is apparently to allow Coretta King and vf
other members of the Board of Directors to 4
maintain direct control. Porter is a former ta
writer for Freedom Ways Magazine. QRPHONE said ie
that Porter knew of him but didn't say exactly how. ny
QRPHONE told Porter he would consider writing a ti
brief on the Center for LPWEAKLY. QRPHONE said
that the Center is going to establish a foreign
affairs staff which will be headed by Jack O'Dell,
an old CP member.

3. After QRPHONE's discourse on his trip, Andy
discussed in broad terms what he could expect in the
next year with regard to securing entre to the Chinese.
QRPHONE was told that once he was proficient in M-L
he would be expected to go out and test his knowledge
with various individuals and organizations in order to
gain access and become known to the Chinese. Andy
emphasized it wouldn't be easy, that QRPHONE would have
to be diligent and patient, but that in the end, if he
was successful, the benefits would be many. QRPHONE

accepted this.
LAs

Kenneth Rosen
Branch 3
Covert Action Staff

‘DDP/CA/B3/KRosen:ckj (2 August 1972)

Distribution:
Orig. - routed to AC/CA/B3
1 - AC/CA/B3
1 - CA/B3

5
Sb UAl



--- Page 29 ---
Mtge, cg eat ata at
7 co eee RENE Te GREE Tey a met ts te E .

TSD/BAB MEMO # 275-72
20 July 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Rod Sweet, Chief CA-3
ATTENTION : Mr. Ken Rosen, Rm 3D18
SUBJECT : ORPHONE/1

A preliminary verbal read-out was given on 7 July in which it

was stated that Subject was an emotionally stable individual.

We still support this statement, but a more in-depth analysis
revealed there are certain aspects of his personality that are
susceptible, These are discussed in the report. If any part

of the report is unclear or requires further discussion, please
contact us. Meanwhile, we would appreciate receiving follow-

up information on Subject's performance in order to help us refine
and improve our methods of assessment.

James M, Keehner
TSD/BAB

Attachment:
Report

|
1. Attached is the psychological assessment of ORPHONE/1,


--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

we *y

ote rt

Direct Psychological Assessment
of
ORPHONE/1

The psychological evaluation consisted of an extended inter-
view and the JBMINIMUM test. His intelligence as measured by the
JBMINIMUM is within the Bright Normal range by U.S. standards.

The test scores were not as high as would be expected in compari-
son to his behavior and life style. The discrepancy could be due
to the fact that he suffers from inferiority feelings and is
working overtime to compensate. He gets considerable satisfaction
and mileage out of his authorship; however, it takes a great deal
of his energy in order to discipline himself enough to write a
book. His talents are much more in the field of journalism.
Mentally alert and very perceptive, he is aware of what is happening
around him, These same traits would serve him well as an access
agent. However, his reporting may reflect some distortions because
his memory is not strong, and he tends to remember those events ~
that are of interest tu him, He naturally has good manual-
manipulative skills, plus a practical bent tha-_. should enable him.
to easily and effectively learn and carry out tradecraft techniques,

Emotionally, Subject is fickle. "Out-of-sight - out of
mind," describes the way he relates to others. The reason for
this is that one of his primary needs is to be accepted and
liked. Most of his life has been spent seeking acceptance, and
because he is emotionally dependent he rapidly and intensely
becomes involved. If separated from someone with whom he is
involved, he has difficulty maintaining loyalty, and begins to
look for another way to satisfy his needs. :

An important fact which his case officer should remember is
that he is not motivated by an ideology, but rather by the person
who represents a particular ideology. His relationship with his
ease officer is of prime importance. To ensure his loyalty to
the organization and consistent performance, he will need intense
handling. The problem is that he may balk since he resists
authority, He has the tendency to think that he knows it all,
as witnessed by his never completing a degree.

3
engl 3

ween mee pee
Tee eo

4



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

Ren

a

Page 2
ORPHONE/1

Subject is not by nature a role player, and it would not
be operationally advantageous to have him switch roles, for he
cannot psychologically handle role playing over a period of time.
He has worked hard to establish an identity for himself, and could
not cope as effectively with a new one,

Conclusion:

Subject is a bright, extremely ambitious, and aggressive
individual who appears to be motivated to work for the Agency
by three needs: 1) a need to be accepted and liked; 2) a material-
istic need; and 3) as a vehicle to be vindictive to former loyal-
ties, i.e., the far left or radical movement in this country,

Though he is capable of switching loyalties, and his life
history attests to this fact, it is very difficult to predict his
future behavior since so much depends on his life circumstances,
One statement that can be made is that, given his personality,
it is very doubtful if he would return to his former allegiances.
But if not personally involved with someone from this agency
who can give him acceptance and support, he is likely to look
elsewhere for his need satisfactions.

PAS Formula: 14(Etute Retct Uoo)}Lt+

melemere



--- Page 32 ---
3

i Aes

ae Supe ME
ets ae

ALORS TS AOE ce at ened ce MEE
citie « Son sete’ Mies dade ae

nigh {Mesit Span}

INTERRALIZER
Set Contained
Asser Buected
Paysicaly Unactree. ceatemplate

Valees teas, synbe's

a hicH Bisck Gesion

REGULATED
Orgazized
Feceses
Persisteat
Rte learning
Fastosally insslated
Memery good for procedsres and routees

A WICH (Picture Arrangement )

tote ADAPTIVE
Versatlc tele player
~ Secially respoosive and segzestitie
Secratty sautative
“Refects group bebavior

Grerestinated

Laat

12 EN oe

. low E

Mase TE STS
SAE ci

t
I
7
1
deen epnaces aves citi pene cyemamcmmms H
stad hae Ste eas EL We Teper psi

oO

EXTERNALIZER
Responeve. seachve -
Outer Thected
Physically Active. reiating

Practical, concrete. realistic

Low f

FLEXIBLE
loose
Grffuse attention
High maginaticn
Trial and error
Spoctaneovs, exptessive, sensitive

- Hemary gocd for feelmps and impressisas

10W u

: tae URIFORH
Limited ro'e player

Socially gearded and aegativistic ”
Oftes ignored ;
Socsally specihzed or sterectyped
Oftes co confict with group bebavaer

. Underestimated

einen ie the ina iacin



--- Page 33 ---
14-00000

Fane seeme meme De

: ©. 0S G25 772

mB a) on |

e + —

; 17 July 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Covert Action staff

ATTENTION: Yr. Jim Anthony

SUBJECT: Completion of Training Report for QRPHONE/1,

Training Program "SHAW"
REFERENCE: Memo for Director of Training, From Chief,

Covert Action Staff, dated 23 May 1972;
Subject: "Covert Training for QRPHONE/1"

1. QRPHOHE/1 was trained covertly in New York from 22 Jue to
14 July 1972. There were sixteen sessions for a total of eighty-seven

training hours.

2. his was a heppy reuion of trainee and instructor. Less then
two years ago, PHONE was given three days of reports training (Please
see Completion of Training Report dated 19 October 1970). Just as then,
FHONE was totally engrossed in every training session from the moment
of his arrival to the moment of his departure. Remembering that the
instructor does not eat luch, FHONE brought a sandwich with him daily
end took this lunch while listening to the instructcr. Thus, every
minute of every day was made to count.

3. The only time lost was three hours for JBMINIMUM and on the
several phone calls he had to make daily to check for calls to his cover
office, then follow up with calls to those persons who had called his
office and had left messages to be called back. At the most, these calls
took half an hour. On some days, they took far less.

4, His cover organization work took up a considerable portion,
everydsy, of his free time with the result that he could not do any

casing to speak of for subsequent preparation of commo plans for exercises.

For exemple, told early on to prepare two dead drop commo plens, he
was not able to come up with anything till the last week -- end then
with only one written one and one that he revéjwed orally. As a result
he had to be given time during the training day to write reports of
his coutersurveillance exercises and one of his agent developmental
exercises. After one such exercise, asked if he wished to teke time
out during the training day to write his report he said: "No, tonight
I will make time to write it.” And he did. And it was @ good report.

5. On each Sunday, he went out of town to visit his aged Grandmother.
le used the travel time to read tradecraft books (he read seven altogether).
EBERT FN CE

oF
§ 58(1)

Ait

£2

$132, BE
4 wi

fon VMSA ETT ta eR NOTE SMES INES CRAM AMEN S188 Mba TONMANS Hale Ut A Bal eA ad ta i tah ca CUS AERA I, oe

aig



--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

tee gy
A)
3
i
‘
y
r
~ercrenrntererenreainn “8
@
ered

boom oy munkt a

On Tuesday, July 4th, his publisher appointed him baby sitter for the ‘ ‘
publisher's teen age son and there went any hope of getting eny casing
done that day. At least one time, he mentioned that he did not zo

to bed till two that morning and as he had left the afternoon before,

he had stated that he had meetings starting at rour-thirty that afternoon.
With all that, he nevertheless was fully alert and attentive every minute
of every training session.

&

?

6. In his developmental recruitment series of exercises, his 3
instructor played the role of operations officer -- and a real dunb- i
dumb he was. In such circumstances, PHONE had to do all the thinking, i i

all the planning, all the casing for meeting sites, all the analyzing, ‘ ‘
all the preparing and pointing for the recruitment. It was pure joy . i
to watch this man, after each meeting and egain before the next one, i io
go to work on the problem. He knew where he was, knew where he wanted i H
to go, knew how to get there. When Mr. Rod Sweet, during the critique : H
at the end of the series of exercises said: "He did a beautiful job,” : :
PRONE had earned that accolade all by himself, The instructor's only :
contribution had been in the teaching of the subject of Agent Acquisition. ' :

7. At this point, the instructor wishes to execute a low bow in 4
the direction of Mr. Sweet: He played his agent role excellently well 3
end made the exercise a meaningful one for PHONE. ‘The three trips to
DO New York by Mr. Sweet must have been very taxing, particularly in view
of his immediately upcoming TDY trip, but they were efforts well spent.

8. No man, of course, is perfect. Each has an Achilles heel, a
wealmess, or an all-too-human trait, et the very least. Our PHONE has
his. He has a very quick mind. He knows it. And knowing it, he relies
on it, counts on it. ‘This, in turn, leads to a small failure in self-
discipline. For example, told to write out his plan for the recruitment
pitch, he came in with six words (maybe not that many) scretched on a
3 by 5 leaf torn out of his pocket notebook. He then proceeded, from .
these few words, to rm off his plan without a single pause for en .
uh, hm, er, etc. It was as though he was reading a definition from a .
dictionary, so smoothly did his mind and thoughts run. He prepares
everything in.Bdis mind, it appears, and does not like to write out .
that which he feels he should not have to write out. While it is great
to have so facile a mind, a bit of discipline, to write out in fw
so important an act es ea recuritment pitch, might one day save grief
when an error would have been spotted had the entire plen been written
out then looked over for possible flews.

wee einem en aden itn ooo

9. This small flaw, the instructor feels, accounts in considerable
measure for PHONS's failure to bring in a written dead drop plan till
the lest days of the program. PHONE felt he could just as easily report
orally. In fact, the other dead drop (he hed been asked to do two) .
on which he reported orally, he discussed as though the peper was in - . -:
front of him and he was reading from it. Nothing was missing -- area

eed GK FANN Dirck Anta BINA a wpe derae MER MSBAMIE A Bian MOMMY Wome es we

SECSET

mremoaaacistica ts acs Bay Silty ESTED tlt ERM Rt MENTO ARI Rlbe ACL BBS,



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

pea

ne com ee

as

description, access, hours of availability, the opposition, pros and
cons as to suitability -- it was all there. He just didn't like to
write out that upon which he could report orally.

10. In wri-ing reports on the two counter-surveillance exercises,
he dashed those off in jig time. No pause for thinking, no pause to

look up at the ceiling or out the window. Just straicht writing, includ-

ing paragraphing. Mind and pen were as one. Same thing for his oral
enalysis before and after each meeting -- no pause to think, to review,
to reconstruct, to remember -- just an IBM-type printout.

ll. The instructor sets down this reluctance on our hero's part
to write out certain things, not to downgrade him, but to alert desk
end field officers that if they must have 2 certein report by a certain.
time, and they want it in writing, they must be firm. For exemple,
after the second meeting in the developmental series, the instructor
seid: "I must have that report first thing in the morning. Do you
want to take time out from this afternoon's training session to do it?"
And, as already reported above, PHCNE preferred to save the training
time and he answered "I will make time to write it". In this case,
time was of the essence because Mr. Sweet had to see the report before
the next meeting. fo sum up this item: When PHONE feels that an oral
report is adequate he finds it a little difficult to bring himself to
find time to make a written report. Told definitely that he must write
®@ report and given a deedline, he meets the deadline and the report is

everything it should be.

12. His reports on his recruitment meetings, ir. Sweet said, were
excellent. No jumping to conclusions, no padding, no misinterpretations,
no omissions.

13. ‘The surveillance team captain, reading PHONE's report on his
actions during the countersurveillance exercises, narvelled at the
completeness, total accuracy of description of the surveillants PHONE
bad made, including their ages (but always made each man an inch or
two shorter than the actual height -- which PHONE edmitted he does --
constantly), and the total recall of every move, every street crossing,
every compass direction. (In the first countersurveillance exercise,
sprung on PHONE without a moment's prior notice, he made one of his
two surveillants. In the second one, with plenty of time to prepare,
he mede all three of them. These were two different teams from the
Hew York Office of Security). Concluding his admiration of PHONE's
reporting, the surveillance team captain said to the instructor: "You
should be very proud of hin”. 4.

14. In both exercises, the surveillance teams criticized the
rapidity of PHONE's movements. He walks very rapidly from place to
place, then spends time to browse in a book shop. ‘hen off again at
a high rate of speed to his next stop. They also criticized his looking
both ways while crossing a one way street. They felt it made him appear

EGRET

s Sei ard Shas aecetnRR ate are

sew ft en
so merit a seer egg

Fe memes © etme memes ei a nen

DUR NRL AEE Ee nhac ea Ee Ae a ncaa armen



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000 '

‘ re ee

i
wsvocd

feat onan ay RP HE TT,

waa ntunee a"

-4.-

tail conscious. These are a typical New Yorker's habits. ‘The instructor,

also a New Yorker, is suilty of the identical actions. We are highly

kinetic in our movements end as for looking both ways while crossing a

: one-way street, we follow the old Marine Corps adage: “There's always }

! one 8,.0.B. that doesn't get the word". By sheerest coincidence, when }

‘ the instructor was on his way to the sefesite to deliver the surveillance if

: team's report, he violated his own rule of looking both ways in crossing
&@ one-way street and was bowled over by a hippie on a loaded bike -- : :
going the wrong way. Only the large heavy film case the instructor
was carrying kept him from being knocked flat. : i

15. Nevertheless, FHCHE is now fully cognizant of the appearance :
that his actions create and will watch it in the future. :

16. One last note on the counter-surveillance exercises: He
chose his positions well and he camoufleged his actions beautifully. £
Qne example: The instructor called the surveillance team for a quick
feedback on the first exercise and caught the men just as they returned
to their office. They got on different phones for a three way conversation.
1 They reported one incident as follows: “So repid were PYONE's novements, : :
. that when he met a friend of his, he hardly paused to speak with hin, i ?
: just waved him off". The second surveillant: "No, it didn't look like . .
i that at all, to me, To me it looked like this Indian-leoking person
stopped PHONE and asked him for directions and PHONE gave them and just
went about his business". PHONR's owm report, vhich he wrote up before i
he learned about the two different interpretations of the incident: i
"2. where I stopped a foreign-looxing man, apparently Indian in origin :
and asked hin for the Museum which I knew perfectly well is on 55th :
‘ Street. I turned around as he pointed south to 55th Street and spotted
i the same man in the grey suit, now holding his hat in his hand”.

17. In the second exercise, there were two items of note: One,
the team was surprised to note in PHONE's report that PHONE even had
the name of the book that the surveillant picked up when he followed
PHONE into a book store. Second, when the exercise was over, the team
compared notes and decided that PHONE may have made two of them but
could not possibly have made the third man. The team captain, on reading
PHONE's report, was stunned to see that PHONE had indeed made the third
man also, but good.

18, PHONE hed en elicitation exercise (in addition to the develop-
mental acquisition series) with Mr. Harry Webster, an instructor in the
New York office. After relating the fine job that PHONE had done, Mr.
Webster's report concluded: "A first rate performance by PHONE, who's
_ Obviously been around -- both coverwise and for real",

19. His choice of meeting places with his agent could not be
faulted. For one, he chose an East Side restaurant (where diplomants, : a
es Mr. Sweet held himself out to be, would properly be seen dining). : .

tf .



--- Page 37 ---
14-00000

OTS

ao oo matches OL

i
i
j
'
i
i
i
:

StGiET
-5S-

Yet it was far enough away from the United Netions building to lessen
the chances that PHONs himself and his putative diplomat terget would
be spotted by *riends or acquaintances. His choice for the next meeting
wes at an impressively named new restaurent near the Lincoln Center

for the Performing Arts on the West Side of tou. This restaurant wes
loceted in the safesite corplex. He was thus able very smoothly to
invite his agent to the safesite from the restaurant for the recruiting
pitch.

20. He did very well in executing two recognition meetings and
two brush passes. He had no time to write his own commo exercises
(as stated, he was able to write up only one deed drop commo plan)
so he was given commo plans written up by another trainee. To give him
veriety, he was alternately the higher and the lower echelon, alternately
accepted and made the hand-off. -

21. In operational and intel reports, he did very well. He very
successfully separated the operaticnal from the intel info and the
source comments from the positive intelligence.

22, Instructor's Observation: PHONE is a proud man, both as an
Sndividual and as an operator. While he was very discreet about it,
very circumspect, he did, nevertheless, let the instructor know that
he has, on occasion been handled with something less than pure genius.
This, like the previous item, is noted not to down-grade PHONE, but to
alert both desk and field officers that this man, being very sure,
positive, definite and strong, hopes to be handled in a manner that
would have those same words apply.

23. %In sua: A very good man.

2h, In an effort to evaluate the effectiveness of the training,
we would appreciate a detailed evaluetion report in July 1973 from the
field station. This report should indicate the extent to which the
training has made the trainee a more useful and effective asset and

' should evaluate the performance in each area of tradecraft in which

training was conducted; negative as well as positive comments are
solicited. The field station's report should also include the trainee‘s
own comments. Please ask the field station to slug the report WOMOLD/
QRPHONE/1/SHAW. Upon receipt of the report at Headquarters, please |

forward a copy to the undersigned.
CALES Cent

0C/oS/ALT/TR

FOR THE DIRECTOR OF TRAINING:

Originated bys :
Aristides G. Lazarus

SECHET

snttaeenileett een anes

|
|
1

oe nermencmtin setae +

'
'

cals

Nee ee es en RN tat ee a RI Ae ce or arene ae Re AA AL SRC



--- Page 38 ---
14-00000

oft

on

wey

Ce =, SECRET oo,
REQUEST FOR APPROVAL GR INVESTIGATIVE ACTION
(Aleays handcarrp i copy of this form)
PLEASE COMPLETE EACH SECTION AND APPROPRIATE BLANK
[serio sree or an |
Ann Jan’ Long

| _[ CHIEF, INVESTIGATION AND SUPPORT DIVISION, OFFICE OF SECUPITY -

[| CHIEF, PERSONNEL SECURITY DIVISION, OFFICE OF SECURITY
SUBJECT:
Crree sees) Reichard Thonas Gideon rnoucet
CRYPTONYM, PSEUDONYM. AKA, OM ALtaSES 1/04 FILE no.

@aPHouR/1

“bol, bo nO.

¥. TYPE ACTION REQUESTED
|] raoris ronat_ortnat onan arraavan [—[ rrovrs tonat_pasrarevany spraovat—————]
[oP reevistowat covent security apraava
[| Secumivy ano RELIABILITY DETERMINATION

2+ SPECIFIC AREA OF USE

3. FULL DETAILS OF USE Bee Pra Part Il, page 3, Section VI, 4 and 5.

4. INVESTIGATION AND COVER

Ae U.S. GOVERNMENT INTEREST MAY BE SHOWN DURING INVESTIGATION?

C. tS SUBJECT AWARE’ OF U.S. GOVERNMENT INTEREST Im HIM?

TATIONS ON COVERAGE IM THE INVESTIGATION

or sussecr, HO FBI - All

00 YOU PLAN TO MAKE SUBJECT WITTING OF AGENCY OR GOVERAWENT INTEREST?
WO INVESTIGATION OUTSIDE OF CIA, EXPLAIN FULLY Bee Memorandum

5- PRO STATUS
PX eeo + on ero oaTA tm (2) COPIES aTTacHED Updated.

Pro 18 OR EQUIVALENT WILL BE FORHARDED PRIOR TO EXPIRATION OF POR.
6- Rt.

1 copy
TRACE S- INCLUDING COMINT

|_| non-cerocatory |_| DEROGATORY/SIGNIF ICANT ATTACHEO

T. DIVISION TRACES- INCLUDING COMINT pre gen

P[xe recon TT [vee roesano | [mon-oenocarony J cenocarony/srensetcanr artacuto |
°8. FIELD TRACES °* A previously sent

[ [xo eecono ttt roneaea "TT won-orrocarory | [ perocatory/steniricant attacuen

{xe necono TT ettt rommano  [ Pon-cewocaromy | T venocarony/sicnirtcant arracnea |

SPECIAL CHECK NSA INDICES . 10. FI/D *%* CS REFS TO FI/D (BR FILES)
[Tuo acconn | [wns vorearo | | now-nenoeavory |_| Desocatonv/sicniricanr arvacuen |

al [_[ormer cexerarw)
Conint no additional since last check 1966 ” .

if i PP am

SECRET Bee seenve

SIGMATURE OF CASE OFFICER

Roderick I. Sweet

{
i
H

a tes

beeanebann nent

_—


--- Page 39 ---
yaon0e
i

ro

PRM be

AMENDMENT TO PRQ PART I

Name: Richard Thomas Gibson

DPOB: 13 May 1931 Los Angeles, California
Section I, 12

Present Residence: 32 Hartswood Road

RFA ee sean pean tes teem mnctt Me eng eveed Hot

cream BREE Sete ater st

Stanford Brook, London W, 12 (owner)

Section X

Monique Gibson Female Born 1966

sane
Ss
Cos

U.K.

UW S, Citizen

5

‘
d

:



--- Page 40 ---
weeny

rm

SECRET

PERSONAL RECORD QUESTIONNAIRE
PART If - OPERATIONAL INFORMATION

we ee eaten an enti LEENA

a
ia PRG pects T : i sseed by comply sag eith ide ap.
oi iceeee Pp FR 10-215. paregraphe 68, g, 126 and 134. Thereafter the esual aethod to decenest or coo-
plete the re

3’. n ee (3) . hander iting. 48 possible) ond too (2) cow-
ted cop ble
to Date sequi. € ob eo.
S$. Fill in alt it bie. é € @ erste °NA.* Ff eddétional apace required
for iten, ase roverse side of page keyed to appropriate ates nuaber.

CRVP TONYE
F * qapuouzA fornerly QREBONY/1 |
'

4. INDICATE HOS, SHEN, GHERE. WHY. AND GY WHOM SUBJECT WAS FIRST CONTACTED OR DEVELOPED.

No change

2- ENOICATE GXETHER SUBJECT COULD BE TURNED OVER QUICKLY AND IN A SECURE MAKNER TO WY RESPONSIBLE CASE OFFICER FOR
MANDLING. IF $0. INDICATE TO wHOM, See previous Part IL :

Yes To any Case Officer introddced to him by RODIGAST, or Aaron C. IAGTHESTRA.

\
:
i
i
'

> LEST OTWER CASE OFFICERS WHO HAVE HANDLED SUBJECT OR WHOM WE KNOBS OR HAS KNOUN, GIVE NAMES BY EHICH THEY HAVE
aren nome See Previous Part II
Aaron C. LAGIIESTRA known to Subject ad "Mike™
Teuise R. CONGREVE “Louise Chapman”
pr bat §
Isabelle Re PRIAMI “Ann”

Howell D. KAMMERMAYER Jin"
Marie M. IWEBBERT

pices cesses tegen teen teteene smn tent terete mangement anatase tnt rem sorinnat natant tint met wteneemae met ot =



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

ey

ao

1. ESTIMATE SUQJECT*S MOTIVATION. (Be detailed, © cate evidence. Do cot use stoch comment such es *antie

consunist.*) See Previous PnQ Part

This image of SXTRUST as a powerful, professional organization has been enhanced in
QRPHCHE/1's case by the circumstances of his agent relationship, vaich require very
professional Landlinz. Indeed e/1 bas probably caze to hold a rather glamorous
"storybook." image of BKTRUST and of the inporteuce of his contribution to the ZKZUZ
BKIRUST BrFoRT. This is a very busan trait ana should not be exagerated in his case,

a impecaTe TWAT CONTROL, FF ANY, EXISTS OVER THE SUBJECT. (If no control, or if there is « bach of rehO
explain.)

QRPHCNE/1 is dependent upoa a BKTRUST salary and has signed recruitcent docuzents and
a security pledge. QRPHONE/1 is not a handling problem aad there hes never been eny
instance in which either he or his handler has had occasion to allued to these contro.
factors.

1. COVER USED GY SUBJECT AND CASE OFFICER 1m THEIR MEETINGS.

Subject and RODICAST use a journalist/literery agent cover in the unlikely event

their clandestine neetinys are compronised. Other officers will use cover of both beipg

0 TW Oe x FORMATION AND IM CONTACTING HIS INFORMANTS.

Freelanceyx jornalist, authera, and as a syxcpathetic leftist

3- INDICATE SERVICE FOR BHICH SUBJECT THINKS NE (Will work) (18 working).

BKTRUST

SECTION IV INTELLIGENCE COMMECTIONS AND TRAINING

3. EXPLAIN SUBJECT’S KNOEW PAST OR PRESENT CONNECTION WITH ANY OTHER INTELLIGENCE SERVICE. CRDICATE THE EXTERT
SUCH CONNECTION 1S KNOON OVERTLY.

No change fron previous PRQ Part IT

2. LIST OTHER INDIVIDUALS (Agents, refatives, Friends) WHO KNOW OF SUBJECT*S PRESEMT SRTELLIGERCE ACTIVITIES.

None

3. EXPLAIN ANY TRAINING SUBJECT HAS HAD IN CLANDESTINE OPERATIONS.

See Previous PRQ Part II
Reporting Instruction with emphasis on spotting and assessment reports 14-16 Oct. 297

SECTION V COLLABORATION POTENTIAL

1. INOSCATE OTHER FOREIGN POWER SUBJECT WOULD BE MOST LIKELY 30 COLLABORATE @ITH BECAUSE OF MIS IDEOLOGY OR Past
ASSOCIATIONS. EXPLAIN.

No change

SECRET

alent eta tenn



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000 '

TPN ete aetna ae awning gists toe cart wn ain coe canna areata mbes a | .

4 4 |

‘ . t

4

Pie PART IT }

QRPHONB/2 i
i

SEcrion IT Notivation and Control j

1. but every one of the wild anti-BKTRUST stories which he heard probably only
serves to accentuate the feeling on his part of being a cember of a very
impressive outfit.

Having accepted BKTRUST employment for a combination of reasons, it
must be added that GRPHCME/1 clearly likes his work. He enjoys dealing with fo
international issues and political subjects. He enjoys the travel and the
opportunity to exercise his language capability. In short, the rather L
sophisticated and cosmopilitan life which he has been able to live appeals
to hin.

QRPHONE/2 vas recruited at a time when he vas in serious financial straits.
BKTRUST has given him a job, paid him reasonably well and regularly, and
bas enabled him to be independent of his wife's family's gharity.

ena ett gree epee

‘

mene a we hatte diet ce one



--- Page 43 ---
14-00000

i

i

SECRET _
OPERATIONAL USE - COBTACT

1. (F SUBJECT HAS BEES USED OR CONTACTED BEFORE, IMDICATE ACTIVITY Im GwICH HE WAS ENGAGED AND THE TYPE OF ImFOR-
MATION WE WAS FURNE SHED. '

No Change

2. INDICATE NOW AND FROM ENCM SUBJECT OBTAINS INFORMATION.

Ho Change

3. INDICATE WHAT HAS BEEM TOLD SUBJECT AS TO THE O1SPOSITION OF ImFOeMATION WE FURNISHES.

Nothing

4. DETAIL SUBJECT’S PROPOSED FI OR C1 TYPE USE OR DUTIES. 5s

sect ae: eo
journalist cover and as a syz=pathetic leftist poset ytd cORERSES YORE. Saget"

milieu of Afro-Asian radical, pro-ccamie groups ané solicit iaforuation fran them on
their activity, plans and views. Subject will elso contact, assess recruit and
possibly handle assets in these groups. Ia pursuit of operational objectives, he
may be required to join a radical oraizatioa ané/; az travel to Bloc countries.

S- OEFAIL SUBJECT*S PROPOSED PP-P TYPE USE OR CUTIES.

Ho PM duties or use are anticipated. Selective CA exploitation within his cover
situation - i.e. es a provacateur or reans to surface anti-Soviet material frm a
"WNational Literation” standpoint - will be continually possible.

SECTICN VII PROPOSED LEAISON OR OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY
t. DETASL SUBJECT’S PROPOSED LIAISON TYPE CORTACT OR OPERATIONAL USE:

S. THERE SUBJECT 15 am OFFICIAL MEMBER OF A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT:
None

GB. WHERE SUBJECT 15 AN OFFICIAL OF ANOTHER AGENCY OF THIS GOVERNMENT:

SECTION Whit AGENCY RELATIONSHIP WITH SUBJECT

1. EXPLAIN WATURE OF AGENCY RELATIONSHIP BLTH SUBJECT: 1.£. TRAINEE. OPPOSITE NUMBER: REMUNERATION. 17 ANY: AGENCY
PERSORMEL KMOER TO SUBJECT.

Subject bas MOA providing for salary of $950.00 per sonth, (tax free), reimbursenent
for operational expenses and travel unless these are paid by other sources.

an)

|

1 Rieke acne aa:

seperate RI



--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

SECRET

+ IMBICATE SuBJECT*S HOBBIES OR INTEREST IN SPORTS, MUSIC. ET.-

+ IMOICATE WHETHER SUBJECTS LamGUAGE ABILITIES AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS, ARE SUCH AS HE COULD PASS AS A NATIVE
OF A COUNTRY OR REGION OTHER Twan WIS CON. EXPLAIN.

Subject speaks fluent tut forelgn-accented Prench. He has a functional speaking
command of Spanish and Italian and can read Cerzan. Sxcept for his language, he
coule pass as an Algeriaa.

z- INDICATE WHETHER INFORMATION IN PRO PARTS 1 AMD If WAS OBTAINED BY RESEARCH, CLAMOESTINE ASSESSMENT, FILES.

CORRE SPOMDENCE. Of OTHER MEANS.

Research, files,correspendence and assessment by previous case officers

2- 17 OTMER THAR ROUTINE ACTION 1S GEQUIRED, IF AND SHEN TERMINATION OF SUBJECT IS EFFECTED, PLEASE EXPLAIN.

(Alec
see pare. 43d, supra)

None anticipated

SECTION XV EMERGENCY CONDITIONS RECONTACT ARRANGEMENTS

1. GIVE FULL CETAILS 3.E. RECOGNITION SIGNALS, S/W! WHERE COULD COMTACT BE MADE: GHAT BOWA FIDES COULD INDIVIDUAL
MAKING CONTACT USE?

MISCELLANEOUS OPERATIONAL DATA AND REMARKS

SGSWIRL EXAMINATION OF SUBJECT on 21 September 1970 (no decepticn reported).

samp tin apna cr nigsaidibs atrnne

i oreo

+ pebagteg tenes oe om

TO



--- Page 45 ---
00000

§

mw

CHET

@ MAR 1972

‘wEWeeANDUM FOR: Chief, Covert Action Staff
SUBJECT: Beview of Project GRPHONE

1. A review in some depth of Project QRPHONE vas
conducted in January 1972 by DC/CA and me with Branch 3
personne], with the participation of Richard Berkey
(now of Branch 4, formerly QRPRONE Case Officer at
LOPIPIT). Attached at Tab A are the questions which
formed the basis for the review. A full recerd of the
responses to these questions and the revicw discussion
is not practical so I bave attenpted below to summarize
the general conclusions which exerged. Attached at
fab B are two charts prepared by Branch 3 for the review
plus a rough draft “CI Assessment" which they also
prepared.

2. FI_and CAL Excluding FSI Sensitive Reports,
QRPRONE dropped from 157 reports in FY 1968 to 6 reports
fn FY 1971. His FI reports have evidently not been
used as a basis for CA activities eince 1967. This
situation is apparently due to a variety of factors:
the character of the man hiuself, restrictions placed
@pon him, a changing political context which compotnded
tergetting difficulties, the complications of his own
security situation, and the method by which he was
handled. It was agreed that WRPHONE docs have inherent
skills which should have an application to either FI or
CA work. He is politically attuned; he writes well;
be can handle contacts in several langusges; he knows
how to move internationally; he has an engaging social
personality; he has an established (if controversial)
reputation as a left-oriented journalist/writer with
some scholasticcredentials. The problem remains one of
focussing his talents and determining the platform fron
which he should operate.

ney remenepemnnenee ot



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000 ve . r

t
coe

a SECRET.

sity. QRPHONE can be viewed as essentally
3. HOsobifity and has expressed a willingneas to i
possess here are, however, qualifications on this. Ee :
pove-snall children and an unvitting, anti-US, white,
ha@ish wife, who would only be willing to leave her
Beland if the overt job to which QRPHONE was going
; was clearly a atep upward in hie career.

a 4. Handling. The method by which QRPHONE has been
er handled, I.e. mainly through Rodigamt (although there

ra has been direct LCPIPIT contact regently), is un~

/ nesearily cumbersome and not suited to the close consul-
tation needed to explore ORPHONE's future directions.
Having been declared to the British Services the most
secure place to meet QRPHOTE is in the UK and he should
be handled directly by an LOPIPIT officer.

&. Security. QRPHOVE cannot escape the record
of allegations that he is Agency-connected. What be can
do, hovever, is face-up to these charges, chailenge then |
and deny them. There may thus always be some clement °
of suspicion attached to hin, but, as time passes with-
out definite proof of such a connection, its inpact on
his activities may be minimized and he may be able to
engage in effeetive work inspite of it.

6. BSub-agents. It was felt that QRPHONE ma
possibly have a flair for recruiting and handling sub-
agents. It was believed that this should be explored
and that he should be given relevant training, based in
New York. This would also provide the opportunity for
Readquarters exploration with him of his future deve lop-

7. Fature Pocus. What QRPHONE's own tho:
be on his most natural course of development aee soe ee
clear, He may have an inclination toward African
Liberation Movenents~-the subject of his most. recent
wajor writing--but it could be questioned whether on
this or on anti~fedayeen work, there is sufficient -
Agency interest to merit such focus. He has no signifi~
cant base in the American black community (rather the
contrary) which would make him of intereet to others on
this basis. His overt political orientation is described

SR ne tt me tenemenneey «at vemamannmege sa; san codes ane ein annem cee ae eee pe enn ge tee nen ene pence ees
cant melee ete

a)
scars

{
i
i

Sener

a 2

ommaaeanmennanenr ene ee ol

ro


--- Page 47 ---
14-00000

as “radical,” but it is an intellectual "radicalien,” .
. not revolutionary. Further, he is basically a theoreti-
eian not a personal activist by nature. He might be
asked and might undertake an activist role—but it is
felt that it would not sit naturally upon him and
would probably not achieve whatever access night have
been postulated. Within his theoretician, non-activist
context it was nevertheless felt that the probably-to-
be-expanded field of Chinese Communist activities in
Europe provided the focus which might most usefully be
explored. The expansion of Chinese Communist activities
im Furope may come quite slovly but, in view of the
probable shortage of assets in this field, it was a
matter on which we should have some patience. It is
also 2 field which could be explored without QRPHONE's
needing to move. Whetker he focusses on this field or
another, however, QRPHONE needs to develop some job
or organigational) base which will make him interesting
asa target himself to those we vish to focus him on.
At the present time his cover doe: not provide a power
or influence base and he is essentially completely
@ependent upon us.

8. CA Staff Termination/Redirection Res ibility.
It was felt that in this procesa oY redirection or
QUPHGUE, CA Staff should retain responsibility for
QRPHONE. Fven if a London-based assignment did not
work out and it was decided to move QRPHONE to another
area CA Staff should keep the project during the trial
period and with this the responsibility for termination
4% the trial proved unsuccessful. If the trial was
successful, on the other hand, then we would have
discharged our responsibility for QRPHONE and could
relinquish control.

9. Some time has passed since the above discussions
took place, I am not aware of the extent to whird there
tay already have been a follow-up to them. Needless to
say, they have decided field implications in which
LCPIPIT needs to be consulted, should they be pursued.

James EF. Knott

: “so ; Prograns Officer
7 ; wie Covert Action Staff
: Distribution: aa ;
Orig. & 1 ~ Addressee 1 - CA/B4-Berkey
1 = ADC/CA 2 - CA/PO
Loo . 1 = C/CA/B3 n
Te 1 = CA/B3-Sweet SECRET :

ee



--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

eo SECRET iy

ar
coo

& En ene ee epee ee

q : :
AGENT EVALUATION |

| ‘ i

NAME: QRPHONE/1 DATE: 18 January 1971 :

4

PROJECT: QRPHONE ' . STATUS: Contract Agent (Under i

a Memorandum of Oral z

Agreement) i

i

OVERT JOB DESCRIPTION: International correspondent for "Sunday supplement" ‘
type color magazine distributed by twenty major newspapers in the J
U.S. Also represents owner of this cuvlor magazine in other of
his business ventures in Europe. This overt job was assumed in
December 1970. Prior to that, Q/l was the London representative
of small U.S. news service. Q/1 does free lance journalism and
is an occasional contributor to several magazines and newspapers.

COVERT JOB DESCRIPTION: Singleton agent targeted at the radical left, .
~ including Waoist, African liberation, and Palestinian groups.
Q/1's access derives from his many contacts in these circles.

PERFORMANCE OF COVERT DUTIES: Q/1 continues to perform well and
without posing problems for his handler. His personality is
easy-going and his attitude positive. If his efforts are not
always totally successful -- leaving us with tantalizing bits
of information and many uranswered questions -~ this is generally
due to operational circumstances in which he was simply unable
to elicit more information on a given subject.

PERFORMANCE OF OVERT DUTIES: Q/1 does a solid and workmanlike job
as a journalist. fe has acquitted himself well both as a
representative of his cover firm and in his free lance activity.
Occasional prompting on this subject produces added effort and
in this connection the operation profits particularly from the
energy and knowledge of the deep-cover agent handler who himself
has faced similar cover demands over many years.

ATTITUDE TOWARD JKLANCE: QRPHONE/1's attitude is positive. (See below
- under Motivation.)

_ ATTITUDE TOWARD COVER EMPLOYER: Q/1’s attitude is good. He has made
‘ an effort to discharge his part of the cover arrangement and to
understand the weaknesses and problems which plagued his former
cover organization. He is approaching his new cover arrangement
with enthusiasn.

MOTIVATION IN ACCEPTING JKLANCE RELATIONSHIP: This is a subject on
which 2 goo ea as beensa over e@ course of this operation.
The following points can be made on the subject of Q/l's
' motivation:

A. His basic image of JKLANCE is positive.

SECRET

TAY str Nee MMR fe

sprees RAAT TNR I MA NOE EA 1G ar EBA anne sivtey BBS,



--- Page 49 ---
14-0000 . oy SECR eT a“

ae eween  TRR
serene
ewe’

B. This image of JKLANCE as a powerful, professional
organization has been enhanced in.Q/1's case by the
circumstances of his agent relationship, which require
very professional handling. Indeed Q/l1 has probably cone
to nold a rather glamorous “storybook” image of JKLANCE
and of the importance of his contribution to the JKLANCE
effort. This is a very human trait and should not be a
exaggerated in his case, but every one of the wild anti- ~
JKLANCE stories which he heard probably only serves to
accentuate the feeling on his part of _being a member of
a very il pressive outfit. .

i
|
{
i
|
|
t

Cc. In his political evolution over the years, Q/1
has become active in at least two "causes". In both
instances he saw these causes undermined by petty jealousy
and factional struggles and in both cases he was personally
harmed as a result. The product of this situation has been
a certain disillusionment with "causes" and a cynical political
outlook. (In other circumstances this might be called
political maturity.) Q/1 now tends to view political trends
as a detached observer rather than a participant.

D. Following on the foregoing thought is the fact
that he is an American (and does not consider himself
disloyal). Given his citizenship and his disinclination to
feel “involved" in the currents of the radical left, he
has been perfectly willing to accept employment by JKLANCE
to report on those currents. He does not give any indication
that he views this as “squealing" on his friends -- indeed
the contrary seems to be the case.

ee cecteneg nen ine Reeth Cent tle UTE RR En ROR RCL Rene engernensee

LEAR ete iere

E. On a more mundane level, it must be realized that
Q/l was recruited at a time when he was in serious financial
straits. He was without a job and was living off the charity
of his wife's family. JKLANCE has given him a job, paid
him reasonably well and regularly, and has enabled him to_
be independent of his wife's family's charity.

“et toe eddie oe bevtmnantiytnt

F. Having accepted JKLANCE employment for a combination
of the reasons set forth above, it must be added that Q/1
clearly likes his work. He enjoys dealing with international
issues and political subjects. He enjoys the travel and
the opportunity to exercise his language capability. In
short, the rather sophisticated and cosmopolitan life which
he has been able to live appeals to him.

etter thie

G. In assessing the relative importance of these
several factors which make up Q/1's motivation, the under-
signed would stress that C and E were probably the immediate
causes of his acceptance of recruitment while A and D were more
underlying. B and F have arisen since recruitment and
probably play an important role in his current motivation.

°

SECRET ot

+ pre SIG anc ave ack atiatte 7 ITT TENA soars agg at

Sat tbe:



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

oo 9 geerep

I WIFE'S ATTITUDE TOWARD JKLANCE: Q/1's wife is not witting of his

' JKLANCE affiliation.. She was allowed to believe that he was

H working indirectly for the Chinese. She certainly is aware

| of the past JKLANCE accusations which have been leveled at

| Q/1, but as far as Q/l can determine (and this is not a subject
i on which he can come right. out and ask a direct question) she

i continues to accept the Chinese story . It should be added

i that Mrs. Q/l is British and is the holder of some rather

} typical “left” anti-JKLANCE attitudes. It should aiso be noted
that the relationship between the two is fraught with a variety
|

i
i
J
vf
“f
3

of problems thereby adding to the complexity of the situation.
Certainly the whole subject of Q/l's activities is one which

Mrs. Q/1 views with misgivings and which is simply not discussed --
lest it lead to acrimony. Mention should also be made that

Mrs. Q/1 seems to accept as legitimate the small amount of

money received from Q/1's cover and to regard this as a genuine
stringer relationship.

RESPONSE TO CASE OFFICER HANDLING: QRPHONE/1 has a very pleasant
personality and responds well to Case Officer handling. He is
a most willing asset requiring no special handling care -- other
than the normal professionalism expected in the handling of a
sensitive asset such as Q/1l.

WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT INSTRUCTIONS OR GUIDANCE: Q/1 is willing tc
accept guidance and criticism -- provided it is onstructive.
If anything, he may sometimes be too willing. His willingness
occasionally exceeds his sense of security and it then falls
to his handler to bear in mind security and/or operational
considerations which may affect his pursuit of a given target.
However, this should not be over dramatized.

RESPONSIVENESS: Q/1 is most responsive to requirements levied upon
m. n this connection it should be recalled that his ability
to respond fully is usually restricted by the nature of his
relationship with his informants; i.e., since he is only eliciting
the information from unwitting informants he is rarely able to
press for all the desired details.

signed recruitment documents and a security pledge. We hasten
to add that Q/1 is not a handling problem and there has never

+ been any instance in which either he or his handler has had
occasion to allude to these control factors.

PERSONAL SECURITY: Q/1.has a good sense of personal security and his
andler makes an effort to build upon this at every opportunity.
As cited above, Q/l's enthusiasm sometimes leads to his failure

to consider all aspects and implications of a given situation.

|
, JKLANCE CONTROL: Q/1 is dependent upon a JKLANCE salary and he has

SECRET

tty vc ag et Vitetee BEEN ho ge a Tet
cace dahtg Nigerian 0 PANEER ea Meets BB

an


--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

“, Ttalian and German. py grmicn

a e
ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL ABILITY: Q/l's present operating context

® SECRET “

‘
‘CORT

OTHER SECURITY AND COVER SITUATIONS: The past allegations of Q/l‘s
a lation wit KLANCE, many pre-dating his actual recruitment,
add an cxtre dincnsiow 1.0 Q/i's cover situation. We have. no
indication that any of these allegations are based on any proof,
nor have they produced a significant reduction in his number of
contacts. :

pervs

ABILITY TO WORK WITHOUT SUPERVISION: Q/1 is a self-starter and can
work well for extended periods without supervision.

ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS: Q/1 poses only a minimum administrative
urden. f@é is not overly concerned about his administrative
and financial position, allowances, payments, etc. He merely
expects JKLANCE to do the fair thing by him. However, on the
rare occasion when JKLANCE has failed to perform as he expected,
he can be very upset.

awaseeee

REPORTING: Q/1 is a journalist by training. He is an effective
reporter -- both in terms of ability to elicit and writing
style.

coat ca Wommestaee OST MINED Te

PERSONAL ENERGY AND ENDURANTE: Q/1 is quite energetic and can continue
his efforts on a sustained basis.

LANGUAGES: In addition to his (native) English, Q/1 can speak French,

come a PeRRR TE tet 5

WILLINGNESS TO TRAVEL: Q/1 is quite willing to travel -- and even
enjoys it.

AREA KNOWLEDGE: Q/1 is quite widely travelled in Europe and Africa
and consequently has acquitted an extensive area knowledge.

oes not provide an adequate basis to evaluate these talents. It
is assumed that he has a satisfactory competence in both these
areas, however.

t

WEAKNESSES; PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL: Q/1 has no major weaknesses,
either personal or professional which inhibit his operational
use. The existence of his "reputation" as a JKLANCE asset --
which is believed by some and rejected by others of his contacts
is a definite limitation on his employment.

CAREER POSSIBILITIES: Q/1 has mentioned to his handler that he hopes
to be able to make a career of his relationship with JKLANCE. He
enjoys the work and presumably the financial security. However,

sin cones Men trang i teem earner pee ac emnne

SECRET

sitar so iste a ane ROR ene TS ERO GE oF



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

en erie

3 SECRET ay _ |

q
the combination of the security factors operative in this
case and the unlikelihood of Q/1l's continued «access to targets f
of interest over a prolonged period argue against his being : {
regarded as a career asset. H

{

AARON C. LAGINGSTRA H
PIELD CASE OFFICER =

COMMENTS OF SUPERVISOR: This is another thoughtful evaluation of this
agent, and reflects the views of the agent handler as well as of the

with JKLANCE, and this evaluation should be read as the best stab
we can make at this enigmatic subject.

foe en ne rE
a
te ne ecto n nea a erie Mn rae Eanes =
oe

1
t
4
Case Officer.
I doubt that we have really divined Q/1's motivations for working ,

ADRIAN B, MASLOTT

; 1 . CHIEF, LCPIPIT

SECRET

“gyenpl ght SABER, alten dino" re mente San Ea Soy ANN i EAL



--- Page 53 ---
-, Do unaassicten = em C] coNF™ -WTIAL [X] Secker

— —— nee ner nena pnt eee ete to na
eee aces eee ene ranma aes SAE : er

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

pe
“ a po
us et

2
ioe

(Officer designation, scom eumber, end

5 January 1972

| Ris) ley |

COMMENTS (Number cock comment to show from whom
to whom, Brow « line across column cher eoch comment)

B Ke eiregc OTe A

Qy meorvet % Qc yy
Rady Nero lr it
K Prem epee

Acdecicind, Ce &
 \ 3-4
jp Net A Pol = elected

Aobhgrnued fom
GR Chae eth neti
Prey awry 1? fon.

zg thus autyedw
~WPaye tom peste”
- nen

°°

=

Us
CCOPET
BRE s26 a

fe G1O“LAeS" EK) secret ©] CONFIDENTIAL =) WMTFMAL = [UNCLASSIFIED

Mell eet ASE GP ately TT he dete 2 ET

ce eree we neurte hs dnbepseibebeeinae term = commie tiene cose eteem mee sp we

tne ammeter
poe


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

é
e
&

~ SET

5 January 1972

MEMORANDUM FOR: C/CA/B3

SUBJECT : Chicom Aspect of QRPHONE/1's
Operational Potential

1. In continuing ny efforts to probe operational
areas for the redirection of QRPHONE/1, I talked at
length on 3 January with his former case officer
(Mr. Richard Berkey) and received a very favorable
prognosis regarding QRPHONE/1's mobility (i.e. his
possible move to another European city or to Africa),
bis agent recruiting capability (preceded by additional
training), and the prospects of making himself attractive
to the Chicoms (again preceded by appropriate training).

2. %In pursuit of the latter item I talked at length
today with Mr. Andrew Ness, the FE Division expert on
long-range Chicom and CP penetration programs. I de-
scribed in detail QRPHONE/1's background, current status,
and the variety of plans we have in mind and received
Ness’ reactions as follows:

A. The butterfly characteristics that QRPHONE
has demonstrated thus far will never result in his
becoming of interest to either the Chicoms or the
Soviets for any operationally meaningful purpose.
While the Soviets would perhaps see him as potential
FI source, the Chicoms would not even do that. :

B. Chicom officers abroad are still totally
obsessed with Communist doctrine and its strategic
and tactical application to a degree significantly .
more zealous than their Soviet counterparts.
Therefore, in looking at potential foreign assets
the Chicoms discard persons of shallow substance as
far as their knowledge of Communism is concerned.
They are interested in only those who have a serious
intellectual understanding of Communist doctrine and
a serious revolutionary goal. The thousands of leftists
of whatever coloring floating around Europe are seen
as only of marginal use to the Chicoms and certainly
not the sort that they would take into their confidence.

en Se

en as

|
7
! .

4


--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

i

meu

a - SECKET —_

¥

5

t

|

| Cc. To become of long-term operational use ‘ |

i to us in the sense of exploiting his possible : i

| long-term use to the Chicoms, QRPHONE/1 should '

H do two things: join an existing "acceptable" . oa |

H organization such as the Trotskyite Party or a . '

| black radical party and, at the same time begin H

\ a serious study of Marxist/Mavist doctrine. AS ’
| he gets into this program (preceded by some ten

H days training and close Headquarters direction)

' he should begin. to seek out Communist intellectuals, |

' party members, leaders of radical groups, etc., to

: ask questions about the dialectic, seek additional t

i guidance, borrow books and so forth. In doing this

be will in time come into the attention of the

professional spotters the Chicoms have and begin to . i
develop the sort of bona fides that the Chicoms,

in time, will find appealing. He should also in
this period seek out Chicom officials with the

same requests for help. The key here is to
demonstrate not that QRPHONE/1 is simply sympathetic,
- with Maoism or any other Communist shading but that

} he is a dedicated serious revolutionary.

D. A quicker way to come into the Chicom spot-
light might be for QRPHONE/1 to join the Black
Panthers, the SDS or one of the other radical groups
with which the Chicoms are already known to be in
touch. He will obviously have to sweat out a period
of probation in joining any such group until he
divests himself of his tattered leftist reputation
and those JKLANCE accusations. Ness feels that a
H successful passing of this baptismal period will
depend solely on QRPHONE/1's willingness to plunge
wholeheartedly into a serious study of the terribly
boring and lengthy volumes of the dialectic. As he
demonstrates his capability to move more deeply into
this field to the satisfaction of the “spotters" he
will be accordingly provided additional help and
encouragement by Chicom contacts and officiais.

j
5.
4
i
1
if

ad : E. The Chicoms will be looking at him as a

: possible asset in their long-range targetting of the
American revolution, henge QRPHONE/1's utterances
Ought to be couched in terms of his ultimate aim of
contributing to and participating in the American
revolution. In other words the Chicoms would seé
little or no use for QRPHONE/1 operationally in

_ Burope or Africa (just as we would assess and recruit
7 a Thai for operations in Thailand not in Nigeria).

Be SECRET foe:



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

be ee Meaecter. Se F

Se a tet a ee MeN RT mee ae em ek tae MUR ene EEN UT OAT ea tar

'

e 7 SECRET

F. Ness falt that should we pursue the above’
as a long-term operational goal for QRPHONE/1, the
city in which this takes place is almost irrelevant.
| He could do it perhaps as well in an African setting
| as in Europe and his cover status i.e., with
| LPWEAKLY, really makes no difference because the
i
i
t
i

Chicoms would test the fibelman himself and would
not ve deterred by his external trappings.

cab aeteee +

3. %&In answer to my question, Ness said he would be
happy to meet with QRPHONE to assess his potential in this
area and then, assuming we all decided to go ahead with
such redirection, Ness could train him and guide him : :
thoroughly enough to get him well on the track by spending i Hy
some seven to ten days with him on a concentrated progran.

Roderick I. Sweet

Branch 3
Covert Action Staff

DDP/CA/B3/RISweet:ckj (5 January 1972)
Distribution:

Orig. & 1 - C/CA/B3
2 = CA/B3

%

corer wept telgeeessm neem tenn eum nt ees sens be a

|



--- Page 57 ---
14-0000 + ’

SR ee ba “ ry +
TLR Nowe att Meets pee Go tee toe bene Ge ae

ie ~ SECRET A :

{
|
;
$
i

28 DEC 971

J

MEWORANDUM FOR: Chief, CA Branch 3 ai

SUBJECT: Review of Project QRPHONE t
REFERENCE: My Memorandum, "Review and Planning,"

dated 23 November 1971

1. As stated in referenced memorandum we are
beginning a review in depth of certain CA Staff projects. -
I propose to meet with you and relevant branch personnel
to examine Project QRPHONE on or about 21 January 1972.
Please advise me when the necessary preparations have ;
been made for this review and we will fix a mutually } :
convenient time. i 4

2. Prior to our meeting, I request that the two
charts of Part A of the attached listing be drawn up
and copies sent to me and CA/PO. It is not necessary
to prepare written responses to the questions posed in
Part B of the attachment. These questions provide the
basis for our oral review at the time the meeting is

held.
—
etd he.
Fred W. Valtin
Acting Chief
a Covert Action Staff
>
t
“CA-71-1369



--- Page 58 ---
SET TE Re

ny ERED ere em emmy —: -
Bor eres Peas Ree Des e

(1 UNCLASS!FtED ~ penal

CO CONF” “NTIAL (SECRET

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

Ra GO “emes* &) secret © [[] CONFIDENTIAL

17 GEC 27

COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom

to whom. Drow o line ocroes column after each comment.)

7 WRNAL = ]sUUNCLASSIFIED =

|
i

: xd

Laramie


--- Page 59 ---
14-00000

wo Gy

(ape nrnt en ae

17 bee 7

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Chief, Covert Action Staff
SUBJECT: QRPHONE
REFERENCE:

Your Memorandum, Same Subject,
Dated 29 November 1971

~1, What follows below are some initial comments of mine on
the referent memorandum, per your request, We really feel In
Branch 3 that for a variety of reasons, we need more time to
deliberate on QRPHONE's future operational activity than the
previous two weeks, Partly this is due to extended absence by the
case officer in charge who has been plagued with a recurring _
iliness--I believe you are familiar with this. It is also in part
attributable to the Section Chief's being new to the position and
having his time absorbed by matters of current priority. So if you
don't mind, we should like to address ourselves further to this
subject following the Christmas holidays. At that time we should
like to initlate some meetings on this matter both with yourself
and with other area components inclading representatives from
Cl Staff.

2. Background: Your memo, of course, was triggered by
an earlier one of mine which proposed that CRPHONE become
operationally engaged in attempting to establish a black Communist
cell in either Paris or Rome. The purpose of this would be twofold--
namely, to exacerbate relations thereby between the Soviet Union

and mainland China through various low-key covert actlon undertakings, |

and in the process to further enhance QRPHONE's own credentials
as a Maoist activist. This tentatlve assignment, it should be noted,
arose because Branch 3 personnel had become increasingly aware of
the possibility that QRPHONE's project status might be terminated
in the not too distant future, While it ts true that in the immediate
preceding month or so, we have benefited from his intelligence
reporting, it is all too clear that over the past two years, he has
been of diminishing atlilty to CA Staff and other area divisions, In
discussing hie future with his recent case officer, Miss Chatelan,

her recommendation was that unless something could be found for him | -

in the near future, we should give serious consideration to terminating

eee renee oe

i

3

:
Lo
b
4

anedl



--- Page 60 ---
14-0000

Prope.

~ o_O Kus | ae

+ y

his services during the coming year. Thus my foregoing proposal
arose from a desire on my part not to terminate an asset of proved
capabilities without giving the agent in question suitable opportunity
to become useful once more.

3. Cl Type Review/QRPHONE Personal Security: Your memo
makes out there have been frequent security reviews of QRPHONE's

security status, and you question the efficacy of our doing stil! one
more. On this let me point out that in making such a security assess-
ment, we would be doing so in response to a current request by the
area divislon concerned whose cooperation we need to direct this
agent. One hardly needs stress that such a request probably should

‘be honored in the Interests of maintaining good relations even if Its

fulfillment means redundant work, But apart from this, the case
officer also informs me that the case flle does not contain any general
summary of the alleged security breaches involving QRPHONE and
their implications vis-a-vis his activitles. It ls true however that his
security status has been reviewed for each annual project review and
that assessments of his security status were made following each

“\-alleged breach, but no up-to-date summary exists. As for our own

gut feelings on his personal security, one hazards that he Is still in
pretty good shape. I agree with you that many of the past charges
leveled against him are of the same ilk as those leveled against other
leftist colleagues(who do not have any Agency association) by their
rivals, And as for the etructure of his case officer relationship--
that is, having him hamdled by a deep cover officer from an adjacent
country--this would appear to be secure in the extreme (so much

80 that one would advocate that it be dropped due its operational
Inefficlency. ) :

4. Location: We tentatively agree that In all likelihood Paris
should not be the venue for our proposed operational undertaking due
the location of the Wright clan. Rome, however, might do very well.

If not Rome, perhaps you or EUR Division might suggest another
lecale. As for the question as to whether or not the Rome statlon would
want him permanently, only time and his own < perational success could
determine this, One hazards that if QRPHONE were able to make his
way with some good local leftists and had promise of developing some
kind of relationship with mainland China representatives, the station
tight come to regard him as a capital asset,

SECEET

wie teen t

Hype catenin eee

Sees



--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

{
4

Foe Sibis.

5. Substance: You noted that ORPHONE... “cannot just
simply show up and start a leftist nuclei. . ."" Why not? Others
have, He is a well-known leftist in intellectual circles in Europe
and has written many articles in praise of Mao. This should do
for a start, As for what he might have to offer local leftists . . .
money, energy and ideas will do. A great deal of money. of course,
is unneeded, but some is. We can supply it. As for ideas and
energy, he has both. Concerning the "bullt-in jealousy, animosity,
etc." which such action would likely engender on the part of local .
slval leftists, this may or may not occur. But is this such a calamity i
¥f it should occur? Are not leftists usually fighting among themselves :
anyway? In any case, we have nothing to lose by trying to salvage y
this agent. What we have to lose by not trying is an agent asset of
proved worth.

6. Credentials: You say in effect that QRPHONE has not
been known as an activist but only as an intellectual, (Frankly, the ;
distinction is not very important in my mind.) Be that as it may, he ;
has written many articles on leftist subjects and has talked to
innumerable leftists around Europe over the years. True, he has i
not been Involved in such actions as street demonstrations, but we :
would not llke him to be so personally involved in the future in any ’
case. What we would want him to do !s to write pamphlets, informally :
recralt associates to his group and provide a little money to the group ' :
as might be required for varlous undertakings. Aside from the :
organizing and funding, actually this is not very different from what
he has been doing--except that It will be in one place for a change.

7%. Book Dispatch Sate: You may be very correct in saying
that shopping him around to European stations by book dispatch Is a
poor way to solicit useful tasks for ORPHONE. But again, I took”. on a
: my lead from C/EUR/CA who made a request along these lines.

4 A. Certainly sending book dispatches wouldn't hurt any. If Spence is
willing at come future time to visit various field stations and to
attempt selling QRPHONE's services personally, we wou'd be happy
to have him do so. We, of course, don't know when he will be
available to do so, and time is passing.

8. Concluding Comment: I really feel that we should relate
~ to you in some detail the success which Andy Ness once had with the
A : : kind of undertaking which we have proposed for QRPHONE. It may .
: ' interest you. On the other hand, it may be perfectly possible that : oles
aaa _ “~ the situation which Andy Ness once manipulated is not applicable to

ae emer



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

ST ETE

the conditions which would confront QRPHONE In say Rome. But

tf we ars not to channel his energies in this direction, It ie Incumbent :
upon us to think of something else for him to do before we begin

thinking about writing him off. And so when you suggest that. . . :
"the first order of business is to undertake a basic assesement

of the project. . ."" Iagree. And to this end, we should like a couple

of weeks more before coming to you with some general conclusions

of ours about the current viability of thi. case and some future

alternative course of action, :

Donald W. Muntz .
Chief, Branch 3 oo
Covert Action Staff :



--- Page 63 ---
CO uNcassivies =O ey ; ( conriper
: ’ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

Roderick | 4 Sweet |

Bran
Covert Aetion Staff

a
pen
Prov -
= eye
ety
jane

at i
|| | HHH eta

pe 610 ease" D secret ) CONFIDENTIAL (C] IRTONAN

fe] SECRET

(1) UNCLASSIFIED ©


--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

tog they

.  seorer

aim ee RIN et acne
.

17 December 1971

MEMORANDUM FOR: C/CA/B3 ;
SUBJECT: Operational Redirection of QRPHONE/1 i

1. In response to your request that I examine the
QRPHONE/1 project to determine how it might best be
redirected in order to gain greater value for the time and
money involved, I have talked at some length with appro- i
priate officers in CI/SO and Africa Division. I have been
advised that the primary reasons for QRPHONE/1's dwindling
productivity are as follows: .

A. Key centers of activity of the radical left
in Europe are London, Paris, and Stockholm. For
different reasons QRPHONE/1's access in these three
capitals is either circumscribed or off target. The
British have asked that he not operate in London, ,chsoe .
against African targets. His reputation among (target :
groups of interest to us in Paris and Stockholm has
been so tarnished that he has not~‘tdken into their
confidence significantly enough to be of value.

.B. Although he has a multitude of contacts among
the left, virtually all are shallow, periodic, and then
very brief when they do occur. Even his correspondence
to the more important radical leaders, which used to be
quite informative, has fallen to almost nothing.

ft:
é
£
i

Cc. Because his contacts are so cursory, he has
been unable to develop a close and continuing personal
relationship with any one of them in order to develop
the intimate confidence so necessary for operational
exploitation.

D. His cover has always been thin and thus has
circumstantially at least lent credence to the periodic
allegations of his being a JKLANCE agent.



--- Page 65 ---
ae sent oo» 7 | |

£. Close case officer direction has been made
very difficult. because of the echelons existing :
between QRPHONE/1 and LCPIPIT, coupled with. relative . t
infrequency of field case officer meetings. ;

a caer vg ent ACR OD

F. What contacts he has within the African
target, for example, are rendered virtually useless
because his case officers are unfamiliar on < timely
basis with Africa Division requirements and also
miss valuable operational leads simply because they
do not recognize them. (This is no fault of the
ease officers because they obviously have little
opportunity to keep abreast of such requirements.)

testes case menemnimten rte sae 6

i . G. The somewhat artificial nature of his trying
to portray a pro-Mao stance may help him a bit with
targets similarly inclined but renders him ineffective
with other political shadings among the left.

: 2. With all of the above in mind and without belaboring
H the history of this project, the following recommendation is :
i offered and has been concurred in informally by CI/SO and
-Africa Division officers with whom I have talked.

A. Accepting the fact that QRPHONE/1's operational : :
utility in Europe is minimal, I propose LCPIPIT be |
directed to begin making arrangements for his transfer .
PCS to Africa and, hence, his operational control :
transferred to Africa Division as soon as feasible.

4

i

1

H B. From the point of view of MHCHAOS requirements
and Africa Division's own requirements, both elements

| Felt QRPHONE/1 could best be exploited in Tanzania, pod
It is one of the two most active cities in Africa for ;

| the radical left, it is a hot-bed of both Soviet and

'
w

Chicom shenanigans, and it is politically vital to
East African stability.

C. However, because of QRPHONE/1's well-known
association with two exiled Tanzanian opposition
politicians in London and current reports that these
oppositionists are plotting the overthrow of
President Nyere (perhaps with Soviet assistance), it
would be very imprudent for QRPHONE/1 to arrive bag
and baggage in Dar es Salaam in the near future.
Nyere and his police might well conclude that QRPHONE

- , . represents the advance probe of the coup plotters and
* | : promptly throw him into jail. .

- SECRET

wee

re



--- Page 66 ---
ot

trance

emcees BEV e eageh eS LS

u

SECRET

De Both to give QRPHONE/1 time to cleanse his-
tattered image and because there are almost as
important operational tasks in West Africa, the idea
is to move him (1) to Nigeria or (2) to Ghana for
perhaps a year. This is to be done in concert with a
suitable strengthening of his cover (i.e. two or
three more stringerships) and a concurrent mutation
of his political posture to that of a plain old
anti-imperialist rather than the more confining
pro-Mao stance. He would be run directly by Lagos
or Accra Station against local targets but with
periodic trips to other parts of Africa for cover
as well as operational purposes. Meantime, in the
intervening months the dust may settle a bit in
Tanzania, the close association with opposition
elements would be allowed to fade and QRPHONE/1's
writings and pronouncements concerning Tanzania would
be calculatedly designed to support the Nyere government.

E. At the appropriate time, a year or so perhaps,
he then moves PCS to Tanzania.

3. %f you concur with the above, I will procede to

staff this out more formally here at Headquarters and to
advise LCPIPIT.

\ < na
Roderick I, Sweet

Branch 3
’ Covert Action Staff

DDP/CA/B3/RSweet: ckj
Distribution:

Orig. & 1 = C/CA/B3
2 - CA/B3

se eennmenmmmenne eeeene ne oe

| kag ae Vi dgetpemanpereeemneptectereesitemetng aires sett mitt gy nine eonerreanetes bee ppenvtenngen mene

Sen ene nnennrenes ee



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

Peer’

Te tere ey

_ Meise ks or ees Fe i sabes. MNS AIRE wal Dh ES hk RE a Ne wat a ot

a , we ry) a .

| 7 a ;

i
. PROJECT QRPHOXE me, |
t

PART A. CHARTS REQUESTED “a

Chart ¥: For the period FY 1967 through FY 1971
provide the number of disseminated reports according to
the subject field of the report. The headings would be:
Fiseal Year, African Independance Movements, Anti-US :
Demonstrations, European Maoist Groups (etc., or whatever :
other subject fields you wish to set up).

against which covert action was in fact undertaken and . . ;
give the number of QRPHONE reports which were submitted

t
. Chart II: List the specific events or organizations :|
on such events/organizations. |

1. What is the basic reason for this being a CA
Staff project (other than history)? To provide multi-
divisional tasking for FI purposes of general U.S. intelli-
gence interest? To provide CA operational information
for possible DDP use? .

2. AS regards FI reports, which have lately been
described as being of only marginal interest, the main
criticisms appear to be a lack of depth and detail.
CA Staff's counter to this has been that QRPHONE goes as
far as he can, and can go no further through elicitation.
Have these depth/detail criticisms been valid? Is our car a
defense valid, or could he reasonably be expected to . ‘ \. -
elicit more depth and detail than he does? eo

| .
: . poo. . $

| - PART B. QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION : oe

| :

t

i

3. If he can go no further through elicitation and
we wish to keep him on the FI path, what is implied? i?
. That he develop and run agents himself? That he actually obese.
goes to work for an organization of intelligence interest -—-— re
to us? How realistic would either of these lines of
pursuit be?

~ SenPey

ont tenet


--- Page 68 ---
14-00000

a ee

"> 3958 Q/1 worked for Agence France Presse - Paris. We was discharged by AFP

~ "when OlMe Farrington (American negro) brought forgery charges arainst hin.

-~- ower the signature of 0. Harrincton, xa xtk violently anti-French articles which

were printed and counld have brousht about the expulsion of author. William 5.

- Saith (still in Peris), Richard Wright (deceased) widow still living in Paris”

ena John Flint all took sices with Harrington.

~ “"¥eportely forvard to Verges eaitor of Revolution certain docunents which

established Q@/l was vorking on behalf of CIA. This was Eecause of fight over

money that was due Q/1 and his wife. (Q/1 had his lavyer bring suit against

_ Verges end finally in 1969 Verges agreed to pay certain smount end also an
'. apology. This Q/1 can use to counteract the accusations by Verges.

“Fall 1966 FBI Report: Source recently advised that during the Fall 1966, a

-:.. member of en Italian pro-Chinese Marxist Leninist Organization stated that

~ " gubject vas suspected of being a spy for CIA. This person reported this to -

Rene Raindorf a member of the Jacques Grippa Pro Chincse Belgian CP.

~ “Jane 1967: EXAXR FBI Report; GRIPPA and RAINDONF indicated to a ember of

@n American pro-Chinese Commmist organization that they thought highly of Q/1

- gna that they were of the belief he was doing a good job (in the cause of

: Q/1 sent to a weekly American publication and to to the British daily The Observer,



--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

there

wee, S
militant Marxism-Leninism).
1968: Stockholm. APIONBLADET - Raflical Social Democratic Datly 18 March 1968

published Photo and Biog Data on @ Q/) {in conjunction with story recent redefection

--. ++ - American soldier Ray Jones implying Q/1 responsible in part Jones redefection.

Kote: Bjorn Kum, an Aftonbladet journalist who is a friend of Q/1's wrote

... . hmm a long Dektex and wnsolicited letter the day following the appeerance

” of the article in which he denounced his paper for libeling Q/1 and gave Q/1
_ @fvice on how to proceed to clear his name.

“""“"" “Stoekholm, TIDSIGHAL / Fedical Weekly - Also published article re Q/l.

Bo Hemmer editor of TIDSIGRAl is pro- Cuben. end veatamendt? 0/1 loyalet

“—----- ~to Willtems who is enti-Cuben. They oppose Q/1 for his pro-Chinese and enti-

, ” Cuben stance,

...---May 1969: Report from Pretoria 6916 (in 49h87) ‘That Q/1 is now suspected

7" yadely of being both a CIA agent end a South African Intell contact.

_.Dee. 1969" Report from FBI: Source stated that he overhcard Cleaver accuse

Bon Wright from Chicago of being seen in company of Q/1 whom Cleaver characterized

os 8 well known CIA agents This was et the Algerian Congress - Falestine Dec. 196).



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

nero |

a 2 2 7

1920
Feb. 389SNIC: a London publication of leftist orientation, carried an article

* mentioning Q/1 by name and stating that he is widely believed to be an

- -et the Algiera Palestine Solidarity Meeting vhich Q/1 attended in Dec. 1959.

“They were menbers of the British delegation representing the Palestine xa

Solidarity Committee (PSC) which ves a rival delegation to that led by A.

““Manchanda in vhich Q/1 sat. Tits Wf Q/1 believes this story was printed

|

CIA agent. (200 of the Four persons listed as contributons to SYNIC were |
|

__4n order to discredit the Manchanda-led Palestinian group vhich is in competition |
i

t

t

~~" with the pee) OS

' B Feb. 1970: BEIRUT 6963 (IN 262712). Relieble Source reported that curing his

’ ~eonversation with Ghassan KANAFANI, latter mentioned 0/1 and accused him of

being a CIA agent. (Q/1 believes KANATANY pteke? suspicion of Q/1 due to accusatio :

—_ tions against Q/1 spread in Beirut by Pelestinien personalities who vere formerly

—_ in London ana who picked up story as result of accusation develed asainst Qf.

_ in smc.)

oot eng ee neem acatine ype”



--- Page 71 ---
14-0000

sae wegen

wee me mya eC

ea

Cuban

rey 3

.

foroitive Neports

oe

ee a as

QRPUONN REPORTING

AAJA Liberation tribunal Anti-US Communisia For FBISR* Dissens-

veg

H

7

AAVSO African Wav Crilnos Kuropean . , . Total - |
5 43 27, 0——i(ist«C 24 i, a2 -  * 106 |
3. . 24 32 27 - @7 4a bh 80 187

-- 12 - 17 ce ce: ce eC

e
t

3 +t 4 31

13. (a 113

ol:
&
S|»

59



--- Page 72 ---
im) “UNCLASSIFIED oO TERNAL (1 CONF “ENTIAL (X] SECRET

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

FROM Pred W, Valtin Smeion
Deputy Chief
Covert Action Staff "99 Neva Se 7

COMMENTS (Member sock comment to shew fom whom
whom. Drow a tine ocross column efter each comment.)

{ (ity hows ae
beads ce ar 5

Go hoo i, bf nok (9 thnk)
Jr abd haw deem p aproed
Vuanenl D ne he Aan on
Be Hebd fare he weld

of

CONFIDENTIAL =} {NTERNAL oO UNCLASSIFIED

tee ae ar ae a westev a detes Hall EM

j
on

seat anata dent likin, ttl oot deanna wlnes annie atastaress at-are ook ReS usb enable ts ale nine nite able bane te
a



--- Page 73 ---
“pe

LEA ete nae

re ~ SECRET oA

29 November 197] :

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, CA/B-3

sene n ee emma eee aennememimemasmnat NPS MEG AREAS

SUBJECT: QRPHONE

REFERENCE: Your Memorandum, Subject: QRPHONE
Operations in Europe, Dated 24 November
1971

1, Imade some notes in the margin of referent memorandum upon
first reading it. However, since these are too brief, I thought it best
to let you have my thoughts on this matter in fuller form,

2. As you may know, we had tried for years to give QRPHONE more
meaningful assignments, but there are certain facts about him and the
+, operation today which simply cannot be ignored. It seems to me that
@ your memorandum takes inadequate account of these factors,

, a. Security: RODIGAST's and QRPHONE's personal security
- . cannot be faulted, in my judgment. However, that has not protected
QRPHONE from accusations of being CLA, which have haunted him
throughout the years, This is such an endemic charge in the milieu in
- which he operates that I feel certain he would have had the same charges
| | .. leveled at him whether or not the Ollie Harrington incident had happened

“Sin Paris.

a . b. Location: Apart from the efficiency of the French police,
' there are a number of good reasons arguing against the desirability of
, QRPHONE's even going to Paris for a meeting, let alone being stationed
‘ there (e. g., protection of RODIGAST's identity, the Harrington incident,
and the location there of the Wright clan), I cannot imagine why he would
consider it, or why we should advocate it. '

SECRET



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

oe

A different cover for a move to Rome might be developed, - :
but not that of a Maoist developing new cells, Rome Station is glad to
have him come there and give them "grass roots" reports whenever
he visits, but would they want him permanently? ?

c. Substance: More generally, QRPHONE cannot just simply Poof.
show up and start forming nuclei -- there are already Maoist nuclei -- . }
the various Marxist-Leninist parties (miniscule though they may be)
that existed, and they continue to exist with or without Chinese help. ;
If he were to have something to offer them -- money, preferably --
they might welcome him with open arms, Otherwise he will encounter
built-in jealousy, animosity, rivalry, and a source of accusation all
over again.

da. Credentials: Asa Maoist intellectual (or an intellectual .
Maoist? ?), QRPHONE can travel all over, As a Maoist activist, he >, ;
has only minimal credentials. The only group he is actively involved / : 4.
with is Manchanda's insignificant group -- and even with that he has / : 4
never carried a placard, and I doubt if he has even helped them with / yo
making up a placard. He has helped them with their press releases, | on 1 io
leaflets, etc. In short, with the written word, not the deed, By : e . i

nature -- which we must also take into consideration -- QRPHONE
is no longer a "doer" -- if he ever was one. And I doubt very much
; | that he can at this stage in his life become a "doing" radical. We would

be misusing his natural talents, which could still serve us well, in
favor of dubious undertaking.

eh Gee eee te enema

In effect, the proposal (if I read it correctly) is to have
QRPHONE develop a group which would serve to distribute anti-Soviet
material. I cannot judge if that would be worth the cost ($40, 000? ?)
to Rome, but I doubt it, I also do not know enough about the "Andy Ness"
operation to comment on that aspect, particularly as to its feasibility
in a sophisticated European community.

e. Book Dispatch Sale: Shopping him around to the European
Stations is the wrong approach, in my judgment, In the first place,
any Station likely to have a use for him is already extremely well up
on QRPHONE's background. There are only three Stations really



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

~

POA et I age eae ie ae |

i a |

aes

heavily involved in anti-CP ops (in which field I suppose this would fall),
and those three have former CI/ICG men who know QRPHONE well:
Breckenridge, Hornstein and Friend. QRPHONE has talents and abili-
ties and weaknesses which can best be explained/sold in person, not ~
through dispatch. I think, that the way to do it, if at all, is by Spence
during a visit to these Stations,

niece eee a eee an a en menace.

£, "Cl-Type"' Review: A review of the file will show how often
this has been done, and how thoroughly. (I can understand Horvath
asking for a security review -- he had no background knowledge of the
operation that would have given him this information.) I do not know 1
what you now expect to find, In all frankness, and unless CI Staff feels se
the need for yet another review and is willing to undertake it, I would ‘
consider a Staff-internal review pretty much a waste of time,

3. Having gone around this problem several times in the past Lye
several years with CI Staff and the pertinent area divisions (as the mo
files will clearly show), Iam most doubtful that any of them will consider : i
QRPHONE of sufficient interest (current or potential) to pay what it
costs to maintain him, We may be able to justify it since we attempt

{as no one area division would) -~ and to some extent succeed -~ to target
him on a multi-divisional basis. In light of these considerations, and
since I have developed serious reservations on the long range viability
of this operation (in terms of the cost-effectiveness factor), I believe
that the first order of business is to undertake a basic assessment of

the project. After some internal discussions, this will also, of course,
entail consultations with the CI Staff and at least three area divisions,

4. Iwill appreciate receiving your comments by mid-December.

repch he.

a Fred W. Valtin
: Deputy Chief
Covert Action Staff

Distribution:
Original & 1 - Addressee

4

St “epee Ae enema er tienen recente vere-nie reeunenenttite ener aenenttnneipeignennnnneyn ne es ate cree meee neers

3
SECRET

mere ene mt rn peamgrinterereecnen monroe ve a ees cans carne neuen eee wae

~



--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

en ke

ceo SORE

Coed
3
{
snes enema anemone
4
@
TROP

-
-

24 November 1971
MEMORANDUM OF MEETING
SUBJECT: QRPHONE Operations in Europe

feel am treo

;
f
:
f
|
1. Mr. Leo Horvath, EUR/CA, and myself briefly :
discussed prospective QRPHONE operations on 8 November. :
During the discussion I outlined to him a general proposal a
which had been bruited about during my recent TDY at !
LCPIPIT in mid-October. In substance, this proposal was :
that following QRPHONE's forthcoming trips through :
Scandinavia and Africa, he then repair to either Rome -
or Paris for an extended period of time. In either of
these locations he would then attempt to identify and
to enlist the cooperation of various unwitting contacts
in the left sector of the student and youth population,
who could assume in time the trappings of a Maoist study
group. QRPHONE would have excellent cover for doing so
inasmuch as he is an established writer of the Maoist :
stripe. His relationship with these contacts or followers
would not be set in the routine JKLANCE operational con- re ue
text. Rather, he would guide and motivate such contacts . 2 ol.
as would an alleged covert representative of a Maoist a ‘ .
group, and would claim to have been a member of a larger :
. such group say, in Britain. He would, of course, imply q
to his followers that he is attempting to develop a : ; i
similar nucleus in (France) (Italy) or whenever, as * a
good Communists should. :
i

2.. Operational activity would be of a twofold nature.
First, exploitation of the prospective group of Maoists
would follow along lines of a typical black Communist
cell, emulating the kind of notional movement which
Mr. Andy Ness developed in the Middle East some seven or
eight years ago. Hopefully, these unwitting followers, in
turn, would each recruit two or three other sympathizers
who over time could distribute anti-Soviet literature and
perform other low-key CA operations, as directed by the
Station, and which could be attributed to the PRC.
Presumably their actions would result in some local :
embarrassment to the USSR and the PCI. Second, QRPHONE,
himself, would no doubt enhance his own Maoist credentials--

el already strong--to the point where he might well become



--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

SEGHET

eee

“

of focal] interest to the PRC. This could lead to 7 '
invitations to Peking (as it did in Ness's case) and

: possibly an FI operation of consequence vis-a-vis the 7 .

i China target. - °

H 3. The efficacy of the aforementioned scheme seemed fu wf.

| to pose some doubts to Mr. Horvath. On the one hand, he en en?

i did not feel that either Rome or Paris Stations had “le ~

' sufficient case officer strength on hand to direct and »~ 164

support a tricky operation of this type which might have en

only marginal utility, in their view. As for Paris,

the French police, being as efficient as they are, would

: probably come upon QRPHONE's "black net" in time, and

i could conceivably pose security problems for him. As pl

an alternative, Mr. Horvath proposed that CA Staff write pol,

a general dispatch to all EUR Stations describing the hot v2 “

asset and indicating that the Staff would like to see if
greater use made of QRPHONE's capabilities on the feo i) pe

Continent. The dispatch should ask the Stations to commeit Ay
on the service that QRPHONE might provide them and suggest nal
the means for accomplishing it. Mr. Horvath also asked - i
that, prior to forwarding the dispatch, a security review 4
be conducted of this case. He did comment that, if the ‘
security review indicated no severe compromises of
QRPHONE's cover or personal security, it would be a .
pity not to make greater use of this agent's notable : ot 4
contacts in the European leftist community. : ‘

4. Accordingly, I agreed with Mr. Horvath's two t |
recommendations; namely, to conduct a security review of °
the case and, subsequently, to forward a blanket dispatch ‘
to the Field, if appropriate. I mentioned that we would. t ‘
still like to raise the possibility of a black operation ;
in Paris and Rome in that dispatch and to this, Mr. Horvath
posed no objections. .

Leetlito/ |
ald W. mts Po

Chief, Br
Covert Action Staff

Addendum: Following the above conversation, Miss Jane Long.
has initiated a CI type of review of the Subject's
security status.

Cetra aia a ae Sag

Laie abe een De eet



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

—j
og

DDP/CA/B3/DMuntz : 1b

Distribution:

Orig - C/CA

1 - DC/CA

1e- 1R/CA

1 - QRPHONE 201

1 - C/CA/B3

2 = CA/B3/Chronos

t
oa
fa
: Hi
}
i
j
4



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

“
f

ee arene ees jamie. 3
‘ '

BE IRAE apace

rs Came SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION ("ESLASSIFIEO MESSAGE Totat Copies ar U eames ANO/OA MITUALS-SEED BY

Peniavuat KOT 2 se
‘ mores “ SECRET a ae
(When Filled ta), Zea Ee = ——

_; Avance cony o (sores REPRODUCTION OF Trvhs 3 ate eRnnoe Teg {4 = ,
S24 1237 ANT
“ 0G ” ACTION GOPY

1 "Cfy-s\ [me SP fad? Cleue  cfefen
Oa |

SE CRE T 2316132 JUN 71 CITE LCPIPIT 21251 23 Jon IN363995
BERN INFO DIRECTOR LONDON jm

RYBAT DIDORIC QRPHONE

4 Pst A. OEPA-3285 ) ;
B. LCPIPIT avsrse) evvoe f - 27

-f. DATES OF QRPHONE/1 VISIT TO SWITZERLAND CHANGED.
° @Y1 WILL NOW VISIT GENEVA 27 JUNE TO 4 JULY.

2. FILE: 200-124 186/5, AND 201-306052.

GP=1 so

Y
3.

., SECRET var

. : . _
. _ a :
e.
° pax DisseM
a wer
“ cs cory
SECRET . 20s 306052. es

PERE, FEET, Gl SLE, LER EEINNT Stee Sakae Eire amee e & Sonstow menos’



--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

;
}
BEETS Bree PSE et ws ment RU EEA e npn OLR EM AE Uy, roe cae eee eee nee te |

4

é .
“ABLE SECHETARIAT DISSEMINATIO“, CLASSIFIED MESSAGE TOTAL Corr"6 ROUTING AND/OR IeITIALS-SEEM BY

| DEMON NOTED = ——: ECRET . ee Kn he Bim .

a : A Ne Fitted In) ar ui s H

AGVANCE COPY [ J fsve0 [ Jmorres LaerwSEUCTION OF THIS COPY PRONIBITED tH HH
J {

yew ar: _—__z ° a “4
3 : ot
| orm 0 SEE 3D wen OA och |
a ACTION AT | A i
ae As FILE, VR par AbLe ELIA ofSO : 5
Tons
OF. i |
"SECRET o7l64az MAY TIC PIF is .
' BERN INFO DIRECTOR LONDON 27Hey IN3 44001 i
y i |
[* RYBAT DIDORIC @RPHONE Vv cob
ly REF: OEPA-3285 7 ot
| ft. PER REF AND MASLOTT CONVERSATION WITH BACHMAN, So i
J . vi
vj QRPHONE/] RECEIVED VISA TO VISIT SWITZERLAND 10-17 JUNE re

> TO COVER EXHIBITION OF BLACK AMERICAN ART BEING HELD AT RATH
_ MUSEUM IN GENEVA. ;

wa

2. QRPHONE/1 INSTRUCTED LIMIT SELF TO JOURNALISTIC

. -Lo -pursurts DURING SWISS STAY,

3. FILE: 289-124-156/3 AND 261-386052,

— Oe OS Copy
lite hes) 9" geepet 9 Qer-sonasg

NEM ay 74



--- Page 81 ---
1g-00000 noo, :
: ‘

:

4 lo asw's | itr errr, «

wt

{ 5
‘ “ mf
|
3 | - : |
|
BY
Fed BG
| _ ‘y f. : ,
te Et i
‘4. The charge is made that QRPHONE is too thinly fii
; spread and there is a recurring urge that his targetting > i i
, be better focussed. Can he in fact be better focussed . > i
on a multi-divisional basis or would focussing, in heey x | :
| practice,result in his being narrowed down to a primarily -—< . be! ‘
! divisional target? n PO
fe,
5. Granting that the CIA label is somewhat in- Rio:
discriminately used for character assassination in the Poe
: conspiratorial fringe in which QRPHONE has been operating, , a
isn't he in fact stuck with this label and in view of aos Bi
the international character of this conspiratorial go / z 5
fringe, won't it turn up wherever he gocs? In this milieu B | .
is there really much chance he will be given any signifi- rel
cant information (and not deception information) by anyone e| .
who will do so because he wants the information passed ey
to CIA? q !
6. When he was looked into in April 1968 by a Fo !
Chicom official, what do we suppose to be meant by the = | '
! officials finding that it was not clear if he was plo:
| completely reliable in a Marxist-Lenist sense? | .
7. How eagerly sought-after are travelers to China’ . I:
now-a-days? What is the forecast as to demand for such . ‘
travelers by next summer? + i
| 8. With a reportedly anti-US, white, British wife i
and 3 small children, how really mobile is QRPHONE in a : i :
PCS sense? If we should move QRPHONE and family to a new ant
location for a trial period and it didn't work out, we A to
wouldn't resettling him have considerable complications? © L a
\ \
9. In how many languages does QRPHONE have verbal feb tae \ Re
and written fluency? . ; io?
‘ 10, What are the current clearance limitations upon - |.
our use of QRPHONE? a DEES.
11. One gathers from the project renewals that Sa Bb
QRPHONE's CIA status is known to MNI-5, MI-G and Scotland - q :
i ‘3 Yard. A French service penetration (UNDERBID/39) indicated Et -
Soo . . . 2 a Lo oy : . Zs tet eas | 4
erannt ; i
en pene eee Mee el



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

fe ema entmnenpianemen oe

14 an

i
that Rodigast was under some suspicion. QRPHONE has - a al & at
been refused entrance at the border by the Swiss -- + Rar eas 1e7 ¥ .
authorities. Does anyone doubt that in view of the a od tal es :
groups and individuals he contacts on his travels he ; ou ne ott e i
has a dossier in each of these countries?. Does anyone

doubt that in many of these dossiers the alleged CIA -

connection is recorded? In view of this, isn't it a fact :
that probably the safest place for him to be contacted :
is London, in spite of whatever tradecraft he and an |
Rodigast may practice? In spite of a rapport and back- ,' eye
ground knowledge clencnts which he undoubtedly benefits , 7 . ‘|
from with Rodigast, are these factors worth the extra
handling complications? Doesn't this handling method jen! :
essentially double the cost of the operation? ili fe 3

12. What were the reasons for the break with "Fair a
Play for Cuba?" the break with Verges? Does QRPHONE or
have a power base at all among American negroes (SNCC
doesn't like him and it is recorded in the renewals a .
blacks and revolutionaries sense that he is not "sincere")?

13. Can't we determine right here at Headquarters
the degree of interest in the Italian branch in having
a rather low-level propaganda operation involving anti-
Soviet propaganda ostensibly emanating from pro-Chicom

what is our best estimate as to the likelihood that they
will lose interest in previous and current pro-Chicom -
fringe groups?

14. Other than on the above, if we asked QRPHONE
, to become involved in depth with one of the groups he
is in touch with, wouldn't he have to act "more Royalist
than the King," and wouldn't he be the first to come
under suSpicion in case action against the group pointed
to a leak?

15. If he could not take covert action himself
through such a group to what extent are we now or
potentiaily likely to become involved with covert

action by other groups against:

- anti-Vietnam action

- African liberation novements
~ New Left groups

= pro-Chicom groups

~- Fedayeen groups

|
|
1
i
: sources? Now that the PRC has decided to go "legit,"
,



--- Page 83 ---
14-00000

he been able to do more about establishing himself on
a more self-s:staining basis? Is it because of the 4
targets we keep pushing him on? What is meant by these . .
allusions to QRPHONE's “work discipiine?” Do his talents
possibly point toward some covert action use in a role
where the CIA label is relatively less important?

| 16. What are QRPEONE's real talents? Why hasn't

yen Maem



--- Page 84 ---
f PDISPATCH so. op creams | femme 7 Y

"| -. COS, London ——~ _{wo occ sroueD,

rom MICPREIL MET FO mc quae ose _
pe LCP IP \ : ; . CAN LOGE INDEONG
fea? Ce
Chief, AP via Chicf, EUR gett ee nn
TS ae ~ BOG, MICRA :
“; JAGUAR Reporting on Afritan Expatriates in London...
. ACHIOS REQUIRED - MLS ERERCS + .
- a4
..© REFERENCES: a. OBLW-25,380 (26 Feb 70) A Z : .

eos b. OELA-53,167 (24 Dec 70)
€. DIRECTOR 063010 (27 Aug 70)
oe 4. OBPA 3090 (18 Jan 70)

er a

3. For over a year ZIBET personnel have sought to stimulate more
SMDRANGE reporting on the activities of certain high level African
@xpatriates in London. Up to now the results have been meager and
‘discouraging, and in addition JAGUAR gained JKLANCE's agreement thet
RPHONB/1 showld desist from pursuing these London targets.
jivini. Bess Berhaps stemming from the recent visit of SMOVID to Head-
quarters, however, we have just received an informative and useful
‘report, prepared by JAGUAR, on Osumba L an g i, the principal radical
,Menyan expatriate in London, along with promises of other studies on
\tergets mentioned during the Headquarters discussions. This is possibly
t@ hopeful note for the future. . :

““* 3. Prior to this development, JKLANCE had recoived only one report
-froa JAGUAR in response to various appeals anJ the submission of require-
ments, That report, received in December 1970 was in response to
Headquarters-supplied requirements forwarded the previous February (and
resubmitted in August 1970}, but contained very little positive informa-
-{ $0on. Furthermore, the repors's format and tone suggested that JAGUAR's
reply was intended as a onoctine affair. It certainly did not invite |
- forthor questions nor indicate an intention to volunteer further details
ter. .
ji. 4. In roviewing the correspondence on this matter, it was noted
‘that the verbstin minutes of February 1970 Headquarters discussions
-with SMEXCB end SMUMBRAGE contained a passage that may cast new light
om JAGUAR's position. In response to ZIBET officers' queries about
what JKLANCB could expect from JAGUAR (it previously having been made
“1 «lean by the SMOTH officers that the target was JAGUAR‘ he iting
a Weng officers said of JAGUAR's position: "They have a gwiteasser tev
Me a o

et

| Sh. (Git an eens

Lion [onps ged 19 | DRSPATOS SYRISOL AJED WURSER J v v
aan ree - ~ . 0605 Q-

iE: 1) 2000124-256/3 OBLW- 26059 f a

of ~ . PF, . GASIFICATION ~ [wes - —————s)

{Be SECRE TART | 11-2-24

{ee re " ™~- Cr 7 rat) Trist

ler DDP/AF/OPS/FIDMzimmernan aco

Ie] Distribution: 1 - C/CA

igh] etcrese-  t pp UR BE ama [oe

ply ad tw 1 > AF/OPS

Le ae "21 -- Rispep | c/ca,’B-3 |

EUR/BC aR

OFF ER'S SGHATURE
oe way
on $

DI

spare

© 39 Men TH:



--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

oN :
EASSIFICATION — DISPATCH BYMBOL AND NUMBE’s

s B.C 7E ee OELW-26059

of-2- CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH

a constitutional problen vith: their responsibilities to IDEN. “The idea

. | O£ passing out political information on exiles is repulsive to him."
Pe! Ze should be noted for the record that JAGUAR itsclf has not given
iu such an explanation to JKLANCE, but, knowing .JAGUAR's bureaucratic

i | position and its treditionally conservative role in the SMORANGE
commmity, it may bo that JAGUAR in fact ‘is thus inhibited.

‘ “Se AS to QRPHONE/1, SMOVID on 15 June 1970 followed up his March
“4970 complaints to JADAIN about QRPHONE/1's contacts with expstriates
‘dn London, SHOVID expressed JAGUAR's concern about QRPIiONE/1's security
and its view that QRPHONE/1"s information was of icarginal value. SMOVID
4 emphasizing that he was expressing a view personally endorsed by

P-| SMUPSILON, outlined three possible options: withdraw QFPHONC/1 from
the country; stop running and tasking QRPHONE/1 as an agent; or have

a JAGUAR take over the running of QRPHONE/1. (‘)RPHONE/2 subsequently was

tp | itdon,. to JELAXCE,

dastructed to stop pursuing his SMORANGE targets.)

om

ee Thus JELANCE {s stymied. The question is whether there. is

anything that can be done to improve the situstion. The one new factor
in the equation that possibly could be used to reopen the discussion
«| with a view to ancliorating the situation is the fact that there now
is a different IDEN than when the February 1970 SMOTH explanation was
ptfered. Even Even though JAGUAR has not specifically given that explana-
Station, without reference to SMOTH's explana-
tion prosunably could elect.to reopen the discussion in terms of a
possible change of atmosphere since the change of IDEN. Such a dis-
eussion at least should give an indication of whether SMOTH"s explana-
‘gion {is JAGUAR's (and JKLANCE'’s) major obstacle. -

ar 2 Were QRPHONB/1 permitted to resume his London contacts he
| ‘could obtain sone information of the type JKLANCE would like to get
from JAGUAR. Eut, in view of the June 1970 S{UPSILON-approved SMOVID
enarche to JADWIN, it night be unwise, for the moment at least, to
sound out JAGUAR about reactivating QRPHONE/1. he would appreciate
recoiving Lendon Station's views on this subject.

ae 8. One final point that should be noted is that McGRILLEN, in
forwarding the above-mentioned JAGUAR report on 24 December 1970, —
montioned that visiting ZIBET officer Jereny !}. FREYMARK recently had

: be @iscussed these JKLANCE require:acnts in London with SMOVID, SMENDIVE

24 end SMEVICT end that it was McGULLEN's understanding that wit was

| genorally agreed to limit our requests in the future to selected ~
targets on which there is evidence of coup plotting or subversion.”
McGRILLEN added that he looked forward to any followup questions based

‘Fon the Ebove criteria thet Headquarters wanted the Station to submit to
Td REYMARK

BS *s recollection of his talks with JAGUAR is at slight
$ variance with McGRILLEN’s-eccount. FREYMARK recalls ‘that he had agreed .
4 @p Limit JKLANCE's future requests to those cases in which JKLANCE had
Be neces interest and where there was. good reason to suspect a real
at to. the stability of the African country against which the London-
"4 Sased-African sight be acting. Accordingly, there is attached a select
‘(1 @48t of individuals about whose contacts and activities JKLANCE would
alike to have updated information from JAGUAR. The type of information
desire is indicated by the illustrative questions and other data
ys support of our request. Whereas we would iike to have unsolicited
ee ané_scevlar. seporting on these targets, we rezlize that JAGUAR is not
equipped or prepared to accept such a continuing requirencnt. te believd
that tho attached list along with the paragraph five discussion pegged
- to s-change of IDENS are good pegs for GIBSON or his designee in re-
r a the discussion with JAGUAR.

€-ASSIFICATION PAGE NO.

[] counnore

veel

Raonamse


--- Page 86 ---
1400000

“SE CR E ee OELW- 26059

pes SDSS EES

. 9. London Station's report on the outcoue of its discussions
with JAGUAR is awaited with considerable intcrest.

s,

oa ees
» ds roe
as

<

430
Attachuent: . RICHARD I. FELS
‘, 43 stated above

- Ojstribution:

“< Orig & 1 - COS London (Att. horewith)
- . 1 - C/LCPIPIT (Att. herewith)

DUPLICATE COPY
FOR CROSS FILING IN



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

Ome ea eee
‘ 2 APTN SCH eanan PMs some joanne 2S pon

eee B

a ae -. aa oe -

;
7 me - ‘ tee
z, an on

“ATTACHMENT TO DISPATCH NO, Ot}. Las 26059

>)
‘ 7
\
°
Ae]
~~

any Current material on

i
| LIBET would erpreciste receivin: fros JALUA-
ighe sctivities and contacts of the followin, Afric ne wic citner resiie

i
i
‘Ga London or who visit thero froqucotly. These tas ets save een selectea i
‘according to the criteria outlined in parayrssi, & of the references |
if

{

i

a

‘dispatch.

i .

Shenae

I: . Willian BE DO B-* NSA © sonsitive jecdcuerters' suurces tave
;dudiceted chat John kK. TE TTE CAN is slannla, to return ts rest

Africas. Since BE DO E-A Nos A His known to oai:taisn contact with
iPBETTEGA t ead was in fact responsible for TO TE! GA i's ceyioy-
@ent with a Japanese business fira io Cairo, wr feel as vay be Envolvee

| 4a aay now subversive moves unJertaten by TE TT ECA,

“ Kojo BOTS! O + There has beer sore indication throu:' sensitive
sources thet 8 O T i 1 O has recontly been trovetiia: tn Avrica and that
‘Re teo soy be tavolved in TE TT EGA ii's currert activitics.

1. In addition we are still intereste’ in the «ther tar.ets centioned
i in Re erence C.}

| Hyerte ~
< L. BALOGUNA - Io is the purported author of the recently pub-
| Boned Kanifesto of Nigerian Young “evolutionsirces Uryacization.

:* Alex Ci ENA - He is an Ibo resident inlonion whe is not only «
! sokfedescribed Marxist but is also 2 regular contributor to Acvaree the
organ of the Marxist Nigerian Trade Union Conicceration. ~

- Sen FE KO KU - Although IK OR YU is the Co missloaer for tcononic

| Bevelopaont ond Reconstruction of tue Niperian Lait Central stage and is

tesiéent in Europe, we understand tast he occasioially visits London. *e

yout spprociate being alerted to taese visits oni receivin: inforeation
contacts.

we ' . 7
be,
! ‘LMED j

MAK 3 1 19771
enero ere |

DUPLICATE Copy
FOR CROSS FILING IN

- 30 605c)

a.

ee

hhh ABATE GELW 2668-9



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000 Sole > be. a * 7 ~ . at 4oN .
: [22> comnuanion OF — SARTRE BTR, TO | 7
“V3. DISPATCH . . L
Tp een t. SEEN-26059————__--
; a ; |

“we

IDEN: The Hiome Secretary

1’

i H

t

4 |
: io.

i

‘DUPLICATE COPY
FOR CROSS FILING IN



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

FMP Fe ie DRIVEL oe wep eet aes we cece tee eee ee nee te

GASSEICATION

s EPCs T

1. QRPHONE/1 has received a letter from the Home Office
which removes the previous restrictions on his stay in Britain.
There is now no limit on the length of his stay in Britain and he
does not need to report his address, etc., to the police, Further,

he may now obtain employment in Great Britain without the need
to obtain official permission.

2. For the record, we are forwarding under separate cover,
a copy of the letter,

Aaron C, LAGINESTRA

Attachment sic ATTD BY RDS
ac. ot: USC Ap
Letter Dated J0 MARZ

Distribution:
Orig. & 2 - Chief, WOLIME, w/att. . ae
1 - COS, London, w/att. a a
-1 - Chief, EUR, w/o att. . re

18 March 1971
wa
Ol- 3eL052



--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

GRACIOUS, BUROPEAN-BORN LADY In
Mid-GOs, of Independent means, residing In
Berkeley, soaks gentieman

scholar, weiter, artist, With pray

tleal interests and desire to share tomorrow,
NVR, Box 3513.

terident, 3°2"*
sooks mata companion
+ and expeionces. Loves
music, time at home and cooking.
NYR, Box 3507.

FEMALE UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR, 27,
Marooned in Ottawa weeks unattached,
intelligent man, 28-35, who appreck
food, music, travel and the outdoors, PO
Box 4449, Station E, Ottawa,

Petite women, in search of
vonutive jo unattached man 58-60,
whose poignant longing Is for more than just
helto yuouby. NVR, Box 3501,

UNIVERSITY TEACHER, Denver area, 37,
wishes 'o meet interesting and warm woman,
antwered. NYR, Box 3495.

ble, responsive personality, sense of humor
feehs gontlaman companion with similar
attributes, prefers successful profetsional
who enjoys home and country tivjng.
Minimum age, 45. NYR, Box 3494,

1 AM 36, beautiful, ntenigent,
pilthed, slrong, wise, moder
love to give vital, expantive, solvent, rich
adull male weking mate. NYA, Box 3493,

accom

SUCCESSFUL WRITER IN LATE FIFTIES,
tall, attractive, amusing, seeks quasi-Platonic
relationship with mature, sensitive women
Interasted in woaring ruDber. Montreal ares.
NYA, Box 3500,

MODERN, IRONIC PENELOPE, tired of
waiting for wandering Odysseus socks aligibie
witors who are tall, over 40, and who have
Intellect, imagination, and integrity. No need
to fear, Odysseus, unless you are a male
chauvinist pig and answer al! advertisements
Placed Dy femaies, NVR, Box 3491.

REPUTEOLY CHARMING MAN, turning
youthful 60, Southwestern Connecticut cliff
wetter, writer-communicstor of many tnter-
et, Considering modest early retirement,
weeks committed retationsnip with tntelth

acres, 175 foot paved road frontage, 500 oe!
brook frontage, PO Box 98, South ure
mont, Mass, 01258.

WILL EXCHANGE 2 bedroom Manhra
apt. (E. @1st) end car for simiiar accom!

dations In Lendon during May and ine,
NYR, Box 3488. 4

PUTNAM COUNTY, year-round re al,
charming Country cottegs, two rooms, We
Place, ali facilities, Sixty miles from N’C,
sultablo for single person oF weekend cowte,
$125) per month plus utilitias, (114)
225-8086 oF write NYA, Box 3487, ‘

RENT. Ciiffsine Cottage, Barbados, Siept
four, secluded beach, maid service. Will reat
. $135, weerly. NYR, Box 3430.

LONDON, BARNES ARGA, separate tin:
Whed flat in Edwardian house. L.ivingream,
bedroom, kitchen, bath, central
tmald service, linens, aishwayner,
garden faces common and lovely babl'ing
Drogk, Near transport, snops and Thames.
20 minutes Hyde Park, $300 per monte to

* dune, $350. month through Septemser,
Write Langdale, 21 Cedars Ra., London 3.w.
13, Engieng, Phone, London, 878-0963.

FRANCE: ROYAN. Furnisnea four sed
room house. Near beaches, Language Conter.
Apritduly, Sept.July $145 month inctugi
all uthitios. Johnson, 16 Rue der Orchures,
Paris (430).

UNUSUAL LOFT, beautifully designed and
furnished, Safe, quiet, convenient. Spacious,
Sky-tight, $300/month, (212) 962-1084,

COMMODBIOUS VACATION HOME, secisd-
@¢ village location Ar Manchester, Vt,
May-Jun-Jut, $350/me, Sheedy, 1 Schooine,
La., Syosset, N.Y. 11794,

VILLA SALE/RENTAL. Compictely moa-
arn. Classic Myte. Gatiios Mallorca, Near
Paime/Meaitorracean, Fully equipped laos
Pool grounds five bedroams furnished, Iisa)

Dracnure: 260 East 70 Street. Now York,
10021.

VILLA RENTAL. Gatiica Maitorce, Modern:
(wed 18th century stone hove. Four bod

year round use/investment. Weile iitustratod |

home of
Garden, al) conveniences, compiotely furnish:
€d, close to Thames, Underground and but,
25 minutes to Picaailly, trom 23 July to &
September for $600, all_utilitles Included,
write Mrs. Joy Gipton, 32 Martswood Road,
tondon, W12 9NA oF phone 031-749-0846.

garden. Every convenience. Overlooking
Hudson, 15 mites fram City. $2,500. (914)
Et 90077.

MARTHA'S VINEYARD. 2 bedroom cot
lage, Oak Blutts, Momoriat Day to Labor
Day. $1000 of by month. NVR, Box 3477
or (202) 254-7127 att

MAINE rental (Mt,
room furnisned farmhoute an cove, Swine
ming, barns, separate study, Rent month or
wason, Call 413-584-1550,

EAST HAMPTON house available to share
with teacner-writer couple, Private bedroom,
Near - beaches, Car necded. 691-7697,
790-4613, Wa 4.9465.

RATIONALISTIC, non-occult astrology. Na-
tal chart interpreted, $15. Give piace, date

3, Hudson, NY 12534,

—$
POETRY WANTED for canporative pootry
antholugy. Include stamped return envetogs.
igiowitd Pross, 1607 East Olympic Blvd., Los
Angeies, Catifornia 90021.

STAINED GLASS STUDIO suthenticaily re
Creating small parts of 1}th-6tn century
windows. Calorful, decorative, Herbs, ant
matt, Medieval sconos. Avaliabla window
hanging, sholf standing. We use technique,
material of Medieval craft, Color catalog, 25¢.
Glass Masters, Box 272R, Now York, N.Y,
19009,

COUNTERACT! If you were reluctant to
Support Friends of Art at your tocal mur
soum, join ENEMIES OF ART. $1.00.
ENEMIES OF ART, Box 5615, Milwaukee,
wis, 63221.

WILG GUY participation in Broadway or Off
Brosdway plays. Thote running, pail snows.
Give full details, NVA, Box 34)

HELP THE CAUSE OF ALTERNATIV®

|, BOUSATION, The Providenetf' een vel uh.

“| REQUIRE...

enact time of birth, Sag/Ariey, Box $1, RO

SINGLE? — Be PHOTOS of 4:10 Idest

mates 10 select fore gating! Advanced
iching systems @ compalibinty! Alt
We for information and tree quay
bnnaire: YALE PHOTO-DATING® SERV-
le INC, ®O. Bow $09, Oept. E, New
ork, N.Y. 10078,

ee ne
T YOUR FOR AL MATE (compulerzen
matching), AN ages, Wate TEAM Proiect,
JOL Ww. sdth $t,, Sune S31, MY 10001.

AUSTRALIA WANTS YOUTH Government
Aswsted Passage 1971 Government intorma
tran and Forms Moxt Complete Iaturmation
Avaiaple $1.00 Reports on Employment,
Business, Tanes, Faucation, Teach Mout
ing. Ranching, Maps, etc AUSTCO, Hom
JOIINY, Long Beach, Cattarma 90003

WHITERS sel on calor before he reac
your manuscript. Send for free boone,
joque. Writers Craft Systems, Gor
J@INVRA, Narberth, Ps. 19072. *

a “dating service” that

D has outgrown pop prattle about the
“gwinging scene” (ages 21 to 65)

D hav the enlightened versatility to

* match Mower childten and Wall Street
tycoons (although only sometimes
with cach other)

DB has penetrated bigtown anonymity to
date deal only with its more cultt
vated, intelligent, hterary community
(48% thtough peesonal referrals)

Ci olfers exctuave, expensive, exhsur
tive, individual processing by trained

~ consultants.

Qa LOOK AT YOUR OUTSTANDI
: QUESTIONNAIRE

. MIND MATES

Bureau for interpersonal Metations
¥ Bast 62nd &t., Now York, New Vor 10087
MU 2-:3787

CLASSIFIED SECTION
Uftective with May 6, 1971 (see,

40¢ par word—15 wo

minimum,

Sin Insertions: 396 por word

‘ 12 Invertions: Jéc per wor

. 18 insertions: 376 per word

{24 insertions: 35¢ per word
freee wean



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

TAO errr eee

ic ok ee

ce Cha

(i ia : ! :
HOME OFFICE ri

Princeton House, 271 High Hoiborn, Lonpon W.C.1
Telex: 261867 Telegrams: Alidep, London WC1

Ft Sa ee ee

Telephone: 01-405 4321 | . |
: ° . ie a
. ov sraTe ~O20 ¢ a rr |
ao OMR Is |
teen . tng
hong et,
. ride
i pb
pi!
“ Sir/adon- |
. _ 1 !

I am dirocted by the Secretary of State to inform you
. . that he is now prepared to remove the restrictions on .
on - your stay in this country. The conditions attached to . . a
3t have therefore been cancelled. a

. Cancellation of conditions means that you are now also
“exempt from the requirement to report changes of address

: 7 and other particulars to the police.

There is now no necessity for you to obtain permission

from a government Department to take cmployrent in

Great Britain. The Secretary of State would, moreover,

have no objection if you wished to establish yourself in .
business or a profession, but it should be clearly under= t
stood that this does not relieve you of the obligation,
in that event, to conform to any regulations governing
the business or professional activities in which you may

|

[.

| be interested.
7

_

oe en pen

* $his cancellation of your conditions does not extend to
the Channel Islands which have their own laws relating
You should therefore consult the Inmigration

to aliens.
eo ve
pep ttae co eee ee rene - ee a an Dog

- - . “S85 ecRer

cate 7a 12? ee) _ manee


--- Page 92 ---
1400000 ot
. s . ~ . ° : }
- nn
I 7 oe . b
(teen meee arent ee vee we line Le . . : !
' . ; TF
. ot wg
: . : vik
. rn re
i SECRE: aie
. , ME ia ; . ti !
‘ . j
. vou dg.
. . . I ri! ;
Autborities of the island concerned if at any time you oo, ta ! i |
contemplate going there to live. itt | : :
2 . This cancollation of conditions extonds to Northern . me ! ;
Ireland and the Isle of Man only as for as residence is j |
@onoerncd. If you are going to take work in either place, - 2 H
, you will have to consult the Northern Ireland Ministry of da:
. . Health ani Sooial Services or the Employment Division, ‘ ’ |
: 4. | Government Office, Isle of Han. ' . ! ~
-) . } ‘
Your passport and police registration certificate have ! | H i
: Deen endorsed and are returned herewith. The endorsement , bro:
: in the registration certificate shows that you are now ! |
: exempt from registration. t | .
. . : I am Sir/¥-dam J |
: Your obedient Servant j
’ . H
. |

. . .
a a sett
cca seonenceene se -

e
a ‘ *
whens ome se”

te mg.

.

~ aes Mr ne nrencee Aeen mB8ee mn ER eee Atte i

.

eee aene »

d
7



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

Chief, WOLIME
"Chief, EUR; COS, London
Chief, LCPIPIT/London

aR
DTDORIC/QRPHONE - Agent Evaluation
aciaom RSOURED - REFERENCES

Attached is an Agent Evaluation for QRPHONE/1 covering the
period to 31 December 1970.

Aaron C, LAGINESTRA

Attachment: H/W . . ;
Agent Evaluation . . . i

Distribution:
Orig. & 27 onset, WOLIME, w/att.
- Chief, EUR, w/o att.

“1 = COS, London, w/o att.

CROSS REFRRDNCE 10
200-124-156/3



--- Page 94 ---
14-00000 . . . . ot
: a < .
ii -
a AGENT EVALUATION | ;
t
{ rho.
i :
H NAME: QRPHONE/1 : DATE: 18 January 1971 |
. i
A PROJECT: QRPHONE STATUS: Contract Agent (Under
i conan a Memerardum of Ore).
i Agreement)

type color magazine distributed by twenty major newspapers in the
U.S. Also represents owner of this color magazine in other of
his business ventures in Lurope, This overt job was assumed in
December 1970, Prior to that, Q/l was the London representative
of small U.S. news service. Q/1l does free lance journalism and
is an occasional contributor to several magazines and newspapers.

COVERT JOB DESCRIPTION: Singleton agent targeted at the radical left,
nceluding Maoist, African liberation, and Palestinian groups.
Q/1's access derives from his many contacts in these circles.

- OVERT JOB DESCRIPTION: International correspondent for "Sunday supplement"

Jt PERFORMANCE OF COVERT DUTIES: Q/1 continues to perform well and |

: without posing problems for his handler. His personality is

easy-going and his attitude positive. If his efforts are not
always totally successful ~~ leaving us with tantalizing bits
of information and many. unanswered questions -- this is generally. . ty
due to operational circumstances in which he was simply unable ~ :
to elicit more information on a given subject.

PERFORMANCE OF OVERT DUTIES: Q/1 does a solid and workmanlike job
as a journalist. He has acquitted himself well both as a
representative of his cover firm and in his free lance activity. bo
Occasional prompting on this subject produces added effort and by
in this connection the operation profits particularly from the
energy and knowledge of the deep-cover agent handler who himself ©
has faced similar cover demands over many years.

ATTITUDE TOWARD JKLANCE: QRPHONE/1's attitude is positive. (See below
under Motivation.) - :

ATTITUDE TOWARD COVER EMPLOYER: Q/1's attitude is good. He has made
an effor o scharge S part of the cover arrangement and to
understand the weaknesses and problems which plagued his former
cover organization. He is approaching his new cover arrangement
with enthusiasn.

MOTIVATION IN ACCEPTING JKLANCE RELATIONSHIP: This is a subject on’

which a goo lea jas ensa over e@ course of this operation.
te, The following points can be made on the subject of Q/l's
tes motivation: ‘ 3

A. His basic image of JKLANCE is positive.

ft»

SECRET



--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

re

t
fi
t

B. This image of JKLANCE as a powerful, professional
organization has been enhanced in Q/l's case by the
circumstances of his agent relationship, which require
very professional handling. Indeed. Q/1l has probably come
to hold a rather glamorous “storybook” image of JKLANCE
and of the importance of his contribution to the JKLANCE
effort. This is a very human trait and should not be
exaggerated in his case, but every one of the wild anti-
JKLANCE stories which he heard probably only serves to -
accentuate the feeling on his part of being a member of - .
a very impressive outfit.

¢. In his political evolution over the years, Q/1l
has become active in at least two "causes". In both
instances he sav these causes undermined by petty jealousy
and factional struggles and in both cases he was personally
harmed as a result. The product of this situation has been
a certain disillusionment with "causes" and a cynical political
outlook. (In other circumstances this might be called
political maturity.) Q/1 now tends to view political trends
as a detached observer rather than a participant.

D. Following on the foregoing thought is the fact
that he is an American (and does not consider himself :
disloyal). Given his citizenship and his disinclination to
feel “involved" in the currents of the radical left, he
has been perfectly willing to accept employment by JKLANCE
to report on those currents. He does not give any indication
that he views this as "squealing" on his friends -- indeed
the contrary seems to be the case.

E. On a more mundane level, it must be realized that
Q/1 was recruited at a time when he was in serious financial
straits. He was without a job and was living off the charity
of his wife's family. JKUANCE has given him a job, paid
him reasonably well and regularly, and has enabled him to
be independent of his wife's family's charity.

F. Having accepted JKLANCE employment for a combination
of the reasons set forth above, it must be added that Q/1l

‘clearly likes his work. He enjoys dealing with international

issues and political subjects. He enjoys the travel and
the opportunity to exercise his language capability. In
short, the rather sophisticated and cosmopolitan life, which
he has been able to live appeals to him.

G. Im assessing the relative importance of these
several factors which make up Q/l's motivation, the under-
signed would stress that C and E were probably the immediate
causes of his acceptance of recruitment while A and D were more
underlying. B and F have arisen since recruitment and
probably play an important role in his current motivation.

-

SECRET

ore

|
|

onal



--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

i
t

7 “SECRET

WIFE'S ATTITUDE TOWARD JKLANCE: Q/1's wife is not witting of his
JKLANCE affiliation. She was allowed to believe that he was
working indirectly for the Chinese. She certainly is aware
of the past JKLANCE accusations which have been leveled at.

Q/1, but as far as Yl can determine (and this is not a “subject
on which he can come right out and ask a direct question) she
continues to accept the Chinese story . It-‘should be added

- that Mrs. Q/l is British and isthe holder of some rather
typical "left" anti-JKLANCE attitudes. It should.also be noted
that the relationship between the two: is. fraught with a Variety
of problems thereby adding to the complexity of the situation.
Certainly the whole subject. of Q/l's activities is one which
Mrs. Q/1 views with misgivings and which is simply not discussed —-
lest it lead to acrimony. Mention should also be made that .
Mrs. Q/1 seems to accept as legitimate the small amount of
money received from Yi's cover and to regard this as a genuine
stringer relationship. . .

RESPONSE TO CASE OFFICER HANDLING: QRPHONE/1 has a very pleasant
personality and responds well to Case Officer handling. He is
a most willing asset requiring no special handling care -- other
than the normal professionalism expected in the handling of a
sensitive asset such as Q/1l.

WILLINGNESS TO ACCEPT INSTRUCTIONS OR GUIDANCE: Q/1 is willing to
accept guidance and criticism -- prov.dec it is constructive.
If anything, he may sometimes be too willing. His willingness
occasionally exceeds his sense of security and it then falls
to his handler to bear in mind security and/or operational
considerations which may affect his pursuit of a given target.
However, this should not be over dramatized.

RESPONSIVENESS: Q/1 is most responsive to requirements levied upon
nh this connection it should be recalled that his ability
to respond fully is usually restricted by the nature of his
relationship with his informants; i.e., since he is only eliciting
the information from unwitting informants he is rarely able to
press for all the desired detuils.

JKLANCE CONTROL: Q/1 is dependent upon a JKLANCE salary and he has
signed recruitment documents and a security pledge. We hasten
to add that Q/l1 is not a handling problem and there has never
been any instance in which either he or his handler has had
occasion to allude to these control factors.

PERSONAL SECURITY: Q/1 has a good sense of personal security and his
andiler makes an effort to build upon this at every opportunity.
As cited above, Q/1l's enthusiasm sometimes leads to his failure
to consider all aspects and implications of a given situation.
_ ‘ 3 :

tp

“SECRET

i
1
:
{

fae mene THE Cnr Ne ennaeigetmenm TE

Tae 7



--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

. . Loe enw we

wares Bett
¢
Leeper sae

OTHER SECURITY AND COVER SITUATIONS: The past ‘allegations of Oil's
iliation wit KLANCE, many pre-dating his actual recruitment,
add an extra dimension to Q/1's cover situation. We have no !
indication that any of these allegations are based on any proof, ;
t

nor have they produced a significant reduction in his number of-
contacts. , - ae

ABILITY TO WORK WITHOUT SUPERVISION: Q/1 is a self-starter and can
work well for extended periods without supervision.

ADHINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS: Q/1 poses only a minimum administrative
urden. fe is not overly concerned about his administrative
and financial position, allowances, payments, etc. He merely
expects JKLANCE to do the fair thing by him. However, on the
rare occasion when JKLANCE has failed to perform as he expected,
he can be very upset,

REPORTING: Q/1 is a journalist by training. He is an effective
reporter -- both in terms of ability to elicit and writing
style.

PERSONAL ENERGY AND ENDURANCE: Q/1 is quite energetic and can continue
his efforts on a sustained basis. :

“uae

LANGUAGES: In addition to his (native) English, Q/1 can speak French,
alian and German. -

i
i
}
{
‘
i

WILLINGNESS TO TRAVEL: Q/1 is quite willing to travel -- and even
enjoys it:

AREA KNOWLEDGE: Q/1 is quite widely travelled in Europe and Africa
and consequently has acquitted an extensive area knowledge.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL ABILITY: Q/1's present operating context
joes not provide an adequate basis to evaluate these talents. It
is assumed that he has a satisfactory competence in both these
areas, however.

WEAKNESSES; PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL: Q/1 has no major weaknesses,
either personal or professional which inhibit his operational
use. The existence of his “reputation” as a JKLANCE asset --
which is believed by some and rejected by others of his contacts
is a definite limitation on his employment.

«- CAREER POSSIBILITIES: Q/1 has mentioned to his. handler that he hopes
to be able to make a career of his relationship with JKLANCE. He
enjoys the work and presumably the financial security. However,



--- Page 98 ---
14-0000
2

a

the combination of the security factors operative in this
case and the unlikelihood of Q/l's continued access to targets
of interest over a prolonged period argue against his being
regarded as a career asset,

AARON C. LAGINESTRA
FIELD CASE OFFICER

COMMENTS OF SUPERVISOR: This is another thoughtful evaluation of this
agent, and reflects the views of the agent handler as well as of the
Case Officer.

I doubt that we have really divined 1's motivations for working
with JKLANCE, and this evaluation should be read as the best stab
we can make at this enigmatic subject.

ADRIAN B. MASLOTT
CHIEF, LCPIPIT

1b teen atl ater

de te oe

4



--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

Sree nee og PE CARIES ANE ry aI:

we Sy
8

Se etetteeroneenenaet oe
|

a . ~

19 October 1970

MEMORASDUN FOR: Deputy Chief, Covert Action Staff
ATTENTION Miss Diane Chatelan

Completion of Treining Report for QRPKOUE/1 (P), j 4
Qreining Alias; PERSUDNG

SUBJECT:

REFERZICEs Memorandum for Director of Treining dated 28 September
1970, Attention: Chief, Covert Training/0s/T2,
Subject: Covert Training for QRPHOIS/1, Fron:
Deputy Chief, Covert Action Steff

1. QRPHONE/1 was trained covertly in New York on 14, 15, 16
October 1970. Tnere were twelve hours of training in the three sessions.

2. In eccordance with the reference training request and discussions
between the instructor and the two Case Officers, QRPHQIB/1 was given
&@ concentrated dosage of reporting instruction with emphasis on spotting
and assessment reports.

3. QRPHONE/1 is a professionel writer, so there was no problen
in the writing department. The need was for channelling the writing
capebilities of this man vho has been an Agent for five years, into
our type of reporting and to end his “stream of consciousness” style
of reporting, as one Cese Officer put it.

H

{

j

{

{

H

}

| 4k, QRPHONE/1 quite quickly got into the spirit of the training
and by the end of the first session was obviously enjoying it end
epprecieting the opportimity to learn to write our way. He pointed

- out that his big problem is having to retein substantial amoumts of
information in his heed for two or three weeks, then put it all dom
the night before he meets his Case Officer. From his conversation,
it appeered that organizing a report had never occurred to hin before ,
and he several times said "no one ever told me about this", "this is ©
the first I've learned of this, etc.” ‘These things were said in happines.
at huving discovered ways of improving his reporting and sinulteneously
maxing his reporting less of a chore and more of a joy.

Z

fe

WR? 1
Grse31 tn ovine}

earmtas at
coches eztiag

o wk SECRET



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000

oe Aw organizing es
exerclaus reperoti ct froa inference, }
consider th); his becxground ond compared to %
his experjense or education. ie has a slignt tende:
to concMiiluna and =ceding meenings into words. He
fron then on he overcase this veraness to a consid
ever, C78) on the Last day, writing reports besed on
newspaper rrticles, Le twice (out of five reports) substituted his
own word fur a word in the erticle for no velid reasoa end which new
word in feut chenged the meaning of the sentence, though only slightly. i

6. Vila small voalmess is not wicue to QaPpiaz/1. It is also
true of other equally highly Literate trainees, vho, like QQPHOIZ/1,
unconscigurly substitute their om language for thet vhich has been .
directly Liven to then, not realising % they @ sa:netimes - i
change ths mecning of that waich they are revorti leppily, QRPIONE/1 :

ourre jumping
zed this and
2 degree. dow-
York Tires

vate ng
a
4
t
a ee eee me ene ore pettae meena, see

wrrewemente! ements

S 3
fealized wits during the exercises, recognized the changed neening, . :
and earnestly stated thet he will watch it in the future. ! :

7. En observetion and description exercises, he did vell efter
a rocky ftrert. Here, he at first concentrated on individvals, alrost
completely jimorin; the actions they vere enzeged in. He soon saw
thet he hed a mental capacity to ratch both et once and there vas no
problem tlisreafter.

8. He was excellent in iis ability to separate hard facts and
put those fn the body of his reports while listing es comments those
items which legitimately were coments end which he2 no place in the
report itse1r,

H
1
i
}
i
i
i
1
!
i
i
t
i
{
|
i
" : 9. Yor the final session, he had been asked to do assessment
reports on two people. He was rortified when he care in on the last
morning, litppily handed in his five intel reports and suddenly realized
| that he hat completely forgotten to do the other reports. However,
!
1
|

in discussing spotting end assessment reports, it appears that he now
understands them.

10, Jn en effort to evaluate the effectiveness of the training,

we would &ypreciate a detailed evaluation report in Noverber 1971 fron
the field Atation. ‘This report should indicate the extent to which the

~ . training jing made the trainee a nore useful and effective esset and should
evaluetve ie performance in each area of tradecraft in vnich training wes
conducted; negative as well as positive comments ere solicited. The field
station's ¥eport should also include the trainee's om coments. Please
ask the field station to slug the report WCLOLD/QRPLGIS/1/Pansiilc. Upon
receipt of the report at Headquarters, please forward 2 copy to the
undersigned,

Gah Le Secten

pe/os/aLr/TR

Originated by:
Aristides Gg. Lazarus

ain
4
{
Jt


--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

DI unetasstrieo =) TERNAL (1 CON” YENTIAL []_secrer
i ROSTINS AND RECSAT SHEST

U/oA are !
/ Iz OcroBeR, (470 !
OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number eoch comment to show from whom

eS Sed

Growin - : 4
1 Wee Ace You on ras ‘

ey A — AFveanccn, Bor AM
SEuy ING Tes Ay vance core

BAwe

Tite INGO (ome 4
Jian CAus BEFORE Ipo-

TAR TRA MEMO
Wel &B CARRIED ON To
THE yp STEALING OFFicer,
Ads AFPTERACEH.

can CaTrEen, Hie F, Covert]
TRAINGAG Wao. Be ROE FE
ervatey (By ME) As To CCoA'S
RELELVATIONS AS EXPRESSE
IND THE STIPE ATION ATTACHE
To +rte POA AMES, UENT,

Pe Lorene

Nou whee more Hay Tes is

AN AMENSMEDT To THE Pon
THe

AN NOT 4m 6A wise

Vane. 1S (TER EsTEp tm OG-
TarminG .

Tere OA, weet 1 @emeve,

Wee HAVE Te AWACT FuariEed
FCosseons BETWEEN yrene

Awy Ne

Se 610 “erse* C] secre ] CONFIDENTIAL () MFIMAL «= ]_-UNCLASSIFIED

ayraaate


--- Page 102 ---
14-0000

concer
t
oA eamememmnereneen

7

a.
3
>)

\

Pa

ExPcOITE FOE
Inpsces

§SSUE OPERATE OHAL APPROVAL

ree

EXTEND POA FOR OAVS UNTIL

PROVISIONAL OPEGATIONAL APPROVAL

QEVIES F4/0 COLLATERAL InrcaMation

| REQUEST RESULTS FI/O DOSSIER @LVIES

oavane Fo [avec
vy

CANCEL OER DEVEISIOM MEMO DATED
(to notice to Division)

CANCEL PER CI/OA MOTICE TO DIVISION @LOUEST REVIEW OF ATTACHED GEFERENCES
(Reason checked below,* oF see rem: ADVISE CI/OA OF MATURE AND SIGHIFICANCE

y Z| iw ‘
soe meen
eaves ovcnamnowny np oummsten Jewett [fume

vos expragp PLEASE SUcHIT PRO EI, IF, WITHIN 30 DAYS, NO FURTHER INTEREST IN SUBJECT
MAG BEEN INDICATED, POA BILL GE AsTOMATICALLY CANCELLED.

SFANLURE TO SUBMIT PRO 11 AS MCQUIMED UNDER CS) NO. 10-5 04 TO INDICATE ANY FURTHER INTEREST IN OBTAINING APPROVAL
FOR THE OPERATIONAL USE OF SUaIECT. :

cA /CE ~~ aw. CHlATECAA . ; : .
Subi'o Pod vy tucudid Laut, cuby fs welude fle Gout

Mavudy culfund iit PUrigug wzaud 2 XbA’ 20 Supe are
wun wud fa i Diiiia 4 Tractuuig’ dad wits He vhpuiabids
that aw ult ata ALU aul te Ub; yang ths Torney wilt
wut be dulcr & AXusshes sudden thet ab hater acdateds
by the Lub; do tuyme. Patreukaty day le wuurtol de
te US dud fa the Kysey, wcad MaAcut @ fess.

Teeter RTE TE ts SP eee

one 707 3 SECRET or an
, fort dy toon +

a



--- Page 103 ---
14-0000

: ners ¥
- weLu. 25
Ctra oes
wabuidigl

28 sere:

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Training
ATTENTION: Chief, Covert Training /OS/TR

SUBJECT: Covert Trainiag for QRPHONE /t

1, This is to confirm telophene conversation between Mr,
Caleb L. Batton and Miss Diane L. Chatclan, Chief, Counter
Front Branch, requesting covert training for subject contract
agent.

2. We would like to have this tral.ing begin 14 October
1970, and can make the agent available full time for three days
enly. We are planning to have the training take place In New
York City, and Mr. Lasarus has already indicated orally to Mise
Chatolon that he will be available.

3. Our mala objective is to provide CRPHONE/I with s
firm understanding of what is required for good Latelligence
reporting ond also the ekills nseded for spotting and assesements,
QRPHONE /1 has been an Agent for over five years and hee
absorbed a good deal of tradecraft in the process, He haa not,
however, had any formally orgaalsed training.

4. We would like to have QRPHONE /l'e outside case officer
(handler) present during this tralning.

S. Subject and his operations! background represent a highly
sensitive area and we would appreciate the selection of a training
site with this in mind. Blographic background as needed by your
instructor will bs provided by Chief, CA /CF with whom all further

' arrangements for this tralaing should be made,

s : ~ FRED W, VALTIN
en Depaty Chief
o Covort Action Staff

CA-70-933

“ SEESTE

ee ecnmnennrenaammenene nt ean ene

sensed

3OG

peel te eee eee

J owte Mee gee

hinte

4°
Y
i



--- Page 104 ---
14-0000

OU eg eat MLM MIT nM

. SECIET

—_—_.,

DDP/CA/CF /DLChatelan: djr (25 September 1970).

Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Addressee
1- DDP/TQRO
1- DC/CA
1 - CA/CRU (Durnmy)
2-CA/CF

*SEONET C=3NE



--- Page 105 ---
14-0000

2
8

eres

et ee ee Hee ne . as .

To 3 1D/2 ” "3 September 1970

ce ene ee NEO AREAS ERR
«
‘
\

’
FROM  ¢ Interrogation Research Division : - |
er Pere a
7 - SUBJECT: Richard “Thomas GIBSON IRD# 54454 = me :
i i _201- 306052 . :

- BACKGROUND: Se et

woke > Subject is a 39-year-old, married, male U.S, citizen who
bas been utilized by this organization since 1966 as a covert ac-
tion asset. He was granted a POA on 23 May 1966. His previous .
polygraph examination was on 13 June 1965. Te,

PROCEDURE:

. On 21 September 1970, Subject was interrogated and given
& polygraph examination in a Commodore Hotel suite in New York
City which was used as a covert site. Subject's interrogation and

_ @xamination were conducted in the English language.

ence pee tetas at eyes
os a
i
1 os _

" PURPOSE:

The examination was requested through Miss Diana Chatelin |
ef the CA Staff. ADDP approval was granted for the examination.
The examination was conducted in order to determine if Subject had © -
revealed his covert relationship with this organization, whether or .
not Subject had been approached by any other intelligence organiza- °

_ tion seeking his cooperation, whether or not Subject was maintaine
ing & secret relationship with any other organization, whether or
not Subject was deliberately withholding any contacts which he has
developed from this organization, and whether or not Subject is om a i
currently subject to blackmail or other direct forms of coercion. .

+ gaepanerty pees y renyni? Lee MRED ewe

—


--- Page 106 ---
14-0000

are

Wa ene ee emcee EATS aie de cay neces met Wem Me

t
‘ fan

IRD? 54454
Page 2
CONCLUSION:

Subject's polygraph examination did not contain any indica. -
tion of deception to any of the above listed specific areas of inquiry.

ay

o : Lawrence J. Howe
. Distribution: .
. Orig. - True, Coleman, Gzynor
1 - Coleman
l- CIIOA
l- File

_ OS/IRD:LJH:yde

Teepe aire te


--- Page 107 ---
14-0000

Soo ane cen oe a eee ere enna mnie
> WARNING—Atreration, ADDITION OR X7UTILATION OF ENtRILS 33 Pacizivc.  * fy

Any Unorrician Cuance Witt Roxoce Tris Passpor? invacio. { |
feo

i]

BART HPLC . i :
CALIFORNIA, U.S.A. i.
wR { .

BLACK | Hy

Noy. 4 40g
NOV. 20, 1969

EXPIRATION «
DATE

: - ‘ - '
on EAE

SEP £0

70



--- Page 108 ---
LUCHT HAVEN
 PLEMESLE «tua estan,

Yeas
IP 11 THR ROCPONSIDILITY OF ‘THE PAISTORT QEARER -
‘TO OUTAIN NECLSCARY VISAS a S

condition tay
We hotter dos wot remala In the

TS

“Permitted to innd on on 4
ina holder d..5 Heb OT

QTE, ve
Pormiltéd’ to land on condition that ;
the holder docs not sonata In the:
» Walled Kingdom tonger/tatoy

“<a

1} bethiozan 7



--- Page 109 ---
14-0000

THE CONSULATE GENERAL OF |
TH UNITED ARAB REPUBLIO
LORPON
| Untry Visa No... AON sue
Type of Visa......A4 faust ae

Permitted to ‘and ro onc tion, that

eee Ss
the hotder dors not remain In we 1
United Kinzcom longer / tater thy, 4

42 rea) ci |

ONE Mo
“Landed MkeUal
1 ae

Date..didpee

Good. for.. CA N journeys

of. AM. Ten . duration

from date of arrival. Tho

ae aa of this Visa is for
Wont

ennnneorrennveeecenserfessnenseeseseees

oeeade essere weve STON dato
of issue \provided peusport
remains valid.

Tee Fe PRR AL ANS on

4 cesmnee to land on conanien "i
the heldcr does not remala” in Or he

orgie lograndet3t ehepd one rz
an =



--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

THE CONBULATEE GENE RAL OF
THE UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC

LOPYON -
—=., RRS RAY .
Entry Visa No.. DOA. eyrovees
| Type of Visa.. “aaa
qari | pate..4()... ae TAG
ahead Alkeuat { Good for. \.A NY. journoys#
of AML. SLOW duration

from date of arrival, The
va 2aaty of th antia Visa is for

«from date
of wy wei pessport
remains valid, |‘:

Tee ro Eat DIN.

seendscovees

at PASSFOMS | 3"
; fac eT PASSIOMS | |

‘aye 422 Th

4 fecunwed to land on concition't
the helice does noe remain in the’

Lt Mott pony vam oe
iat logzal nae therien, DON ore
— zai \ piace



--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

ww

cena
Eo suam

ter

2d Bo nnd on ccna Get
7)

Vho conditi-a attiched | Pa
the grant of leave to tand

$s hereby variod so as to?
require dexrture from the

United Sy
ee

fue DMeder Secrzcary of

“-Walld for aovers] db

ad — 4c Peep) KSA ry)

""" itmbassy of the Hashemite Kingdon
of the Jordan — Loni

Consular Secti gol a

. “Ordinary Visa
‘Transit Visa’, ..
Serial No. Lf:

| Valid TH 9.6 UND
Provided the
* is so lone

+ Permiucd fo tard oa ec
the holfer do-s 4S

y

smNed sce
RAZED ap
TA APR A

towrov 4:

~~)


--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

2 elcrisallen ,
© Notifg 00
isle
W, de Vorsess
Londres, lo 4



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000



--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

H

PEE yas errr MERTON ARONA S go eat BE ER LASES gag orem a tae bee ee ee

SZ CABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION SGD 0

Pye ECRE SEC ae Corits] I. a Boo anoion waUALe sean oy

enour +

emaal — eee one CRET “Sas 2 g :
1 ; sft
i

gov coer [asrres SGGCTION OF Ths COPY PROMOTED

fd _
moex [jves [no Ls]
ty suastiye aed es rey JNO. me meno re

ev, an Z.-}
——_ FEF yar ro es PRR HO.
: a Q vig
. Gases © een CH _j i all we ne RETURN TO

= S0 FILE, VR ppP p00P. cJeuR ckiso , ches

BRAN EM pee

SECRET 121608Z AUG 70 CITE LCPIPIT 3737 (THOHURST ACTING)

DIRECTOR INFO LONDON 2 Aue I 41393
RYBAT DIDGRIC GRPHONE
RT “DIRECTOR 057975 A

te _ IW VIEW REF WE INCLINED ASK QRPHONE/1 MAKE
OFT - POSTPONED VISIT TO U.S. IN SEPTEMBER AT WHICH TIME HE COULD }
FULFILL SGSWIRL REQUIREMENT AND ALSO MEET PERSONAL On
< PRESIDENT OF LPWEAKLY TO FIRM uP DETAILS OF NEW CIER. MID-EAST’ :
~ TRIP WOULD BE POSTPONED UNTIL AFTER U.S. VISIT. :
2. WILL DISCUSS WITH RODIGAST WEEK OF 17 AUG AND ADVISE
RE DATES, DETAILS, ETC. ,
3. FILE: 289- 124- 156/3- GP-1
s ECRET ~-

» : “ wue See vpew REQ.

~) SECRET

Mn ee nr antennae ee matte et ae ee eR A RR I RS
Saeed

ore et


--- Page 115 ---
14-00000

7s

. .

ae Messauc ron:
TOTAL COPIES: .
sua: DIANE L, CHATELAN
naz; = =C/CA/CF | ( s E CRET

ai 1089
DATE: 27 Feb

~ £ sours AHD/OA INITIALS - SEEN BY

ry 2£Q
TABLE SECRETARIAT DISSCMINATION Onoex OO no wnoex DD rerurn to ——_.__». saancHt Orie mo

Ld We 9/7 ROY © rite in cs Fite no.

leh — [Elem DOP AdNP afee AclSo

. site}
(etassitication) (date and timo filed) frelerence number)

SECRET

990) itzian enone) 13.8 5 g

© © Lcprprr INFO LONDON SS - 7
: ate ee aN i
-.. _ RYBAT DTDORIC QRPHONE ; Mo ;

° REFS: A, LCPIPIT 9405 (IN 031696)

‘B. _LEPIPIT 9348 (IN 929903)
; {PSTEAOU BELIRVEPROIZCTEOBILING*PAM7 0 CAN BECP COSTE SER,
) ROSPROS LEM RESASPRIPY: + NOREPHIS:OPS EXBENSES*AND.OBLIEATIONS |
_ GNDSAN-TOPAL$7800 “BO THIS“MUST-ADD- $800 RECENT PAY. ARDAX
INCREASES “LEAVING ONLY SOME”$2;500°REL:OPS*TRAVEL: REMAINDE?"
EY-J0{UNLESS “DIS SUMELSTMER-OBLIGATED)}

po 2. goer VIEW REF B ACCESS POSSIBILITY, REQUEST TRIP

‘BE DELAYED ADDITIONAL FEW WEEKS IN ORDER PERMIT Q/1 FOLLOW-
“up on ISSA CONTACT AND SERVICE RELATED DETAILED REQUIREMENTS -

a ORTHCOMING SOON) AFTER HIS EXTENDED ABSENCE MIDDLE EAST,

SUGGEST HE BE GIVEN GREENLIGHT FOR TRIP MID-MAY, SUBJECT TO

URGENT LEADS THAT MIGHT MEANWHILE EMERGE FR

PHOMBEAH/STANDARD, wy eek,

4, RE PARA 2 REF A ‘AGREE SUBJECT TRIP Wf ONAL,
COORDINATING OFFICERS (continued)
AUTHENTICATING

RELEASING OFFICER , SECRET
PRODUCTION BY OTER THALI THE ISSUING OFFICE IS PACHIGIT=D. Vie oP

Rese


--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

BOUT Iu metuse wns IF SIALD © oc ve OF

ete MESSACE FORM
: TOTAL CoPiEs:

| SECRET |

i INDEX

Ohrnemcseneno.

Orueao

One twoex . 7 neruanto

{date end time filed)

staesifieation}
CRED |” PAGE 2 cme omecrea am
; 13
ER, REQUEST Q/1 ALLOCATE TIME FOR ied /ANALYSIS
A/PHOMBEAH POSSIBILITIES BY ZIBET OF: FICER)( CONGREVE

THERE. STULL 4,
NEW, ALSO PSSH OMA OIMG STANDING REQUIREMENT FOR

RL, WHICH osha vecontasesD SAME TIME, UNLESS YOU

OBJECTIONS, SUGGEST Q/1 BE PREPARED SPEND WEEK IN NEW YORK

HESE MEETINGS, Dobe, _ te .
_SINCE CONGREVE HAS MET Q/1 AND ANTICIPATES NO PROBLEMS

VISE ABOVE, NO NEED RODIGAST PRESENCE UNLESS HE TAKING .

LEAVE SAME TIME, - *

FILE; 200-124-156/3.. f- /
ns ce END OF MESSAGE

S ICA i 1 Kaabetas vem ou! abrcrcae
smemoornicee SE | smerer | RET al se rf — a

 RFPRODUCTIC.~BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OFFICE IS wrGHiaiTED. : COPT RO.
Cee eenamatnenaaameanemmsan one

en EN AP IPL PF |


--- Page 117 ---
oie

Ae :
Sea ena
0A wae



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000


--- Page 119 ---
of.

oF of

+ res
ice

Loto9



--- Page 120 ---
£ office
acre, WC.8

4
s

2s
28
aan
2.5.



--- Page 121 ---
fHiwWE 20f

Beet yy
vt! Loew ata i

ae.

stats
‘

Si

Se anni

sant
iy

. Te tet eres NCBA RAITT PNY SOE REREAD ae NAL TES RORA ET CLRID Bae Ue Lak HET SE ET Ae PE SP

14-0000


--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

sang

: et 0 A RE CISA TERPS RESEND
é

SARS sesh ciao berth enema ee ST oe

berger ae

meg DP ate og ae ae PY

For the record we are forwarding, u/s/c, a copy of the
letter to QRPHONE/1 from his Paris lawyer which outlines the
status of QRPHONE/1's action against Jacques Verges. As Head-
quarters will recall this letter was used by QRPHONE/1 to

good advantage in conncction with his recent trip to Algiers.
The letter says, in effect, that Verges has proposed a settle-
ment of the matter and has agreed to pay this settlement in
Algerian dinars, Needless to say, QRPHONE/1 has yet to receive
Payment. Nevertheless QRPHONE/1's purposes are well served by
this attestation of Verges' expressed willingness to pay, with

its implied admission of guilt!

Aaron C, LAGINESTRA

Attachment: u/s/c
QRPHONE/1 - Verges Letter

Distri : oo rere
S C/WOLIME W/att . 7 oo °
. - > London w/o att : . .
/ 1 -/C/EUR w/o att : a 7

f

OEPA - 2425



--- Page 123 ---
14-0000

we ee weep ee meee eee cme a eres wre bdianet coe |

.S. SCHWARTZENEERG woe ‘ Panis, ce 29, DECEARE 1909

Avoca’ A tA couR
28, FAUSOURG MONTMARTRE .
PARIS-1X*

— ton

Thy. 3 TAITEOUT 6319 See 7 307 on .

: ou 024 69-10 oo. . , °.
. own 223 . oho . .
AFP. GIBSON c/vences - sO .

*Monsicur GINSON

32, Hartswood Road
wo ‘| Stamford Brook
an . LONDON W.12 =

“(Grande Bretagne)

1
o\

Rnd ce Bont a eee

mes
1s heereretantdan ae rarer

Cher Monsieur, oan

. . . a : . a '

Je vous confirme L'entretien téléphonique ave
“nous avons eu au sujet de votre affaire.

. ° A de nombreusc¢cs reprises, Maftre VERGES a proposé
de régler votre affaire et notamment Je ler juil¥et 1967
mk il a vroposé ~ ce que j'ai accepté immédiatement ~ de
.. vous régler ainsi qu'd votre ferme , en dinars, lors de
votre vrenier vovagze en ‘ivérie, une somme équivalente 4
da moitié de vos denandes respectives.

Jtai vu dans le cadre de nos pourparlers, la pro-
position manuscrite de MafStre VERGES, dont les termes sont
assez fidélement reproduits ci-dessus.

* A plusieurs reprises, Maitre CAIN mta ‘conf irné .
accord fe Maitre VERGES pour rézler sur ces bases ;
toutefois ces derniers mois, il m'a fait savoir qu'il ne
_Ltevait pes revu depuis un certain temps.

Pour vous nermettre de discuter utilement avec
“Mattre VERGES, si vous le rencontrez, je vous rappelle
le montant des deux demandes : _*

- . + 4°) Lpour vous-méme : salaire : 4.500 fF =.
. . vo préavis 2 9.000 Ir =
congés payés . : 1.500 rr ~

’ %

Fl est demandé en outre un certifjicat de travail,
‘des fiches de paye et la ré;ularisation de votre situation
& l'égard de la Sécurité Sociale.

4:


--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

emt

aE EERIE PEPER SOE I TT ESN TESTE BEEPS BL LNT ELLA LNE UO RIPE RT eT ET EE
Lote

ea

ee ot . ae

Je pense que vous abandonnez ces trois derniers
Prstes qui rtomt aveun Intérét nour vous. je croise
2°) pour vetre épouse’s salaire : 4.500 fr
préavis : 4.500 fr
i congés payés: 1.500 Fr.
Il est en cutre demandé des “fiches de paye et
la régularisation A l'égard de la Sécurité Socinle. Ces
abe doux derniers postes me semblent sans intérét, comme
»pour, vous-r6me.

whine oh emenneunbenmmngeren Ure pe et isseeft

-* . Je pense donc que vous nourriez demander & Ne
VERGES de remvlir les engagements qu'il a pris a votre
égard,..savoir. paiement de la somme de 12.750 fr francais
. convertis en dinars.

Herci de me tenir au courant.

Veuillez, je vous prie, transmettre mes emitién |
& votre épouse.

. ar oo
.

Jtespére avoir. le plaisir de votre visite lors ‘de
", votre retour | en Angleterre. ye
ars Stans re cs

we wee me
reese

“Je vous. ‘prie actePetre, cher’ Monsieur, 4 2'ex-*
pression de mes sentiments dévoués. ee

 eiaiinimisnat uy
t r



--- Page 125 ---
14-0000

oo . ot? < ay a] . id .
. ae oon . tae
ae ee omy . wee Aree memtcanenen + came cee ote Pll peng ar os ene evn tileaat do

, 3B. SCHWARTZENBERG
avoter a Us cous

98, FAUSOURG NONTHARTAR _

5. PARIS-EKE

— . on be

¥ty. 1 varteour 0340 Mae e.g e8
ou @24 63-10
. “la 8 eo. *
eva pewcetvove. . J

APF. GIBSON c/venses- - 2

*Honsicur GINSON
32, Hartswood Road
, Stamford Brook

- LONDON W,12 @

enemas

“(Grande Bretagne)

Fs Pe a “Me

Cher Nonsieur, 2

Mede te ot 2 otha. oe oan ‘
Je vous confirme l'entretien téléphonique que
, nous avons eu au sujet de votre affaire.

t
° A de nombreuses reprises,. Haftre veRGES a proposé ;!
_de régler votre affaire et notamment le ler juil¥et 1967
rk ila proposé ~ ce que j'ai accepté immédiatement, = de
vous rézler ainsi qu'a votre fenme , en dinars, lors de .
. votre premier voyaze en ‘Sl-écrie, une sonme équiyaleate a.
la moitiea de vos demandes respectives.

J'ai vv dans le cadre de nos pourparlers, la pro=
position manuscrite de Maftre VERGES, dont les termes sont ,
assez fidé)ement reproduits ci-dessus. ae i

ela plusieurs reprises, Maitre CAIN m'a confirmé
_ i *accord de tiaftre VERGES pour régler sur ces bases 3;
‘toutefois ces derniers mois, il m'a fait savoir qu'il ne
iL‘avait pas revu depuis un certain temps.
t Pour vous permettre de discuter utd lement avec
_ Maftre VERGES, si vous le rencontrez, je vous reppelle
le montant dos deux demandcs ¢ .

a . 1°) Lpour Vour-méme 2 ‘salaire 2 4.500 fr
uo a tn . préavis 2 9,000 Ir ~
cles a . ‘eongés payés - $$ 16500 Fr =

IX est demandé en outre wm certifjcat de travail,
‘des fiches de paye et la résularisation de votre jSituation
4 l'égard de la Sécurité Sociales



--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

te

Je pense que vous ahandonnez ces trois dorniers
postes qui n'ont aucun intérét pour vous, jo croise
2°) pour vetre épouse't salaire 1: 4.500 Fr
préavis t 4.500 Fr
: . congés payést 14500 ir,
t Vivi pin amawee!

Il est en cutre demandé des “fiches ‘de paye et .°
la rérularisation 4 l'tégard de la Sécurité Socinle. Ces *
_2»-@oux derniers postes me semblent sans intérft, comme
s.pour, vous-néme «
* . Je pense donc que vous vourriez demander a& Me
VERGES de renplir les engagements qu'il a pris a4 votre
égard,..savoir. paiement de la somme de 126750 Fr francais
+ convertis en Ginars.

Herci de me tenir au courant.

Veuillez, je vous prie, transmettre mes “omitiés
& votre épouse. nes ve
a t oot

Jtespére avoir.je plaisir de votre visite lore ‘do
,votre retour, en Angloterre.

ele get Vo
ee mentees mm weet «ate

“Jé"vous prie as terates, cher Nonsieur ,” a ‘Lexs

_prgasion de mes sentiments dévoués.



--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

ry

*a958 OL worked for Agence Prance Presse - Paris. He was discharged by AYP ee

ait
7
-
ap
F
Z
L
rf
HL

a Q/2 sent to a weekly American publication ant to to the British daily The Observer, |

nae ee ee — tee ed

“Se pinta oot tre trough ewe fe epuion of eas Villien 6. a

— — over the signature ef 0. Harrington, xm xt& violently anti-French articles whieh |
i

sett. (00103 in Paris), Richard Wright (deceased): widow still living in Paris --

and it Joim Faint all took sides vith Harrington.

eee cee ee te

established Q/1 was working on bebalf of cin. This vas becsuse of fight over_

E noney that was dueQ/l end his wife. (Q/1 wad his lawyer bring ng suit against —

Vergre ont finally in 3969 Verges agreed to rey certain erount and elzo a2

ce ee ee ne ee ee ee rt ne erecta

“pala 1966 _FaI Reports: Soares recently aévised that during the Full 1966, «

a nee ts cea es ~~.

ember of en Itelian pro-Chinese Marxist Leninist Oremiration stated that ---

-_. _ Subject was murpected of being 8 apy for CIA. “This person reported this to _

anne aetna
a i a ee ee wee ee H
4

i ee - be ee eee eee we eee eee nee ee!

{ ce fmerem pro-eioeeeCommiet erymsation thet tay Wong May of PL



--- Page 128 ---
14-0000

wee

_ silitent Merxism-Leninien).

1
|

Sree,

|
{
'

“March 1968:° Stockholm, APIONBLADET - Radical Social Democratic Daily 16 March 1968 t

pai Pio Bg Dut on# tn cnbnetin vith etary rset roatestim a

- ~~~ Anerdean soldier Ray Jones iuplying Q/1 responsible in part Jones redefection:

Totes Bjorn Kamm, an Aftonbladet Journalist vbo ia a frienf of @/i's wrote ;

_..__._--himg.e long Setter and weolicited letter the day following the appearance

i

TTT are aap,
i
{
'
i
|
Sth. ET

[of Che “article in viich he denounced his paper for Uibeling oft and give “a 4

stvice om how to proceed to clear his nam. ae ce

a ait TESTEAL_ / Padtenl weekly - Also published article re Q/l.

_ Bo Hammar editor of TIDSIGNAL is pro- Cuben. end welt? Q/1& loyal

|-—-----to Williams who is enti-Cuben. ‘They oppose G/i for his pro-Chinese and ‘antie ~ :

| =: Cuban stance,

i

ie Bee cee am

“wiley of being both a CEA agent ent a South Afriem Intell comtact,

ee

___ 8 a vel mom CLA agents This was at the Algerian Congress --Palestine Dec. 196.:



--- Page 129 ---
14-0000

fa
Bd

faerte tase

2. { .
b--\q00-— a ee
Feb. Aes: @ London publication of leftist orientation, ¢ carried an article

Sete Te acacia AN

~~" Bentioning Vi by name end stating that he is widely believed to be an

“GTA agent. Two of the Your persons listed as contributons to SIMIC were

——-~-at the Algiers Palestine Solidarity Meeting vhich Q/1 attended in Dec. 1969.—-

They were menbers of the Britioh detegation representing ‘the Palestine = ”

"
;
7
H

_ “Wanchanda in vhich Q/1 sat. fits ae Q/1 believes this story vas printed

seen ae cena meee ae aneeenetmaet

Sol Mdartty.Comtttee (P8c) vhich vas a rival delegation to that led by A. |
et

in onder, to discrsdit the Manchanda-led Palestinian group which is in competition_

{

OP PRES RE HI Ee EROS ARTI OTA

we nese}
8 Feb. be 19702 _Berrvr 6963 (Iy 2éen2). _ Reliable Source reported that during his

C
a
Be

[-

\-

A
|
|
7
|

ee ean

“ eonrerastion + With Ghassan KANAFAUI, latter mentioned’ a2 end ‘accused hizi of” ~~

cone
Pale.

enn mane com as acre tn eee’

__ being a CIA agent. (9 Yokes KAMFATE pst moto of 2 due to eccunte

——-.. ce ee ee ee wee cee ee ee

in omton md wo plein wp story wo Fond of acountion Beveled cgnnat @/



--- Page 130 ---
14-00000

oy

exerts
é
*

b.
Se
i a
(When Felled In)
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT
1

DOCUMENT DISPOSITION

me “ese ees ppm

PERTINENT _INFORMAT 108

iy
tt
i
; be
A A }
4 GIBSON, RICHARD : 7
$ 201-306052 200-009-054 : iy
+ SEX M DOB 7 OEP -00737 \ 44
~ 4 26 JAN 70 ‘ i
1 cit ux” P3 i |
J occ ? : 14
| SOURHALIST FOR LIBERATOR H i
+ © ALGERIAe ALGIERS ATTENDED CONGRESS GF H !
| PALESTINE SOLIDARITY COMMITTEES ALGIERS ze- :
j 28 DEC 69 ; = i
‘4 \ i
J ; a __
J * :
| i
} : ;
i 080 ; R 7002111871 |



--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

_—

' CHIEF, WOLIHS

COS, LONDON: Clief, EUR Divieion

CNIEP, LCPIPIT
Pec PTDORIC /OPERATIONAL ; \
Cuarterly Operational Statve_Rowarts __ _. wo EB ee

oa

era Te creme otar oo)

i .

' REPMREDCES: eo, dated Ti Setenver 198% es
i ‘NW2325, Gated 29 Jaonary 570 .

Forvarded |erewit: are Giarter'» States Renortr foe tte

!
|
|
!
ADRIAN B. MASLOTT
|
i
i
!

Attachments: i: ~
As stated fin duplicate) °

mt ’ Pistribution: : : ‘
_ B = CAVOLIME, w/atts (2 covies) .

1 = COS, London, w/o atts. .
_ 1 - C/EUR, v:/o atts . woe te

H JAN 21 1970
22327. fat January 1970

CSA GS Ru ecu

aon = em cee cep ih arr panne nace mpm ee en et nc re ea fe en re ene ee



--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

_ . :
. QuARIERLY
BISOAPIOS/BASE : LCPIvI? (London
AGENT'S CRYPT :  GRPHOGE/L

PLR

ra ios bcd TD oe
E OFFICER TIME: if w

TG) COVERED

i October-31 Decens22 L5S9
(average)

ARY OF OPERATIONAL DEVELO:
an effort has been made to targ QRIR0SE/ 2
Palestinian liberation groups and theirs suseleon
Start has been made in this efzost. QREnG.L/ > and.
of those European leftist groups accive on <
Tais in turn led to his being invited to week
Solidarity Committees which was Leld-is aly-ccs
ZCPLiPLY 7667).

on
y

In carly November QRPIONE/1 made
certain of his radical contacts
made a visit to The Netherlands

in Getober GR?UOXE/1 made another
“taxe the temperature” of the radical
visit was forwarded to Headquarters iz.
Tais visit was Geemed to have been us
another such visit ve scheduled cor Feasuns

A visit to Wairohi py QRPRANK in late
for an added assessment of her ~ sone
time.

eece.

O2Qr?HO!

SS
QREROD

iondon who are

Bruner

2 Palestine
« decision +
rw end
8U62, DIRECTOR 990343 and RO So. Lor we

ecu T
pecial Uranch in coe

LONDON

oO mod¢e wonths,
* G@linerate speed. One
Zt 4S our usdersstanéing that
etners. Meanwhile GRPiGit/i has Le
as usual" image. He showid be a:
cover.



--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

aay ee

WUT EON

URPUO.

fmup On his access
atte to cultivate leaders
wita the Ovjective of taking a trip to te
Beirudc).

ORVEOII/ i's postponed trip to the U.S.

(in the next garter).

for Age

GRPHONE/L wili re-visit Italy, ;
190% at the activities and attituces

QRPHOIE/ 2
erationai

continue his develis
est in London.

RESPONSE TO ASSi
JRTGY, ETC.: GRWONS/ 2
“continues: “to be enchusic

v are able to fuca

PONSR TO) CAS
ORVPHONE/ Lt
this is
ron Nis wany contaci
ated expericnce. OR:
Sczection and criciciss -

a 2 Cen ses

LATS ER, INCLUDING >: 2 4
Ae balk Of “GRP HOW B/i's S Suinsy
and wiii be put into operation in Go

prodiems of BIKNES - which were clea

ancrease in salary of $100 per
Gnas wili be cifective 1 January arc
arrangement in order that it not ines

(ENTS ON AGES PEAPOR

_€ENEREL CS:
He nas performed well and ofteczively

ang well. In subsequent quacters w
Togress can be muintained.

Ta plogcess toward operational.iy us
: :an and Kambona) is painzully

uatioas - the problem is mainiy che =

; ; cere ee
: : Sel: La.

orem ate eetits +



--- Page 134 ---
14-00000

rhe

SC MARAT ROAT MARIN exen RL ANNE

ARTETA RIND TMNT SM YAEL ETSY

contacts (that
situation 92

OEPY ~ 858 was
on tne Italian target and explained
Gisseminablie. Having reflected ona 7 2
not surprising. t snoald be recalled that Rome Sta
requested that QRPHONE/1 get away Erom rigie formal
ren more opinionated journalistic type seperts.
has been judged quite useful ky pome Station = but
operational manner and for general appreciation o=

nN nee eee

I

Hons

Bite oO

it was not surprising that an analysis of this p roup of
turned out as it. did. PIT th
ORPHONE/1L's visits will continue to be welcome an sting ©

use - even if this utility is outside the Cs fr.

- mays!
customers

I

there may have been a tendancy on the I
let-éo : |
i

t

exaggerate QRPEONS/1's potential -
realities of ORPHONE/1 the man and his
ea now £Leel that this is behiné us. ¢

a. oar
ween te eee ae ee



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

: eeiaee aye ae ee aes it SA TE
LETT WE CABLE Tae Tee eat oF eS vo nd
eee i :

cr eae enema

coor

eke

oe os


--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

cee ee eee

jw tl

elas

“> WARNING—Actzuation. Aenewes oa tum anion or Exrmesis Paowerrea.
——_ any Unorricrat Cnasce Wri Reverr This Passport Ixvarin.

¥. 49, 2989

; EXPIRATION B ONOY. 9, 197%



--- Page 137 ---
ve

|

an "secre > 7 7

17 dec a |

ns

_MEMORANDUM FOR: Chisf, Contract Perconne! Division, OP

VIA: Chief, OPSER

SUBJECT: ORPHONE 1 - Amendment of Memorandum of
Oral Commitment

Oy 1, ltha requected that QRPHONE /l'e Memorandum of Oral Commitment
* be amended to increase Subject'n tax free income from $850. 00 to $950, 00
. per month effective 1 January 1970.

2. Thies $100.00 a month Increace will be zet up in an Interest bearing
escrow account,

_ Ha -_ ae - Dobe, ..2+ B, HUGH TOVAR
- 4 fe pe Chief

Tas fre : OB “. + Cevert Action Steff
Gonear: /5, / : ree

Contract Personodl Division

: Distribution:
Orig. & 1- Addressee
1 - Chief, OPSER
SC , .'1 = CA/PERS
wi Be CAICE
“5 + P- CA/CRU
..1-CICA



--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

oe

ELTA AS EE SRST FERENCE ARI ag CINE He a he) rene ces ante mmseaenentneten tanta ae eee OURO as ecrecwr tre! sd OI
: a sneer ate ae re on wert

Seer”

-SECRET

Chief, WoLTME

COS Pa gs: CO ondeon: EUR
bief, LCPIp ondon E3770
rerponre/oRssessens
oT as 7

ORPHO! asspor:
pe keccars

afte

Reference: OEPA - 2223

Ze 2of-3ckL 952
‘1. Reference reported QRPHONE/1's having lost his passport and
having obtained a replacement at the U.S. Embassy in London.

2. On 17 November Air France returned the lost passport by mail.
No explanation was offered regarding the delay in finding andreturning
the passport. Since QRPHONE/1 had already obtained a new passport, he
returned the old one to the U.S. Embassy in London for cancellation.

Ack.

Aaron C. LASINESTRA

pete teete et

MICROFILMED
GEC 1 7 1969

DOC. MICRO. SER.

ctnentecttten i st tet. =

ribution:
C/WOLIME
1 - COS, Paris
1 + COS, London
1 ~ C/EUR

Bof- 20605 2

DESPATCH SYREBOL AND MUMBER
OEPA - 2263 oc FG 1 0 Be r 1969

ANAS I es LE RR AA ORMOND NEA EAI



--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

eae

Sees

rae

Se ee Sey
peat Se sia

aa

ey

a

-
anak

ACEP REY Pa ARIA CR EMIT OATES 18

sess

oral

"24 Noveuber 1969

MEMORANDUM POR: CA/BP

SUBJECT: Escrow Statements of Account

1. Forwarded herewith is the 30 September 1969
Statement of Account for the escrow accounts maintained
by Project MHMUTUAL for your division.

2. %f any of these statements do not relate to your
division, please advise so that we may change our records,

3. Effective 1 May 1969 the interest rate was increased
from four to five per cent per annum on interest bearing ac-
counts.

Ls split. A f Dieicrec.. <c,

ae H. MERRIMAN (P)
OGC/MHMUTUAL

Attachments: a/s

Creacs

pears |



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

¥ ean pon EL FY COTTE er ROR PO MEI ey TR A tems Ate Nt

apy os
artnin fae

ane

Distursc-
ments

4
>
NI
by
S
wn
uo
Py
te
©
oO
.
i]
o

: aon
.

Lee
eoe
2 k=)
>
N
wv

/* 5% interas from é day of “aebosit to day
| annually on value este (6/17). .

eso Qe ACL JEN:
Smsnt of Aes

dune 17, 1959 - Scpzetber 5

ye eae ae

p2iOr

Account
Ratance

$ 3,290.00
3,206.22
3,266.2



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

mechs “4

n

eee RAMI LIGESSPPRRDI RAT AIER ED Ses. APOETSCOP SEHD ENE TSIE RAR TN CIRCA EMEA MTN INT OTS BY OR) RETINA STOMATITIS MPR AT BH hs

ttre

‘ted “
BE acntar, eyeupneganeeett Math nna! ae HERA WM eee ne

* ~ eos
USSR

, BISPAICH SEC RE T/RYBAT

i 7
Chie, WOLIME | x |
D1 |
COS, London; C/EUR; COS, Pari 8 ROFILMED
Foe

Chief, LCPIPIT/London “es = : Foes acne see] ” = wal
Perma ie [coe mcrae}
ACTION REGUTRED - REFERENCES 7

2 Doi- BOLO0L~

1. At their most recent meeting QRPHONE/1 reported to RODIGAST
that he had lost his passport in Paris during his recent visit to
France. The loss occurred on 8 November in the departure lounge at
Orly Airport as QRPHONE/1 was waiting to board AP 822 for London
(leaving at 1755 hours). QRPHONE/1 had shown his passport to the im-
migration officials when he entered the lounge. He then went to the
duty free shop to purchase a bottle of Scotch and a carton of cigarettes
for his wife (she smokes Galoises). He presumes that his passport slippsf
from his pocket during the process of producing his wallet to pay for
these items. At any rate he did not discover the loss until the flight
was airborne.

t

2. QRPHONE/1 had no difficulty re-entering Britain using his Home
Office Certificate of Registration. He reported the loss to Air France
immediately but as of his meeting with RODIGAST on 13 November it had
not been located.

3. On 10 November QRPHONE/1 went to the U.S. Embassy in London
and obtained a new passport (the number of this passport is IDENTITY -
u/s/c)- .
4. We advised CHALEMSKY, of Paris Station, of this loss during

his visit to LCPIPIT on 14 November.
dc Z_

Aaron C. LAGINESTRA

Attachment: u/s/c
Passport Number

Distribution:

3 - C/WOLIME w/att - , . . . :
1 - COS, London w/o att : Te Caren
1 - COS, Paris w/att moe 7

1 - C/EUR w/o att

J ATT

CATE
OEPA - 2223 21 November 1969,

WS Fa REE
SECRE RE 2/RYBAT ~201-306-952—
see



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

IDENTITY

Z 1057628

‘SECRET

sic ATTN 0 EPA -2223 CS COPY

UNDER SEPARATE COVER ATTACHMENT —

TO: OZPA - 2223

MICROFILMED
pec 9 - 1969 ©

DOC. MICRO. SER.

Role 306052

= =|

ements.


--- Page 143 ---
14-0000 .

fea os
oe game by

EIB On eine a etcnens wt ORe patie wee es Wye ww cn wetyees ae eres lee

Soe SECRET ;

MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Chief, CA Steff
SUBJECT: LCPIPIT Request for CRPHONE /1 Salary Increase

REFERENCE: ' OEPA - 2122

1. The following is a breakdown of QRPHONE/I's salary history:

Starting salary, June 1965 $600 per month
1 September 1966 $700 per month
1 July 1967 $800 per month

- All of the above figures are tax free. In addition, as of 1 May 1969, Subject
was given an additional $50 per month (also tax free) as our contribution
toward some form of insurance againet the future (endowment, lump sum

_ each value, or whatever the Field and he finally selected), This appears on
the books as a salary increase. However, although to his ultimate advantage,
it does result in a small decrease in take-borne pay since @/] ls also required
to make s contribution to the payment of the premium.

2. In addition, Q/l's MOC also provides for $10, 000 indemnification in
case of death, or payment of $600 per month up to $10, 000 to his wife In case
of his total incapacitation or disappearance while employed by CIA. Allowance
had originally been made for this provision when he seemed to have an excellent
chance for travel to Peking; this year we included the provision as a general
benefit, not tled to any particular type of hazardous travel alone, Finally,
this year's amendment to his MOC also included a severance bonus of one
month's salary for each year of satisfactory service. We placed $3,200 ina
special escrow account to cover his previous four years’ service, and are
providing in our Project renewals for each year's required deposit to that
escrow account. Please note, however, that this benefit has not yet been
surfaced either to QRPHONE/l or to RODIGAST, by decision of LCPIPIT (a
decision which I believe was wise).

oe : 3. It le my feeling that the proposed salary Increase of $250 tax free
‘per month Is way out of line. I belleve that paragraph 3 of the reference,
comparing Q/1 with a hypothetical GS-12 is a rather specious and unrealistic
argamest. Q/1, although an American, is an agent, and nothing more, and es
you note in your penciled comment the question of quarters, allowances, and
periodic step Increases is not relevant. In addition, while I do not subscribe

Qla0\



--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

Wareens a

_ Feport for 1 April to 30 June 1969; this is the last one we have received.

7 gyeemen me ne ne eet renee ernment ne nye oa eennen nc antag te ny een nt tre ne meer

7 ~ SECRET

-, oa,

to some of the criticisms that have been leveled at his production, the fact

remains that I hove not seen any marked improvement during the past two

years in the quality of the material he provides us. As time goes on and ae
the realistic criteria of what is dieseminable and what is not are applied an
more and more to his production, and this production in turn remains at its

present level of superficiality, we will see lesa and less of it qualify for
dissemination, Since he Is an FI agent, this has considerable significance,
although It of course does not present the full picture of his capabilities. His
operations! intelligence has been received with mixed evaluations; usually

his initial coverage of a subject Is very well recelvei and often whets the

appetite of the recipient for more; somehow, however, that "more" never

seems to materialize -- they get more of exactly the same caliber, but

little more in terms of depth of reporting. Perhaps the fault lies in QRPHONE/I,
in which case we should realize early that what we have here is not a true

FI agent, but a sort of "operational intelligence butterfly." Perhaps, on the

other hand, the fault lies in RODIGAST's handling of the man, not In terms of |
the personal relationship which RODIGAST has been able to bulld up with him, |
but maybe even because of that relationship. I remember when I first talked }
with RODIGAST I quickly realized that he felt he knew more than Headquarters
as to what was important for Q/1 to cover and what wae not; Iam sorry I

missed RODIGAST on his TDY here and when I was In London, and that his

home leave has been postponed, for I had hoped to determine for myself

whether RODIGAST stiii feit that way. Whetever the reason, I am by no means
giving up on O/1, but will continue to try to narrow down his targets so that

he will have a fatr shake at showing what he can do when he is net allowed to ©
cover the waterfront.

4. What the above paragraph is leading up to, Is that I do not in all
honesty feel that he has done anything to really deserve a promotion, except
balld longevity since the last one, and perhaps not follow up (actively) on that
newspaper job offered to him (his preference, in any event). However, I do
realize that a man must have an Incentive, and would like to propose that we
suggest to LCPIPIT that a more realistic increase might be In the neighborhood
of $100 a month, and that the severance bonus mentioned in paragraph 2 above
might now be surfaced both to RODIGAST and to Q/1 as a new benefit.

S. Attached for your ready reference Is a copy of the ORPHONE quarterly

wae DIANE L, CHATELAN

Attachment: as stated . 4 Chief, CA/CF

Distribution:
1 - CA/CF

Orig. &1-DC/CA SECREL



--- Page 145 ---
14-0000

Coed

scores pratense POR TEER TERE ASAI AEB

S
a
Y
m3
‘¥

CEisa Filled f05

a ® ue oar
OOCUMEKT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE mer

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION

3- DISPATCH O@ SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL NO.

2. SOURCE CAYPTONYME§. DATE OF INFO.

DOCUMENT DISPOSITION

HR 2 a

GIBSON, RICHARD .
201-306052 200-124~156/03 -
_ . | SEX 4 DOB 2? OEPA-02115

: LO 14 OCT 69

< UKe ENGLAND, LONDON
FORM ON EDITORIAL BOARD OF REVOLUTION.
PRESENTLY VIN ITALY . fe

oe eee et OREN ERNIE

cea merenenmn cremsenarepeaien
rons ~

__,_ 8 6911060376

res SE IN BOTS
[omen > | TT
oer O67 OBE PeRviees corvsens. SECRET ; (7-40) j ; .

° —— =e Ta eee Sr wn AT TN te I AS ae.
SOS baad eesti a ene :



--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

pitt

~ QUARTERLY REPORT
STATION/BASE : LCPIPIT (London) PROJECT : QRPHONE ,
AGENT'S CRYPT  : QRPHONE/1 DATE OF POA/OA: 23 diay 1956
PERIOD COVERED =: 1 July-30 Scptember 1969 COSTS 3 £ ap ahd eld
CASE OFFICER TIME: Z § (pa

1.

2.

_ Of QRPURE.

“QRPHONE/1, including discussions of his participation in the now magazino.

A new means of funding QRPHONE/1's salary is being sought to replace BIKNEE,
Which is no longer 4 functioning due to unrelated problems encountered by the

_. peincipal agent of that operation. For a review of the security implications
_ of this matter (which are thought to be mjnimal) please see DIRECTOR 46178.

"ESTIMATE OF AGENT'S CONTINUED DEGREZ OF ACCESS TO TARGETS: QRPHONE/1's
‘ access to his various targets remains substantially unchanged.

12 working days per ae

Costs Only) :
month (average) :

SUMMARY O? OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS DURING PERIOD: Pursuant to plans
developed as a result of Marie R. LUEBBERT's TDY, QRPHONE/1 made a
continuing effort to deepen his contacts with various African person-
alities connected with the "London group". Although som? progress has
been made with persons who seem of secondary importance, QRPHONE/1 still
is unable to gain the confidence of the central characters such as Dennis
Phombeah and Oscar Kambona. _
ORPEONY‘'s one week stay in the U.K. was a week of intense activity for
QRPHONE/1 and saw his local “credentials” put to a most demanding test.

QRPHONE/1 performed extremely well throughout the week. See OELA - 51297
for details. “t

QRPHONE/1 has been able to monitor the activity of Belgian Communist Rene
Raindorf who is attempting to become a key figure in the Palestinian lib-
eration movement.” Sce OEPA ~ 2037, 2099 and 2123.

Following an overature from a U.S. newspaper QRPHONE/1 made a quick trip
to New York to consult with Headquarters officers regarding the impli-.

cations of this overature on his RVROCK status. See LCPIPIT 4222 and
DIRECTOR 28728 for details. . :

Through two unwitting female informants QRPHONE/1 was able to obtain re-
porting on the Algiers Cultural Festival. See OELA ~ 51298.

QRPHONE/1 has continued his monitoring of the activity of various African
liberation movement figures in London. . a

SPECIFIC MATTERS OF OPSRATIONAL SECURITY AND COVER: QRPHONE/1's vacation
in Italy with his family produced a marked improvement in his domestic
situation - with its consequent impact upon the cover and security of the
entire operation. This remains a matter of concern and one which will be
carefully monitored.

QRPURE is now entering into a more meaningful overt correspondence with

This will have a positive impact upon QRPHONE/1's cover as a “representative

EXTENT TO WHICH AGENT RAS BEEN ABLE TO SERVICE ASSIGNMENTS, INCLUDING
INTELLIGENCE PRODUCTION: QRPHONZ/1 has approached all his assignments with
enthusiasn ana energye He has fulfilled these assignments to the maximum


--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

4
2 . _ |
**. deBree feasible - given his cover and the unwitting informant-type nature
of his relationship with his many contacts. OQRPHONE/1 makes every effort. -
to overcome this limitation and in this regard a plentiful supply.of’ back-
ground information greatly facilitates his clicitation of added details
from his informants. However, this limitation is one which will always
4 be with us in the caso of QRPHONE/1 and it is one which can sometimes be
i particularly frustrating. During the past quarter QRPHONE/1 has been the
2 source of 11 intelligence reports prepared Ly LCPIPIT/Reports.
i . 5S. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS LEVIED UPON AGENT FOR ENSUING PERIOD:. QRPHONE/1
A . will make a trip to Italy in late September and early October in order to
4 survey the situation within the Italian new left/radical sector. This
trip is one which has been requested by Rome Station. (The trip will have
| been completed by the time thic report is received by licadquarters.)

QRPHONE/1*s contact with an official of the Eritrean Liberation Front led
to a TDY by AF Division officer Geoffrey B. DRANSTON to brief LCPIPIT on
the ELP and to discuss possible operational exploitation of this contact.

QRPHONE/1°s trip to the United States has been deferred until spring 1970
by which time any possible repercussions from QRPEONY‘'s return will be
relatively unlikely.

An effort will be made to explore the operational possibilities posed by
QRPHONE/1's existing (or potential) contacts within the Arab liberation

{
movements. Headquarters views on this matter were requested in OEPA~2044. |
"A reescheduling of QRPHONE/1's trip to Germany has been proposed and |
HeaCquarters and Bonn have been asked for guidance/requirements. Lt |

6. AGENT'S PERSONAL RESPONSE TO ASSIG:VIENTS LEVIED INCLUDING MOTIVATION,
PERSONAL SECURITY, ETC.: QRPHONZ/1l‘s response to assignuents, like his
performance, continues to be enthusiastic and energetic. The comments
made in previous quarterly reporting regarding his security and motivation
remain valid insofar as RODIGAST and LCPIPI? are able to judge.

Tcmsash

lates easily to others. This is a positive factor in his elicitation of
information from his many contacts and also makes dealing with him a
pleasant and uncomplicated experience. QRPHONE/1 accepts case officer
handling - including direction and criticism - well and in a constructive
vein. The same holds true of critique of his reporting. Please see pre-
vious reporting on this subject for added details. -
8. ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS, INCLUDING PROMOTIONS, TRAINING: A new means of
. funding QRPHONE/1's salary is now being devised. ‘This has béen the subject
~ . @£ several items of correspondence between Headquarters and LCPIPIT. We
‘“* plan to consult with the SGFPLAG representative in Bern on this matter. .
s QRPHONE/1 has had some purely overt problems with his Chicago bank (an
apparent error in his statement, etc.) He is also being charged very high
v

service charges for the performance of routine transfers. If he is not’
able to resolve his problems with this bank it may be necessary for him
to change banks. . .

At LCPIPIT's insistance ORPHONE/1 fh has begun to invest a portion of his :
monthly salary in a repitable Mutual Pund of his choice. ‘This modest
investment program will enhance his financial security in the event of .~
termination and/or a rainy day“.

i 7. AGENT'S PERSONAL RESPONSE TO CAS= O?PICER HANDLING OR CRITIQUE OF HIS old
. REPORTING TECHNIQUE: QRPHONE/1 has a very pleasant personality and re- 4
i


--- Page 148 ---
1400000
NEGRU PRESS LNBs
S708 4. STAs

CusCAce. 1 e021

we,

WreE ee nage:

ey Pp G,
Bie Ave42erd 28 can Ge Heb

Leen en. lee

en
_ American Rational Baz aT
and Trust Company of Sicaces

sz see

#6025 Liu on: 207 20%00 7 718 289086" 700000 20000. {
piueneittthemennnibencasteenie meewencan ed!

8
a
fe

= aE R IES.

emer reomenncnnreemacemerensteaeTTERT TR: SS
lo” 7s Jeet NOR T teeming 88" — &
hoe, ,

ee AREER ASA RRS LF nea ee pe —
NeGro Press Ix TERNATIONAL Treg)
S708 s SOSTATE 424-6320

* CUKAGO. UL. 60621

he AY ; 19, 69 Ris :
ouneitor ACCt.s Of Richafa Gibson 76288201 lageis 7
A eles,

y Wetigac! fais of qeicetre:! \
d Rmovicon National Bank Tul tweds Coe at apahan

fiit BN S45” a
and Trust Company of Chicago ~- ws dhs Tater paces ak

ccernmene  MOOUS5S" 0107100007212 . ow f
Beem cnet ae ct creas faana aca 88 |

2. .. eee a - : .
— otal eer erent wttten raat Ra eet an! tee OTe ee, cS Si De imo eae Re TESORO NO At om, ne eh TS

Necro Par: ss Inver
, 703 5. aTATE
tuicaco, (LL. G

teow

Date Poe fa. oaen ta al Gas “od
Deve bum, dite, VOPE =~:

; American wligicat Bante QL. a f Sie Daytes lap

and Trust Company of Chicago :

00 LkOGe 8207100077" 289058" 2000043 *

05 SS DET encanta itp neem cen none ps cae et eae Set YE 2 mentee nF00.

Npots TARR Leet ANN Meet Bett tae aa) See bey eg

Meet AD Se TT OS a SEE RE Ta a TNT

yee BSS
NEGRO Press INTERNATIONAL Ixe2"
‘ S708 5. STATE 321-6320 ry

_- €HICAGO, ILL, 6061

~

re : :
: San 1 17:
hones Leow, Ricks od. ee wee

net. eet tint tea tals MOO e

; z
- American xcional Bante: an
= _ and Trust Company of Chicago

— #00 235 9# +1207 2000 7 785 2890860

OO: I a OREN OE ERT ON DN LS OCS PCIE OS RITES I

— ame:



--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

waters
«

63 Se vee

en ond .
. as he a

WAP ANS
Liss

TROST
mye toe

rd my
an non IN Dy z afl”
Babe | aS ]>

24. ah (ornate 40"

a|
3

opto
Shy TSM, SES
as Oty 39”
3 POPS

€
:
on mane 6d 6 Reelin ere anes ne a ar eR



--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

ae ARNO mae tenes we ne Ee cen
. poems = aR ie cane Tar Tet rasa Nea sti cee AS eet 2s er ema Sanat arsine eae BT :
L¢ -Necno PREss Ix esa Tova ixer ss
“a 708 8. STATE * 324-6320 Ny f xy
t 4 Pa CMICAGO, ILL. quer. . uF fs
- : H & .
a d Dy _ - t nor? re ALA _ nd
flit ec Gael Cp. ws
4 '
American Naneiat Ban!
3 and Trust Coms:any my Chicags _ a
i "mop a3age ot0710-00772 289086"
t SE SSL ST eee cree ee are LN MAREE ET EC
+ Nucro Press InterxarionaL ine ash
. . FOSS STATE 321-6320 - . i
. CuIcaGo, HL. 60671 : “¢ |
_ : 2:72 °
5 a : 4- n au : > bos Ph
i Hn ALLL AEE ‘A. ii
ry Huan. decd Poy ZN 73 ar hie =< Danas i
7 a “a EN > al
_ American Raticael Ban U ae SEP ays REE Pack aL fi ‘
’ and Teust Company of Chicago : . a4 7 i
ee oa :

° “soo BLES sO? 20800778 864058" : ; ; a

he Soren ae RR RT I LE AP A EE wrcemernes scorers 8 OO8CB2 QOGGes


--- Page 151 ---
14-0000

4
BAY ANY CAKK

ce

Sree ete te AAR RT te te eu B he AN pe cD Sah AL oh ROE

;


--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

a0. Chief, EUR; Chief, LCPIPIT/London
Foe

Chief of Station, London

QRPREY /QRPHONE/MHPROBE/ JAGUAR
~ REFERENCES

1. As previously reported, we related to JAGUAR the incident
.in which Lionel Morrison is believed to have searched

~QRPHONE's papers while the latter was out of town.

As you know, there have been some indications:in the past

which might be taken to suggest that Morrison was a JAGUAR
contact - he works for the Daily Telegraph and seems to

be in touch with David Floyd, and on one occasion provided
QRPHONE with a report (on QRPEONY) which came almost
simultaneously from JAGUAR. Clearly, this does not add up

to much of a case, and we could hardly conceive that JAGUAR

would be involved in the harrassment of QRPHONE. Even if

there was no JAGUAR contact with Morrison, however, we felt

it might be possible that JAGUAR could add to our understanding
of this peculiar development from sources available to their

own net. JAGUAR's reply is as follows (CORONET is the agreed
crypt for QRPHONE):

‘with reference to your letter of 24th April 1969,
we have been informed by a secret and delicate source
that David M. SIBEKO, the newly appointed P.A.C. rep-
resentative in London, has recently been told by Elias
NTLOEDIBE, the P.A.C. representative in Nairobi, of the
incident of MORRISON's search of CORONET's papers.
According to Elias, MORRISON had written him a letter
in an attempt to blackmail him. Elias told SIBEKO that
what annoyed him was that MOKRISON had sent photostat
copies of Elias's own correspondence with CORONET.

"Elias went on to say he was satisfied that MORRISON
must have had covert access to CORONET's personal effects.
Elias was surprised that CORONET had not replied to letters

/Continued/

Distribution:
®- c/woLine
3 - C/EUR
1+ C/LcPprIpirT/London

aaRSercAnOM : Te
SECRET/RYBA :

201-306052 ~~
a |



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

’ A substantial increase in QRPHONE/1's salary has been requested by

LOPIPIT. We have further proposed that this increase be paid into an,
escrow-type account. See OEPA = 2122 for details. -

GENERAL COMMENTS Ol] OVERALL AGENT PERFORMANCE: |, ORPHONE/. 1's overall
performance has been superior. ‘ .

ACCOMPLISHYENTS AND EVALUATION OF EPFECTIVENESS OF PROJECT: QRPHONE/2
continues to perfora in a most effective manner. :

“ deh

Aaron C. LAGINESTRA



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000 ~
v Woe ata! e
{ omit . Man Mayet ‘ - t-

vd
‘ CONTINUATION OF
i DISPATCH

he had written to him about the A.N.C. and enclosing

press cuttings. He has asked SIBEKO fo find out if ,
CORONET got those letters, and to warn CORONET that . . :
MORRISON or someone acting for him has been stealing ,
mail from his (CORONET's) house. he

i
may be working for Black Power or Marxist/Leninists }
or The Telegraph or even M.1.5., and wants CORONET !
told of this.

"Elias bas written to MORRISON telling him to go to
hell and that he (Elins) and his friends will stand
by SIBEKO.

"Blias has said that he held no brief for CORONET,
but he notes that CORONET was introduced to the party
by MORRISON and that in June 1968, MORRISON wrote
an article in the Zambian Mail describing CORONET as
a great Afro/American and a great revolutionary.

"According to Elias, CORONET was then living in
London and he recalls that there was correspondence
between CORONET and MORRISON at that time; and that
CORONET used to supply MORRISON with pocket money.
SIBEKO wonders when MORRISON began to work for CIA
and infers that he and his friends should no longer
be taken in by the ‘coloureds.'

a

"In view of the delicacy of the source I should
Be grateful if the above information is not passed
on to CORONET."

BO eberen tte anton

2. This reply does not of course answer ail our questions,
but it does seem to be in accord with what we know of the
incident from QRPHONE. It seems reasonable to attribute
Morrison's actions to factional fending with PAC - a crossfire

{

i

"Elias speculates that the spy, whoever he is,
| in which QRPHONE happened to be caught.

SRA RNS 7S

WIS

Nowell D. KAMMERMAYER

octet rt te pms ne at ga eeenen cane, retin LAr rSematttetA ne TT eer wipsE: mensemeienr tie tere Ae nimeRt RRR ak ARR SaFee TE tae ene ce

L . 20/- SOLO S52

PAGE NG

;
im 2
CONTINUED
en comer - -_ a

ont _

CLASSIFICATION

sen. 530 USE PeEWOUS cDITION. SECRET/RYBAT “

yyy)

Se

eet,


--- Page 155 ---
14-0000

et a

Seer eyeiANe Be

SECRET

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Finance

VtAr: MPS /BG
CGC /MUMUTUAL
SUBJECT; MHMUTUAL Escrow Account for CRPHONE/

1. Tt le requested thet om MHMUTUAL intorest-beariag escrow
aecourt be cat up in an appropriste elies for agect CRPHONE/L. In
secordsace with an amendment to the agent's MOC cesecerning 2 sever-
aeee bonus, the acceunt Is intended te accommodate annual payments
ef cas moach's salary for ewery completed year of satisfactory service.
The initial depookt ceasists ef $3,200, retroactively covering foar years’
service and computed at the rete of $200 per year, Additional deposits,
in the amount cf the agent's salary on the anniversary date of hia cone
trectual rcisticachip (! June}, will be made ennnally to hic eccount on

or about thet date.

2. Any additional qeestions thet might arise may be taken up 4

with Chief, CA/CK, es with Miss Ans Sass Long. |
\

|

APPROVED Ahn

- CA-69-560

SECRET

)
.
ras

B, HUGH TOVAR

Chief 4
Covert Actles Staff en

201 - 3060052.



--- Page 156 ---
Line ae a UTA edgar ten ee ge ne

ekg HH

sone

SECRET

Distribution:

Orig. & 1- Addressee
1 - MPS/BG
-1 - OGC/MHMUTUAL
1-C/CA
1- C/CA/SG
1- C/CA/BF
1- CA/CRU
2 - CA/CF

tatemnmene rater

Se a

“+ SECRET



--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

cere ny

: vats see SEE

t-: ° eee ese see,
f ) " Camce SECRETARY DesSEMINATION Cussinep Messace Toran Cones AEH pours avovon minats- sed ay f

. OMT WOT HIED = ~ nouPt

: SECRET molt nem [1]

I. a (Whee Filled Inj omnes BENcs

{ e
4

i

H

S ECR ET 201634Z MAY 69 CITE LONDON 2779
. Lewd
~ DIRECTOR INFO LCPIPIT ©

RYBAT DIDORIC ORPHONE MHPROPE
REF: DIRECTOR 93219

I. LOCAL USIS HAS REPORTED THAT VISITING USIA OFFICIAL

. HAS INFORMED THAT ORPURE IS A LEGITIMATE OUTFIT BUT APPEARED
“T00. SMALL TO BE ABLE TO SUPPORT FULL TIME STRINGER ABROAD.

: ADVISED LNPURE NOT ENCOURAGE LANDY TO GO TO BAT FOR ARPHONE.
_ 2. LANDY IN MEANTIME FOUND THAT ORPHONE OUT oF TOWN

AND FREQUENTLY TRAVELS ABROAD. THIS HAS SET LOCAL USIA TO

a OE Ser ee ne

tree tenement pe crinnneme etcetera

SPECULATING THAT QRPHONE MIGHT HAVE WANTED PRESS PASS TO
ESTABLISH BONA FIDES AS NEWSMAN ABROAD. LOCAL USIA HAS
DETERMINED THAT MORNING STAR (CPGB) HAS PRESS PASSES, BUT
THAT THEY NOT GIVEN TO BLOC JOURNALISTS.

3. LANDY WILL SIMPLY INFORM @RPHONE THAT SCOTLAND

YARD TURNED DOWN APPLICATION AND THAT NOTHING CAN BE DONE - -
ABOUT IT. - QRPHONE WILL DROP MATTER.

a + FILE: 201-396052. i
Seake Toe

“pou L oe el
* SECRET


--- Page 158 ---
14-0000

—|
¢

cs
$

od

Forar Comes

SECRET constr

{When Filled In) Seen zacalt

CABLE SECRETARIAT DISSEMINATION
SON/UMIT MOTIFIED

RATAN SN RMSE Pa

ADVANCE COPY LD neuro [J] stores

woo: O ves O no

CLASBIFY TO FILE WO.

R-REF TO FULE

SECRET 6817052 MAY 69 CITE LON
D INFO LCPIPIT
RYBAT )ARPHONE MHPROBE

. 3 LCPIPIT 2389(_,J 5/731) wae
“ te USIA CABLE DISCUSSED REF WAS UKNT MAY 7, ron is, fo
FOR ATTENTION 10S MCNICHOL. a :

2. FILEs 201-306052.
SECRET :

Senay he.
: a heysy
- an har 348062

SECRET ws



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

ay, | hulled

7 INCSNS HCE vate baila

; Bie Us. Peirerens

i E1193 "A CONFIGENT!*

4 RR RUEHIA Classification . : ial

ICTION DE RUDTCR 3516 1271020 is _ at

i Ios ZNY CCCCC 22H ; , : one:
R 9710122 way 69 apy

“ALSO WOULD LIKE 70 KNOW IF U.S. INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY uasC/

ru awemaassy toms | UFO i Ox, ples
| Le.

TO USIA WASHDC-832— DB6S
STATE GRNC

Pa oowor” ALLO
CONFIDENTIAL) LONDON 3516 ] 7 Ql KE
USIAC

FOR IOS MCNICHOL. FOR GUIDANCE OF PRESIDENT OF AMERICAN LEP?

CORRESPONDENTS IN LONDON WOULD LIKE TO KNOW WHETHER NEGRO a f). 3
i
PRESS INTERNATIONAL OF CHICAGO IS LEGITIMATE CLIENTEL.

ANY INFORMATION GP RECENT ACTIVITIES OF RICHARD GIBSON, NPI 7 7.
REPRESENTATIVE HERE WHICH WOULD MAKE HIS CLAIM TO BE REPUTABLE
PRESS REPRESENTATIVE SUSPECT. FYI SCOTLAND YARD HAS REFUSED
ISSUE POLICE PASS TO GIBSON AND ASSOCIATION WISHES TO SUPPORT
HIS REQUEST UNLESS HE HAS RECORD WHICH CLEARLY INIMICAL TO
U.S. INTERESTS. WOULD APPRECIATE CABLED REPLY CONTAINING

ESTIMATE WHICH COULD BE PASSED TO ASSOCIATION OFFICERS PURELY
AS GUIDANCE. KING


--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

Chief. of. Station Bern | -
Chief of Station, Lon don] -Chier; BoE pivit
Chief of Base, Geneva

1. As addressees are aware QRPHONE/] has officially been
denied entry into Switzerland since 16 December 1963. This order
was issued in connection with his employment with Identity A,
which was then receiving money from the Chinese--in violation of
Swiss neutrality. A similar order was also issued at that time
for Identity B, who was the Editor of Identity A.

2. It is now some six years later and QRPHONE/1 (at least
overtly) is employed as a legitimate journalist. He is not a
member of any group which is proscribed by the Swiss authorities--
although, of course, he maintains contact with a wide variety of
leftist individuals in pur-uit of his operational tasks. QRPHONE/1
has noted that Identity B has been allowed back into Switzerland--
in connection with his defense of Arab terrorists and feels that
iff the Swiss are willing to do this for Identity B then they should
also lift the ban on his entry into Switzerland. QRPHONE/1
obviously feels personally about this, and it may be that future
operational benefit could be gained if QRPHONE/1 were again able
to enter Switzerland.

3. We are forwarding under separate cover a copy of a report
written by QRPHONE/1 following his contact with the Swiss Embassy
in London on this matter. We are also forwarding under separate
cover a copy of the letter which he sent the Embassy in which he
formally states his request that the entry ban be lifted.

_ Attachments: u/s/c
1-As Stated above
2-Identity Sheet

Di tion:
~ C/WOLIME w/atts

~ 2 - cOS/B Jatts
wo. 1: €05/tondon w/o atts 2n MAY 8 1969

7 May 1969

— HS File MERE
Te. #201-306052



--- Page 161 ---
yo0n00 g

mo

: - toe ‘ . a”
i

- | CONTINUATION OF STEN SPAT EaEE TRO RGTR
: DISPATCH SBECRET/RY BAT OEPA-1794 F

4. You will note that the Swiss Embassy suggested that
QRPHONE/1 work through the U.S. Embassy on this matter. We have
told QRPHOME/1 not to do this, but rather to deal directly with
the Swiss. If he needs certification of his status as a working
journalist we suggested that QRPHONE/1 obtain. this from the appro-
puicte profzseionel organization (of which he is a member) in
London.

wrt es,

| eA A ENOL AOD LO REI ME MOINLSRARSE DENT SIO ATTIRE BE TESTE £8 SSS tr ea ET

Fn epee te ap ana

5. We presume that the Swiss Embassy in London will be
forwarding QRPHONE/1's letter to Bern. We will appreciate being
" advised of any Swiss action, or statements, on this case which
may come to the attention of 3ern Station. Any advice which Bern
Station can offer regarding QRPHONE/1's pursuit of this matter
will be welcome.

6. Of course Bern Station should continue to be guided by
the contents of DIRECTOR-69543 in any dealings with the Swiss : H
concerning QRPHONE/1. |

Aaron C. LAGINESTRA

neat Rte ntnctt cor smneecn em «Ptr ettdmanticte arn cae memati ep eM eee Tm Stee

oo reenter erger a

pa

_ L . od CLASSIFCAT.ON
a i ose 53a USE PREMOUS EDITION. SECRE T/YRYBA ,
7 ae [Jeonnmue



--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

i

ast

SOROS TO ea cenataesmacameesngat: |

RRA ern umgt te eee ener,

ae SEPARATE COVER ATTACh«ENT .70s ~~ IGLO
< OEPA~1794

IP

MEROFILMZD
MAY 15 ley

po. MIGRO. SER.

SYLSS EXCRY Bax PROKLE

i
On 15 April 1969, I spoke with Charles Henry Bruggzasn,
Pirst Secretary at the Swiss Exbassy in Lonfon and who
handles press affairs, by phone. I tried to arranze a perso
meeting with Bruggnan, who insSsted on knowing the exact
nature of ny business with hic. He elaimed tiere vas
nothing he could do for me in London, except to forward
a letter from ne through channels to the proper cutborities
4 in Berne. (I later sent hin ix such a letter.) Sreggcenn
4

could take up the matter through the Esbassy in Zernee If

. the U.3. Embassy would only vouch for me as a prozessio-l
journalist, Bruggmann added, I would be almost certain to
got the ban lifted.

urged me to work through the U.S. State Dopartuert, veich | .

Naturally, I have made no efforts to contact anyone at

the Enbassy in London, but perhaps something right be

done to got the Exbassy in Serre to acknowledsgo at least,
when queried by the Swiss, that I an a bonafice jourralist
in the eaploy of a reputablo U.S. newa ani features agency?

Ae
ona eka 7 |
D SAe-1ay- 56/3 8 yt 306 05%

Heaglapran anisms TTF ro Saar CEaERROnaR RE ST



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

-

PR gperetitieyope cgearargene nti

LAD ee emai porta

i
Hs

7th doril, 1969.

Mr. Cherles Henry Bruggusnn,
First Sseretiry, .
Enbessy of Svitzerlcnd,
T1/81 Gloucester Plece,
London, %ele

Devr Sir,

Follotin: our telophone conversetion . few dys ico,
Z tn now writing sornolly to you *o roquast thet tac ben
on cy entry into Switzerlend be lifted. Ghis ben, vhich
dates from 1963, wes never porconclly cirected czcinst re
but asainst the publication for witch I was tien sorning
eo cn Editor. Thit pudlicetion, ‘sfriccn Ravolution', ro
longer exists end I note thct its former Algerien guolicner,
We dzcques Verges now visits Svitzerlind frequently. In
eny case I im now in no way connected with hin.

we

As you mow, I cu the overseis revresentctive ind
correspondent, bused in Lonuon, of Nezro Press Intern: tion lt,
“| the sajor Negro sews tnd Lectures asency in the United tiras,
“ . + * whieh serves sone 270 newspcpers. Thies is a bonetriucd
commercial journcListic enterprise cnd serves no Lolitical
purpose. I personclly im & seacer of the ioreimm Press
Association ind the Associition of Aucricen Correszondents
in Lonuon end en accredited to tha Porei:cm enu Connon ec. ltis ©
_ O7Tice here. :

2 : It is pert of my duties to resort on the setivities

core eB on. 0) Of the United Nztions und its excncios. I hive vern, vor

Se . many yeers, accredited ut Unitec “uttions Nezdquerters in
sew York and I «és slso in cocrcdited corresponcent ut tae
founding conference in Geneva of UNCTAD. Many important

_ meetings are scheduled to be ield in Genove daring *.is-yorr

tnd I heve teen ccczed by my firm to cover these confer neas.

Sherefore, I esk yourcousider:iticn ind coogerction ia



--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

Boag cere Frappe cep fem AE RP eg Rg terete are ge ase nity byte ae, ea

im

- ‘ . - le
.

27 -2-.

a
a
obt:ining the removal of the ben on ne in Sxitzerlind
. Which prevents =» fron fulzilling oressing professionel
duties.
I wish to nike it most cleser here thet I cm in no
way connected with any political o-geniwzation or bodies

in Svitzerliind or elsewhere cud co en esteblisked tnd
well~known professional intornetionsl journclict.

Sincerely Yours,



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

§

re Pittne
oe

,

SEPARATE COVER ATTACHMENT 2 TO: OEFA~-1794

IDENTITIES f MicasenveO

MAY 13 196Y

poc. MICRO. SER.

Revolution Magazine

Jacques VERGES

S04 #¢ XO
(OEFA - 19

1D ae-sat-/5Y3 —— Dal - 3060 4¢
5 gpppeerensemarermete 2pm _

Lac ae
: eo.
j oe Lo noe tet a - lu. *

ET OVRAT.
at RYSBAT

2



--- Page 166 ---
14-0000

TRIAS RE RI nee apy cite pee EOE Se Seta gm a tne Wa

£
vm CABLE SEC PETARIAT DISSEMINATION CUSSIFIED MESSAGE soray COMES

i oieswernerses SECRET maf ’

(When Fed ta) pied

aoe <snoe

ay

. ra
Ca ee oy ret m7 SOTTED

moe vee Tne

CLASSIFY TO FILE HO.

REP TO FULE WO.
eue mo Oazezo

SECRET 861128Z MAY 69 CITE LCPIPI
PRIORITY DIRECTOR INFO LONOON
RYBAY) DIDORIC QRPHONE MHPROBE

te USIA REPS HAVE BEEN APPROACHED BY JEROME LANDY, \
UK ‘REPRESENT ATIVE OF WESTINGHOUSE BROADCASTING AND \
“PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN PRESS ASSOCIATION IN LONOON, ‘
CONCERNING YQPHONE. LANDY FORWARDED QRPHONE'S APPLICAT!0N
FOR A POLICE PASS TO SCOTLAND YARD (METROPOLITAN POLICE), {
WHICH TURNED IT DOWN, REFUSING TO GIVE A REASON. LANDY HAS :
CAPABILITY RAISE CONSIDERABLE FUSS ON QRPHONE BEHALF AND ‘
WANTS TO REPRESENT MEMBERS OF HIS ASSOCIATION AS BEST HE
CAN. QRPHONE HAS PUT SOME PRESSURE ON HIM, CLAIMING TO BE
LEGITIMATE REP OF QRPURE, ETC.» RAISING QUESTION WHETHER
TURN DOWN HAS SOME RACIST OVERTONE. SOMEWHAT CAUGHT IN
MIODLE, LANDY TURNED TO EMBASSY TO ASK WHAT IT CAN TELL HIM
ABOUT QRPHONE TO HELP HIM JUOGE LATTERS JOURNALISTIC BONA

_ FIDES. ACCORDING TO USIA OFFICER WHO INTERVIEWED HIM, LANDY
ts ALSO HAVING QUIET INQUIRY INTO QRPURE MAGE THROUGH HIS .
CHICAGO CONTACTS. Co

“. Q. VSIA QUERIED LOCAL Luca GgemenHicH REPORTED IT HAD

BS EOP -
«_.. SECRET

pe cee en erm sete eee ee



--- Page 167 ---
14-0000

oes pamgepec ee aptennnttpeencntnene

srg

a LES ARE pan

CARE SEC RETARUT DISSEMINATION
FERTOW UNIT NOTIFIED

CUASSIFIED MESSaUR 49 SPIES

SECRET nacre tom
(When Filled in) ean a
4

REPRODUCTION OF THIS COPY PROMIBITED

“povnce cory DD asur0 [J morro wow. O ves OU no

CLASSIFY TO FILLE NO

2OREP TO MILE NO.

rie mo Cner to enanenC)

: PAGE 2 LCPIPIT 2389 SECRET

NOTHING SINCE 1962 AND FAIR PLAY FOR CUBA CONNECTION. IN

1 ANSWER TO USIA QUESTION, STATION REPLIED THAT IT HAD COME
ACROSS QRPHONE NAME GN SEVERAL OCCASIONS BECAUSE OF RELATION-
SHIP WITH REVOLUTION, EXPULSION FROM SWITZERLANG, ETC. TOLD
USIA THAT IT SOUNDED TO US THAT JUDGMENT WHETHER TO GIVE OR

; WITHHOLD POLICE PASS 1S POLICE DECISION, AND WE WOULD NOT HAVE
; ANYTHING TO TELL LOCAL USIA WHICH WOULD ARGUE THAT LANDY
SHOULD MAKE A CASE OUT OF IT. O10 STATE THAT OUR RECOLLECTION

FROM THE FILE WAS THAT QRPURE WAS A LEGITIMATE OUTFIT, BUT
DID NOT KNOW ANYTHING FURTHER ABOUT IT THAN THAT.

3. IN ORDER TO PERMIT US CHANCE TO ALERT YOU, WE PERSUADED
USIA DELAY ITS MESSAGE "WHILE WE CHECKED STATION FILES FOR
” ANY RELEVANT INFO." USIA CABLE WILL REPORT PROBLEM AND ASK,
GUIDANCE ON HOW TO ADVISE LANDY.
_ A. WILL FORWARD USIA MESSAGE NUMBER WHEN AVAILABLE.
‘SUGGEST YOU ALERT QRPURE TO POSSIBLE INQUIRY (ALTHOUGH THEY

® MAY NOT, OF COURSE, BECOME AWARE OF IT).
: 5. QRPHONE OUT OF UK SINCE 24 APRIL, RETURNING 13 MAY.

” WILL BE TOLO NOT RPT NOT TO PRESS LANOY TO ESCALATE THIS

; . MATTER INTO MAJOR ISSUE. :



--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

elas CUP ED

RRS SECRET malities >

{When Piled ny BEd

 ntieanea cory ( auso Di arorten
ry

CASEI TO FILE HO

ood ar.

REF TO MLE NO.
oue mo Oecr. vo

:
~ Sesew ay.

PAGE 3 LCPIPIT 2389 SECRET
6. FILE: 201-306252.
SECRET

SECRET

sete tgS eategs



--- Page 169 ---
14-00000

es
i

ten SO REE Se shea Fa Hy

4 ZL, ;
Eaee SECRETARIAT Dissemination “< * ctaf™

stasorait mOTAFATD ~~ -
, SECRET

ee eee ac wa
Ora borie., Ancur! Yanelom imerescs-seen av

En cy -

153009 [Faorres

Ctessere 16 ce eres a0.

sense vo cs rice we.

Orne one S07 000 16 men

SECRET 0212002 MAY 69 CITE PRETORI 6916

“|

|

[

/
DIRECTO INFO LONDON Rev): Mai INAS4B7 | q-

SECROU2AR , me v | -_

1. SELEVER/17 PROV} DED/ FOLLOWING ME%O" ON 2 MAY: & WK LONSOD ‘

“SUBJECT: RICHIRD Gisson 22/- 226252 ear SSA
SUBJECT IS BELIEVED TO BE AN AFRO-AMERICAN Jounsan See NUE

RESIDING IN LONDON. HE] TAXES A KEEN INTEREST IN AFRICAN
POLITICAL AFFAIRS.
IT HaS COME TO OUR KNOWLEDGE THAT SUBJECT, WHO |
HAS OFTEN BEEN IN TOUCH WITH SOUTH AFRICAN POLITICAL |
EXPATRIATES, IS NOW SUSPECTED WIDELY CF BEING BOTH A :
CACFIRN) AGENT AND A SGUTH AFRICAN INTELLIGENCE CONTACT. |
THE TANZANIAN ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSIONER IN LONDON HAS
APPARENTLY ALSO BEEN INFORMED OF THE SUSPICIONS AGAINST
SUBJECT AXD HAS PROMISED TO ALERT HIS GOVERNMENT WITH i
A VIE¥ TO HAVING SU3JECT DECLARED PERSONA NON GRATA IN AFRIC i
ABGVE MERELY FYI.” Co , : |

2. IN PASSING THE ABOVE, SELEVER/17 COMMENTED GI3SON MICROFILMED
PUTS OUT SOMETHING CALLED “THE GIBSON LETTER” ON ABOUT - MAY 191969

A YEEYLY BASIS AND SELEVER HAS FOUND THAT KIS INFO RE ‘

& typ oa Ma CY
sec 7" Yar 3060S D

angen

iy

pekien]

DOC. MICRO. SER.



--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

ne Pen SOTERA nae ge feN RD Regen NEE Meme Hoe oom ~ ~
w
) C.ASSIFIED MESSAGE /SECRET © 9 tn____pact__

am § 3 20PH Gg

PAGE 22°58

_ paBhOAEDIezc. Is FAIRLY ACCURATE.
“RPT NOT ONE OF SELEVER CONTACTS.
3. RERUEST TRACES ON GIBSON, WHICH WOULD NOT RPT NOT

BE FOR PASSAGE TO SELEVER. .
4. INDEX.
5. FILE: 72-2-2/5.

SECRET


--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

- = . CLASSIFICATION JCISPAT CH SY UB AMO NUMBER
are “CONTINUATION OF . ..
"(DISPATCH SECRET/RYBAT | - OEPA-1708
as MANCHANDA, which are obviously known to the security
authorities. Purthermore QRPHONE/1 himself might think
it odd that he was being treated in that fashion and
suspect that the Home Office was aware of his role which
would not help your relationship with him. Alternatively
(a) would obviously be a nuisance to say the least, so we

another year on present conditions."

3. We have attached QRPHONE/1's brief report of his visit to
the Home Office tc obtain this visa renewal.

Aek

Aaron C. LAGINESTRA

CLASSIFICATION
ee SECREWRYBAT

felt that the obvious answer was (b) i.e. an extension of ©

bone

Pe Me erie RRND QI Ee ae eR Rane dem gER mE nen MRNA CRT ap pe FE ke ee

fates cea wave

a Coe

= eneinin Mebranaset ee co itchy



--- Page 172 ---
14-0000

San SPS

TO panne REP eggs

. — . HERECITH ATTACHMENT TO: OEPA-1708

¢
. %
. tee, . c 7" - . Cc.) rt .

. . '

. spree a8 33
Suilisd VISA 22

He cue t

were

On 22 Larch, 2 got ay sntih 25 Sebruary
+ + 1970.-sc in the pas

et the

ause some pants

% tke exe Citice ask = 350 until 1500

<a ze DL sally ebtatnins 32th apolozies ice.
who lensiay éclay — mosnally it takes ebous an hour.

+

.
.'

_ Mas Wes |
| 0EPA- 1708 =



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000

MO tele papa sen man Pape

4

20 March 1969

MEMORAUDUM FOR: Jane Long, CA/CF, 300101 cae
SUBIECT 2: Laboratory Tests, QRPHOIE/). ; -

REFERENCES =: (1) CEPA-1662, 26 February 1969
2) OBPW-4O5, 7 October 1968

Review of the laboratory studies from the initial dispetch
@ the one dated 28 February indicate a definite improvement
the liver function tests. It is our opinion that the individual
recovered from his hepatitis and should have no complications
be continues to follow his doctor's sdvice as to dict.

: nN Wn

ROBERT A. INGRAM, RLD.
~ an - ; Operations Division
. Office of Medical Services

ce gree en et ae Rae ee RR RENTER ae REET EE I

ERB

K



--- Page 174 ---
14-00000

. ‘ lj
r
a

ry
Chief, WOLIME

ero. Lief, EUR Division
Chief of Station, London

ic,
QRPHONE/1's doctor has determined that his liver function

has now returned to normal following his attack of hepatitis

last Fall. We are forwarding under separate cover a copy of
the report of clinical tests given QRPHONE/1.

Lies

t ge . wee tte

Aaron C, LAGINESTRA

Attachment: .u/s/c

Report DOC FORFAFDED 4/0 S/C

BY RID/SD 1 9 MAF 4969

Dis utions an

- C/WOLIME w/att . . . e
1 - COS/London w/o att , te
1 - C/EUR w/o att

OEPA-1662 , 28 February 1969 Ee
GQASSRCATON 10S FE UNS AZol- O66Se
SECRET/RYBAT 200-124-1563 :

*


--- Page 175 ---
14-0000

Dr. J. R. DALY

By +: fd RIVERSIDE CLOSE . Dept. of CHEMICAL PATHOLOGY
KINGSTON UPON THAMES WEST LONDON HOSPITAL
ate SURREY BAMMERSMITH
i _ ON » $45 $828 an woe LONDON, WS
\. Pe ee he eg sear
| i “Jane Bothy 19696,
ee
I

To professional charges for biochemical
> ingestigations carried out on Jan t4th,
196 93 : .

| :
|

With the coupliments of Dr. Daly. 7

De. J. R. DALY

* Dept. of CHEMICAL PATHOLOGY ~
WEST LONDON HOSPITAL
HAMMERSMITH
LONDON, WS
01 - 748 S41

Jan, 20th, 1969.

i + J RIVERSIDE CLOSE
| KINGSTON UPON THAMES
SURREY .
01 M582

Tole e

Der{ 0° LE
Herewith your liver function tests,
“which now seom virtually as good as nowe

With kind rogards,

* Yours sincerely,

a


--- Page 176 ---
14-0000

Ste 2 Se acae

§ RIVERSIDE CLOSE
KINGSTON UPON THAMES ;

” Liver Function Tests, Jan. 14th, 1969.

Plasma total bilirudin
alkaline phosphatase -
+ alanine aminotransferase

Serum total protein
albumin -

" globulin

Comment :

have ‘returned to normal.

ae

‘Chemical Pathologist.

a

Dept. of CHEMICAL PATHOLOG
WEST LONDON HOSPITAL.
HAMMERSMITH

. = LONDON, -W4
Riverside 3441

Jan 20th, 1969. °°

"less than 0.5 mg./100mk. |

3 KeA. units.
9 deue/l.

7o% g-/100m1.
3.8 g./100ml.
-306 ge/100ml.

Electrophoresis of serun protein showsd a normal pattern. *.

All parameters of liver fi action tested appear to: -

woot 2"

2 Tt ante nee nares eset edmeniae aCe ae note



--- Page 177 ---
'
1400000

NOTE © .

This 1s Sensitive /nterm -
attm arch must Le hares
with EJBSY§ ori be
torwardere to ASC.

OLC 7-17 70]



--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

° Chief of Station, Algiers

" @ vonthly Report/Errol S. KULPA ,
‘ACTEM RCQUEED erect +

1, Attached find contact and subject reports covering
activities of KULPA during the month of January 1963. The two
outstanding characterjstics of this project remain a helter-
skelter operational pattern and the usual difficulties in
administration,

2, We can not really blame KULPA for the former, His
forte is. aoving around and being able to convince. These tvo
Qualities are rare enough not to demand in too loud a voice
for the third--serious concentration on a long range target.
It le not that KULPA lacks the professionalism, rather it is |
the tempo of his personal and professional lifo that inclines
bin to speed rather than accuracy, As last sonth was marked by
the stop and go of SCIMITAR/6, so thie month was hampered by
the upcoming Congo voyage. It is not that these ventures are
unimportant, it simply remains difficult to judge KULPA's
performance on cvents occuring outside our area of coapetence,.

. 3. We can say nothing new or nothing untrue on the aduin-
istrative aspects of the project, The cry is the same froa

#11 small stations--why sust’ so much valuable tine be spent on
tiny administrative detail. In KULPA‘'e case the matter is
porhaps compounded by his transfer from Casablance but hia
complete file is living eviderice of the imbalance of tho outaide
staffer. In the regular four way breakdown, the file reflects
Glsost no paper in Plans and Development, Production is not
fat, Operations ts fuller but transitory, Support is s srollen,
blistoring monster. We see no end to it. Our present agenda
for the next KULPA meeting calls for a discussion of eleven
separate administrative items, One more chestnut and we are
finished, The KULPAS of the world take precise careful case
officoring with sufficient time prior and post the meeting to
bring order‘ froa chaos, It is just this tine that a small
Btation lacks, 80 tar; we are glad to state, KULPA seems to be,

worth the price paid. in ” ingD ao. Law7O7 .
. : DAVID W. LAWTON 3-4 —2<7
Distribution: =

Orgs el. C/aF (e/ate ave) [LT b YC [er re” 5
tH \) 17 Feb 1963
Attachments: ‘mois Meiniek F ae Te
2.8.0 (1 copy ! :
> of each) : AAAA~554 :
: . HEADQUARTERS PAE RAAETD
S-E-C-R-B-T *

co

Da retactane et



--- Page 179 ---
14-00000

cera’

‘
as pee!

‘wena

cove Yeneazay

VES) S320 31 Hous

: .
. - ee - LA
woes €53 ZIS hl hate
Ps cet tara Lepupap i
Laer J9 AST! EL OF-
a, WF BO3 THSTET ESTAS

Sant’

=

“ore



--- Page 180 ---
watches

Secteny ove vy
_ Lone - Travirvise se70 5 pitted

0S Pg TET RS

wh of

ne 2
ttcaass

lg L256 1.
ae

tads
an.

ord

ma)

+

et 2itod
““groorcias.
Ove Bx:
ats TL

Stoner pees te ne cee ees cae cat temaet Mane ae are me sien ete ene eae reneemm

14-0000


--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

+ A spammers amare nearer kee ana

sichenepanameanimmaadahebttisanetiemiamntiniaa i ac ae CLL he oa

ARSEPPE TET crempean a tenet meta wenn ete wen ER SEM SE tet

ief of Station, London’
ie EUR Division

1. On 12 March 1969 QRPHONE/1 was granted an extension on his
British visa valid until 15 February 1970.

2. Since QRPHONE/1's file at the Home Office indicates an
interest on the part of JAGUAR in his case, JAGUAR was consulted
prior to the issuance of the extension. (This is not unusual in
the cases of persons such as QRPHONE/1 and does not necessarily
imply an “agent” status. Of course WOFIXM is not mentioned at all
in this file.) In coordination with London Station it was decided
that a re-newal of QRPHONE/1‘'s one-year visa was preferable to the
granting of permanent resident status--which would normally have
been the case. We quote from the appropriate memorandum from JAGUAR
to London Station on this matter:

“The choice was between:-

a) an extension of two months

b) an extension of one year i.e. a repeat of what
was granted to him last year

c) that his temporary residence should be made
"unconditional" which would be the normal
procedure if there were no special considerations.

Our feeling was that for QRPHONE/1's cover purposes (c)

would be undesirable; if his friends got to know of it

they might think he was being treated over-generously in
' view of his contacts with leftwing revolutionaries such

/CONTINUED..«/
Attachment: h/w
Report

Disspatfition:
- C/WOLIME w/att
1 + COS/London w/o att CS £0Py es
DGSPATCH SYMBOL AND WUMBER DATE
- OEPA-1708 2 April’ 1969 ~
NON HOS FALE ER ;
SECRET/SRYBAT '01-~306052



--- Page 182 ---
14-00000

a de net eeetet writ ae

(2, ) Bho recerd of EUL7LI9 dealt
*, Goborte Helden sovear to ta te felleves.- .-
; He “Pour £4) inihtal mestice with '-
2) ae ith Eitan cat

‘
j
4
i
}
i

vthtaresy, pxracre explotse? Get be eoald 2
ples Clgsasosd that ery bata 222
et 0700 the: ‘feving, ty, 't

wise foe the test 6) a .
$2 Bahders - the latter !wa Z tserind fer Tris st 3 0 on

Biers

wrenge Fo tet gate covarsely rere
5 pus ar roe off arQ Ear 7% Etta ro” dnélceit :



--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

PEST FG

3

bee" RWS

LISTS -H B-20¥F 272A, bnina 19 Jar 63

Subjz Cntacts with Serve }ichel
ool

= PADa?r dlettd Hotel, tun mectines 17 Jan ard ten mectines 17 Jan

SEE CMR ENN at

2

1. Michel fx stertin: a rew public:tion to te called ATLAS, much on the omer
Of Pari-Match, whic: will be al ed at Prene~-s;ankirs Worth Africa, “jude bast,
and Alecriane in Fearee. An Alperian teziced at Freine-Tlreur in : aris will be
editor (he ws unra-ed) ard “ichel wlil te tne zuiding renius. Coler will be
used for tne cover and addg inside, t.e plates being mdr in .est Gemeny. An
Arable edition will be issued later.

a
;

3. Kicnel plars to re tiree phétagraphers Sor the ~azarite, fnu Laxhdar aka
Dyanal (trained in Czech;, Démal Tenard-rid (Af he consrits to use & camera
instead of a movie carera), ar. me. {‘‘4crel e2id he hai to use Algerians even
they we @ not "“hotorrariers", but that he needed me ty cack then up technic ally.)
He has already tacen twerty-sone photos fron re ani nas -tven ne a lon Listof
others he warts. He has prised to par 15 frares eacy to start, with raise
in pay ee the nara-ine rrocresaes, I said my present «ork carns my livim, and
@ question ofprestice vas more importa:t thar par for th+ ov ent. (Comment: I'm
fot sure how serio:s Michel is, nor if he hae the authority te we se. At leaet
he talks 8 food cae, afi he has taker, sure “hotos to show the dfitor for wein
the riret few les.ee.)

3. Before Vichel offered explovnient on the ~avasine, he as.ed if I would be free
to eperd tiree or rour weexs in An ola ard the Coro with Roberto Ho:den to take
Seev ral tho:eand® photos which could Le ueei for the rext several years in a
conmtinuirs eanvsign for the liberatior of Argola, with mo retaining eolling rights
in the negatives and the entire trip being paid by Hodden. I eaid I was willing
if I could arrange it with my e ploy res. That wis at roon 18 Jane At six pore
18 January, Michel srnounced to # thut Ho.acn had agreed to sponsor a trip for
Be to Arm>:a. Asa first step, Holden warte: ve present at JU00 dan 19 to take
photos of his interview with Ben Bella. I wiil be there.

&e Michel then said the Atias once unserway would not be his responsibility, jost

* ae he had loosed the reins of Al Ghaab once {t -as started. Then he will publish
an cntire series of slktk,ore-ti e publicutions on the various phases of the
Algerian goverment ani its efforts, & photo took on «j}perla, photo bocks on the
verious regions and problezs of alger.a. Concurrently, he will be doing publications
on Black African subjects, ta-tne many, lone ewines throurh Aerica to gather the 4
inforsstion andphotos. He said, “You will fe working -wre witn ne and traveling
throur) Africa at that ti-e thar workirs, on Atlas, whicn s.culd nave a good backlor
of Algerian photos by ther." He ad'ed, %f course, I*11 have to vet pemiesion tn
take you on theee trips—ayve they'1} wart an arrican photo-ravher instead.*

5. After the Holden/Een 3elia irterview totar, I an to ret Holden ami bichel to”
wake further flans.

wd

»

Pare

i Cc i i

i



--- Page 184 ---
14-00000

LASTRIR I 220, Bupa Te Zi Jan 63

. Subd: Contacts B'=20 Jan ~
3 1. Sere }tenel: Wolwice dalle. ue

“PO neded ver, Tapldly re the “reffered
rm @ rane ertes wit: liter | wolden tom: morte trip.

“26 lution,

tris to aro.
Ory other i

S$ At.as,

So or eAll Ve Nereer wits 4

DVD, Sneie Feta: et nor tute wits
to te re In tee re.rt of 3

anole MU oe Bee.

irtervi w, Jon:

: ene ay TERR 9456 Bch -ect.
etn, tre tet as etal b- 5,

She seene

whl twice, on v tr ard 2. on Joe. after tr

Zeiia
Po esete: se 6. fy ard ve ontloned aa Se:ze"
had * leed of «, Pees dey ha leg r Awol.
The 20th with i & Faror, he was
a: plyine for + visa in Marie

e-
He ie storpine at
rte eTts. 1 exat ore thee
tht epae em: Yorvehe mt 5
(alten teste te by scow in tae

bowie Ran iniden told hin >
= + Coe dant “Vt are: stn twee, area WE ae an ft:
gl fre nent oe x ninead 3 2% amt at ay

Cro fr ld das at nening, woud
Bee te Wher Me retpgy © oce Ble iapreseagas, “ia ileerians

do anytiirn moritte ter Arpolare, “ . prcrared
Se Taleb Wa ats caw hin severed
erythin: like the e
Sdeans Ipvis> >.
CIA avems,

tlexet to ientotest te th ds:
Conr-nm, bit, © + thebet. 89Gb
owas whiter Pees lon

hore. Said newer siy
FID art Polit amen,
in "st: > A", are noth

$e Nahjouh Be rotate 4 fen Aveb,
Zhe cahjorh deciined tal

poltt.ra.

Lig end diener in: tone
otha faintly revee-SLins

tH
|
1

Sateveroees

nn i i

Taree ncariainies ESE. 5 7 Siang

pretense

$305

tee eam geese neers



--- Page 185 ---
14-0000 a to . . oe !

Through London Station's liaison with JAGUAR wo are sometimes

. able to monitor the reactions and attitudes of QRPHONE/1's enenies

within radical circles in the J.K. We are forwarding, u/s/c,

In this case thoy

copies of two such recent JAGUAR reports.

were particularly helpful in undorlining the continuing need for

attention to the cover backstopping of QRPHONE/1's sources of,

income. | te 2

Aaron C. LAGINESTRA

Attachments: u/s/c Preity) om Kio
stated above 5 oY) qed

Distribution: . : an
- C/MOLIME w/atts
- C06, London w/atts

1 - C/EUR w/o atts

:

CP SER Ie ED Cr) =
OsPA - = 2118 14 October 1969

Gpugoaga Oyo Or Say
Seen Sreartes eee Be



--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

_Bonths in Italy. |

- 2. roctg 8 Le __
tent 2 7383? ss onand’ 4 rd R00 pac au

~ oes soon

YORRIGOA saye Richard GTBSGT is cunning for his bocenee . ‘oe
he fo too involved with OLBS0N's wife dara. LORRTSOS had hed on oe
affair with Sara when he waa working for the “Afro=Asien 7
Journaliat” end was vieiting London. CIBSOT had fod cut, end. *_ oS.
told a conber of the P.A.C, about 4%. Ke in tum told LORRT&GT, | F]
and he told Bara. fhe challenged her husband, and asked how he \ \

dare anrend rumours about her, Once before she had walked out |
on his. - . :

2 WORRTSO? ead CIBSOY wns wo..ted because he 4146 n>t know
exactly what information SORRI8G nos cbout hin. There wae @
confrontation of the two at a meting of the “cco Relations
Inatitute at which GIBSCI refused to eit with LORAISOZ. MORRISOE
asked Kia on that oscasion to rewct the matter to “hie masters",
doplying that OZBSOY wes an agent provocateur.”

"y,  womRrsoy cays Sara told hia chat they live for clove their

poane but aro never in debt, and sno could not wunderetasd it.
That te why oho had started a nursery echool, and no longer 414.
any vork for GIBSON. Previously sve had teken part in @ nuader.
of CIBSOS's eotivities, for instance “the LANCHAIDA attempt to
Deeek up the Vietnan Solidarity Campeim".

4 Once GIBSGI went to the Poreie Press Association claiming
that MORRTSOY nad forged an application fom end ves not working
for "Zenbien Mail". ‘ORRISON is now a weekly contributor to that
paper but was not when he firat applied to the F.P.s. MORRISON ©
saya that at presen’, CIBSOW and his wife aro on holiday for to

-—— i. ~~

.

933039 :

20", secret and reliable source states that.
MaRIQ ALI ie certain that GIBSON is working for
the Americans, He claime that the Chinese have
docunentary proof of this, and for that reason
they removed him from the editorial board of
“Revolution”, the Paris marazine they were
financing. GIBSON head then come to Lonion.

2. TARIQ ALI saye GIBSON is very wealthy but ©.
no-one Imows where his money comes from. roa
time to time he hands out donations to eynopathisers
Saying that thoy era “on behsif of the Chinese".

osaeb .
cE TARIQ ALI also has suspicions that Robert”
“iS, "who was thrown out of both Cuba and
Peking" may be working for the C.I.A. __.

a



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000 : - .

emda
¢
‘

ee Ledel POARTERT and Rohand OTB “"* ~GERPAs ate |

. VORTSCT ome, Pictred ATDSOT te pinning for him beortee Poy. “ neg
ve he fe too involved with OTSS0%'a wife Sara, HORATSOR had hed en : es %

affair with Sara when he was vorking for tho "Afro~Asion - . : ey

ae eR NATH,
ra
Ene

aoe Journndiet® anf was viaiting Londen. GISSGt hed found out, end
: told a menbor of the P.A.C. about it. Ho in tum told LORATSCe, F]
ed and he told Sara. She challenged hor hugbend, end eaked how he \ \

SRA Garton a RaseEear preecenereECtIe RRR

dare anrend runcure about her. Once before she had walked out
on hin. .

2. WORRTSGT aid CIBSON ace worried beoaise he 416 not know
exactly what information :O3RISSY has about hin. ‘here was @
oonfrontation of the two at a nerting of the “ince Reletiona
Institute at which GIBSCY refused to sit with LORUSCF NORATSON
eeked Kia on that occasion to rewrt the natter to "his masters",

feplying that GIBSOS wae an agen. provocateur. . .y ato
3s  SORRTSOT cays Sara told hie thet they Live for ecove theig 6 > *h }
° Boones but are never in debt, and she could not understand it. os on é

Thot ie why she had etorted a nursery school, end no Inger aid .

° any work for GIBSO7. Previously she had taken part ir 6 nuaber ‘es
of CTBSCI"s activities, for inetence "the ANCHATDA attespt to coe
break up the Vietnac Solidarity Cespaig"™.

4e Once GIBSCI went to the Poreie Prose Association olaiming
thot MORRISON had force’ an application form end was not working
for "Zonabien Mail". ‘%ONRISON te now a weekly contributor to that
paper but was not when he first applied to tho ¥.P.4. MORRISON
says that at present GISS0N and hie wife are on holiday for tao
_.Rontha in Ttely.

as - oe Seren ee tee ne ce ee ee ett ne meee,

-¥33039 : ‘
R ola wecret and reliable source states that.
TANIG ALI is certain that GIASON is rorkineg for
the Americene, Ho claine that the Chinese have
Gocunenterv proof of this, and for that reason
they removed him from the editorial board of
» “Revolution*, the Paris narazine they were
financing. GIBSON hed then come to London.

2. PARI? ALI says GIRSON is very wealthy but ~
. No-one knows where his money comes from, Frog
oa tice to time he hands out donations to synpathisers
oes ee they arg “on behalf of the Chinese".
. on “e
3. Fi TARIQ ALI also has suspicions that Reodert
. M8, “who was thrown out of beth Cuba and
Peking" may be working for the C.I.A. _. _ vem ee

Li . : te


--- Page 188 ---
rem

o

. s
or ‘ sgcase sas
INFORMATION REPORT COVER SHEET

Vrouw: : - england, London/LCPIPIT : OgP-737

ny . :

e + 23 January 70 ,
CABE OFFICER: Aaron ©. LAGINESTRA dof ; JAN 26 B78
REPORTS OFPICER: Yoraas C. RULBi ato NC

= WOLIME, w/usster
= LONDON (OK for SMOTH aod sAGUAR, provided source description is
changed to resd “a fairly seliable source”.’

. wae
BRLRASING OFFICER: Adrian MN. WASLOTT ro) ZO

6

i

e

s

o

b

6

9s

6

&

p

bs

Co

o

>

o

»

r

Algiors . :

ty “

Rabst .

Tunis . e

Geneva i? e

Bern . . ea o

Agman ts

Beirut b
Rome

LepIPIT b

b

6

e

°

e

es

id

o

e

°

»

°

»

e

°

s

r

e

a

°

e

ONw mire NaNO

€
°
°
°
°
°
‘s
’
°
e

~

rr ey

DTDORIC/QRPHONE
SUPDATA:

tener 26 tn sete wee

Subject: Orirse Internationa! Coumresa of Palestine Solidas ity, ,
. Comsittees ln Aluiern, 26 - 26 Le ember 1969

Source: QRPHONE/}

Note: Request Headquarters verify and correct nemes. INDEX
participants.

Congress documents gavo several bhuglish translations for
this Congrean. We heve chosen the one which we believe
is the most accurate translation of the French.

File: 200-124-156/4 oo, (



--- Page 189 ---
1400000 . . : v : t-

mmoned
t

_ FIELD INFORMATION REPORT

: pactoRoum uss cnLY
WO FORBIGH DIBSEM/CONTROLLED, ‘DISSEW/RO preser ABROAD/ " 6

secret agpoat HO, QX OEP-737

Dare pxsta. 23 January 1970
counter Taterastional/Algerin

oor 26 - 28 Deceubder 1969 .

Piret internaticsat Congress of

Palestine solidarity Coaittees

fe Algiors, 26 - 28 Neceaber 1969
.

eeoee ee eee e ee vneoeerene

(16 January 1970) neo NO.

aca
soch = Radical European who attended the Congress. His reporting
hes been generally reliable.

Suevary: The First Int>raational Congress of Palestine
Solidarity Coazittees in Algiers was sponsored by the
Algerian C.mmittee of Solidarity with Palestine. About 200
dolegates, sost cf whom were western E:ropean pro-Chinese
militents, attended tho ovent. In the procadedings of the
Congress these ailitents sought to appiy the Chinese theses
of the “People’s var" to the Palestinisn struggle. The
Congress firmly backed the notion that Al Fateh and the
Palestine Liberation Orgeotzstion (PLO) vere one snd the
eame body vith Al Fatah scting as tho vanguard body for
bringing about unity enonog 2ll Palestine comaando/ liberation
organizations. A aajor decision of the Congress was the
acceptance of a Palestinian proposal to create an ioformation
bureau in Algiers. The Algerians cloined that fifteca
countries wore represented. Thore was no list of delegates
end the Algorison hosts went out of their way to essure
enonymity among the participants. nd Summary.

OOO CC eee Kee Fee TTT

2. The Preaier Congres Internaticsal des Comites ’
“Palestine” (Firat Internationa’ Congress of Palestine Solidarity <«
Copaitteca) was held at the Club des Pins conference site
ten miles outside of Algiors fros 26 to 28 Deceuber 1969. It
was attended largely by pro-Chinsse militants froa Western
Buropo. The total number of delegates vas 188 -- 148 foreign,
20 Palestinian and 20 Algerian. -‘The French delegation vas the
largest one present and the most divided into various factions.

Vwevees

8 BCR E T/KO FOREIGN DISSEX/CONTROLLED DISSEN/NO ISSN ABROAD/
BACKGROUND USE OXLY

[2 2m eatnmeeneamntiinaternnet ence nee east mie

etoeoeeseuved



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

~~

zo

Ro ey

. 2 6/80 FORSICR nrsemy/conTeoLeD DISSEM/HO DISBEM ABROAD/
. : BACKGROURD uss ONLY

t ; Pago 2 ofe6 ‘pages

The Congress wes officially sponsored by tho Algorian .
Comaittcs of Solidarity with Palestine.

a“
2. The partidipaats, for the gost part, espoused

the Chinese thosos regarding the “People's war" and appliod

-, these theses to tho Palestioiaw e*ruggiv. while nct directly
eriticising the Soviet pulicien 1: the Hiddle East, it was
evident in the Congress documents that the Buropear ailitants
Bought to do no. For example, they strongly condesaed the
United Nationa resniiitions on the nettlezgat of the Widdle
Bast conflict. The main conclusi-na of the Congress vere: |
an acceptance ef the Al Fatah as ‘oiog the only geruine
Palestiotan reynlut.ofary organizition, and a decition to
eroate an information bureau in A.gierp which will de run
by Palestinians. Tho bureau 11] provide information on
developnonts in the Palestinian revolution to all the
Palestisian committees throughout the world and to all
revolutionary soveuents which support the Palestinisn people.
-3a conjunction vitn these Palestine committees, the lureau
will sponsor neetings, lectures, detatea, film shows and an
sonual conference. (feurce Comment: abuel HaABS ed,
&@ prominent leader of the Palestinian delegation, confided
to one of the delegaten after the Congress that the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) would probably, sponsor _
& copference in Jordan someting in 1970 or 197

ALL CARDs GP -- BAGEIRIA, ALGICKS & ATE ROL eee UenehEs js £ PALESTINE

a - Bowe of the Alzerian participant-otsorvers, they vere not:

altogether pleased with the Congress, feeling that its con- ~—

Be clusions vere excessivol yf, tist. The chief spokesnan for
TS apgzsthe Algeriaos was M’bancd a@2zid, who ts the Algerian

ora on _the Inttgd Nations S urity Coudcil.)
Thien CAREERS Bi 20 te fox mt "y y acad.

2 DIPLOMAT 4.' The delegatcs alapt at thé ‘Zeralda Touriet Center
= ALSEREe, Jocated avout eleven smiles froe the (lub des Pios, and were
bussed daily to the Congress stte. The Algerian hosts sav
tn it that the dclegatior were cept busy and together. Strict
Security va¢ maintained and the Jeicgates had no chance to
taingle sith the Algerian pecple. Trcke vas no List of
delegates and several of the participants used pseudonyas.
pci vet

T 5. The first session of the Coogress on 26 Deceuater,
c ‘Rugcanaeetch included the attemdavce of a large group of Algerians,
ote ‘was chaired Ly Larbf¥B entouni Algerian). (Field

JC LAWYER Comment: TOCSI‘B 315/05108-39, dates 31 December 1969,

ry deacribed Bentouni as tho Algerian defonse lawyer in the -
recent trial in Switzerland of the three Palestinian terrorists
ebarged with attacking an El Al Boeing 707 in Zurich in

assigning tho delegates to. the cumpissions and }}
the timing of the various speakers, such ag qaott rs a 7 at,

© Al Patah’s official spokesman and chairman of the PLO. Upon
SEX the recossendation of a Paleatinian representative, the Congress
Liz Sphisrygted Wy, aasority of 33 votes to create three counissions -
co. . These were conzonly known an follows: Political
c LCENRIMEER Commission, Informxtion Commission and Organization Cossission.
(Source Comment: The Palestinians obviously had cose to the
Congi sep with only one ipmediate practical aim, i.e., to

obtain loft-wing acceptance of the «reation of a Palestinian.
m4 ioformation Lureau.+ .

3 at 6. At the luginniog of the second day of the Algiers
— Sp pttereae, 27 Neceaver, Bentoumi ceded the chair to Nabil
Sesser o§ the PLO. For the rest of the Congress the
Algeriana played no active role, thus leaving the Palestinians
o ME with corsideracl: treceep of sctson in the proceedings. Tho
bho pens.

sR ECRE

(NO FORRICS DISSEX CONTRIRLYT. D1SS.2/ ND DISSex ARQOAD/

Feces ENT act ae EME geen see wee tet

== —ryeugee CouueMtr Id BRA Te boavereetigie with yeene

iTS

”
TUTTO,
eoeeceoeece

rg .
@e

!
Fobruary 1969.) Most of the first session was epee tofa. “aoa ng aip

eovpeseeesvoagensen

a et e%
eouvesvee:

vee

Vy
@eceeaos.

4

t
|
i

ow ae 7 e wwe
seevoces



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

's se 8 s 1/86 FoREION DiS8Ee/CONTROLLED DIBSTH/KO piss ABROAD/ fe

cas : BACKGROUND USB OMY .
O03 - ot . . .

az : . Page 3S of 6 pages
occ : i
4 spalestintons took ovor the chairmanship of the three coumissions \
f

. 74 guided guch of the vork of these groups. A YConrade
# ut" from Parie obaired the Inforgstidn Commision;
jagaen chaireo tho important Pulitical Commission. (Pield
Source dtd not know the uvage of tho Palestinian sho
4a) chatred the Organization cusstasion.)

(22!
7. ‘The soat important Congress document cag <
_ political declaration which bad been Grafted io beep icicel
Coemission eainly by Abu 51 Hausen and (Lhiganya anchanGca,
Ks Britiah citiren of {ndiao descent whe is chairman of tia pro-
ach-Yie’nag Solidarity Frovt (B/s7). (Sourc? Comment:
Bancbanda confided that ho was not con ,letely satisfied sith the
text of tho document, Lut considered 1. worthwhile nonetueless
because it cane close to what he considered vero general Chinese
positions, although it did uot condean the Soviet Uaton by nase..
Abu EB) Hossen and other Palestinians congratulated Manchanda for
- bis success in ramming through such a hard-line political
Gocusoent. Manchanda had in fact dominated the final plenary
session of the Congress on 26 Lecember which voted affirmatively ~~
op tho declaration.’ On ons occasion during the discussions in the
Political Commission, Yarid tried to persuade the Corzission .
fvhose revuolutinnary commitnents he claimed to ahare) that it
shoulé go eanior tn its condeunationsa of the United Nations.

Rr en eee eee RP TP TPC

Bi pti

Siskin She ie

ban, 4
pS BELE TAM é frazil ~ Represented by a youth pancatt CGALL unig
pei ool ite jn London. SEX M oe

L ad. Great Britain ‘two rival delegations) -
Nelegation led by manchanda as follows:

e

. ®. Delegations from the following countrins were °

represented at the vongress: °

. e

a a. Austria - tapresented }y an observer from e

4 M pacow-line Cumeunist Party of Austria — py

9 Ting 22 pec! . gebeos zt) *

Coe BELEIUM 1. FREES ‘= a divided delegation headed hq
————__—_, «5h nly dy “und Rain eNO but which included

ce ow supporters of Jacquti ripp a, a current e

A political encay cf Ratndorg). - m) .

rer reat yom ge y

’

s

SET: Braz

(i) Manchonda, representing the Solidarity
Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the
Arab Peoples, and the Revolutiouary Marxist-Leninist
League

. an aed ory: UK
Qy pine | angtfor f of SE aes Woaen's s
ual Rights Cas baign MEMBER @ES
~ Fr, Eee Ko asl .
on (3) Mike iryiitetes, of the SEAM
MEMBER Revolutiopary Bpraipt-Leniniet League § ¢€rr.ui<
Strive nK

we 3]
ay visner hinawasneca, of the

MEMPEReZiwebatwe Students Yoton in girors_ i (ZENE). (Field
SEX Comment: An officia i Britian Serv Service reported in

August 1969 that Chinemaseaa was expelled ty the
CIT UK executive committee of the Zimbatwe African Peoples

Uuion (ZAPU) “s resigent of the ZSYE.)
DPOB. 13 May 31, usA ea ~ ay SEXM

we is: Richard arate bs bat jourdalist fer “err: u
“Liberator” , Seri
—— reer ore,

tee dane § Wer2iaaas, a school\ieacher

eee

a tenk
eoaee

é

eevenu seve www ww

ABINALS
ee

a ee er

RAB ERIN Ae mt

i

eHow

ae



--- Page 192 ---
14-0000
4

: . ‘s 7 CM w CRO FUlesee WISCAM CUTE. wees tte ce * 2°

: . BACKORGUND URE ONLY eee é
nr 2 fo Oe . . * .’

: ° . . s e.

t s,

- . - Page 4 of gtecea . . se.

. from London who cave es an olacrver . br?

; SESM Fn | eee “

‘ (7) Max Hun t, sClexche# in Landes who e

: ext Sine as ac observer for sac cehoote’ Action

s Union membre ‘

i — aes .

watt “L-: g a co. sanager of the Scottiab

sex M (ay
errs) “vanguard Mookahop at Fis Pataley Road, GlLegow,
which 16 owned by the Susttieh sorkere. Raviy.
. P mANasEe ASIOCS ATES vlog ue ef
ose: Bek wm 20ek a novia ue Vuraks, irom the
saScotttah Gorkera Durty 20 Lives st 66 Tausdee :
” mest Street In Kainiurch

a ee er er ey

sexe

ext. us Delegation frum the Palertine Solidarity Campastgn “SCY
= as follows: FY let
° . ar esgerM? oun x, freasucer of Erienda

Of Palestine en is uow atfitfated with the PSC
— peed
(20) Noraan Fei ple, cf the prienda

: of Palestine . menesrs
~s “ws ~ acl
hk - (8) Abdullah asaaco, of tho JFetends -
ua of Palentine MEME X-—
LUK 4 we vel .
wel (4) Louis akes, at fhe. Young | Liberals
SA EMBER

¢,
per eee (3) an untgontizted girl {riend of Eakes
‘BeAtsior Par Sores 9
PALESTINE rt ta Room Lider, cf agiteprop
r So
SOcIPARITY CAMPAIEN, Fe ere: nae
i735) (pur alker, wie cazc a at 2

otserver
F

eve gel iwc,

(8) wiu?u un. fr Yee Birch’s Ceesunist

Party of Sritaip. Maral: satatst sid af the PSC
é pe get PVEMBER

(9) uave “KJ uo de tl, of tie lRoolut tionary
ry Hoctalist studeuts Foueratiun (R38) 10 *- in
EX (Source Copnent: This delegation had been ay ° Algters,,.. bo
SEXM ky the London-bascd PIO representative, (fnu emeana 24)

who fg apparently the itor of the vevs “Y¥ree
F  Balogg sack. The newspaper, howaver, tists its oditor as
AZ:

ari". Armanazi had supplied the airfare for this

Presi Meadiftan tera

itn Neem nanny
" .

2 delegation vecause he did not vant the PSC people to ga °. 8}
to Algiers under the arrangements of Manchanda. All of ay
the PSC people were young aad no eatch for Manchanda who, 2. &?
fin the final senston of the Congress, was able to inolate ° &/
them completely inasmuch as they -rrosed the recoguttion - . .

. of Al Fatah and the establishwat «f the information — a /
bureau in Algiers.) = ° =r

. . oe!

. * -e. Italy - Represented by delegates frou‘ the a

Italian Communist Party and the Socialist Party of
Proletectan Unity (PSIUP). Tuey decided te Ye in an
. > observer status, altbough they were entitled to ie net,
woo Participants ‘y the fact that they Lelong to a Palestinian
eo Solidarity Comsittce in Italy. The only open political
Oppnaition te the overall palitice: line of the Congress |
came from the [taliaus who pageed out a statement at the
final session dupioring the importation of left-wing
quarrels ines the Lusve of Palewcias. -

. SECRE] Nee BCH

he owe



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

wean ing

wee ee : cee war ae EME me oT

eo.

S ECR E T/HO TORETON OLSSEV/CONTROII.ED DIRSHN/KO DISSEM ABROAD/
BACKGROUND USE ONLY :

3 FRANCE . Page 5S of 6 pages . .
4 ce ,' . ,
4 a“. ft. Fraoce. The delezatino vag initially ‘

XV ‘divided into fartiona tet, or 27 Secearer, eo sort of

N Struce was worked cut aad thore o-s ro overt troucie. . a7
Jpevoninest secabers ofthe delegac.oa were:, Roger ha
ds tidy, ty see turers aut
rerygiint v tts, BYother of Alain © * *
(xi SF. FF Cas Stroy and War{s-Clsude . .
Ate tignau d, the sistr «of Anderrecak VS en bad J sm ol
xe AN” (algeriag living fo varied. 1. os PE SEAM ery: atcental
: B t t.
.& G- West Gernany - The delegation eas cc aposed
£ . privarily of unidentified militants of the Socia.tat
f “x German Student League -- SDS. fhe grcup took a very
‘a 3 left sectarina poaition and joined with the PSC rrom
Eee: ANce Britain io openly refusing to cive full support to the
| ‘3 =. Al Fatab. On the otner baad ths Germans played ro
: 4 os role, spesking only Uriefly fo the Polttical Comission.
[KE ppeRnrsan BE NAAT
i ASSOCTAIC ee AGP &. Spain
° itzerlaud : 4"
. t xt Sw F pel
pie c 4 V- The Netherlands - Repres § obaervern
+3 ly Keee’w an gtendonk and Bertu enpdriks

: HETAERU@ who cane from Amsterdam. (Source Comment: Wagtendonk

—"

t
tit waid that he was 6till a «ender of the Pacifist Socialist

: Party; Hendriks deacrited hizsel! as 2 Marxziet-Leainist.)

. -

; &. Scandinavia - Inctuded Sveden, and perhapa

. two other Scandinavian couutrivs “Suurce Coument: The .

j wuall Scandinavtsa, georp, waich -aze os ylsptvers, was / * asf
it Mm Quided diriay the oreecedings Ly Sumter & outanti

| 3-53 who resiges at .luttacsen 10, Haverster, Stoci.hoim. He

Crp SWEDEN as an Aral jourualist wha chizs to or:ite# tor Lebanese and
*~ Syrian publications and who tad sttondcs the Vietnam War
oce TOURMEUST Coimes Tribunal in Stockitela,s —

1. Algoert: .

wm. Palestine

-- . a. United States - Delegation as follows:
poe aef SEX MM Cryivs
ay nero i oc k,” of the Ad Hoc Coxaittee
WF for @ Marxist-Leninist Communist Party who led the
a ) delegation
, &Y weve? SEX F f2rT.usa
Sf (2) Mre.VR 1 oc k. “wife of Hert Block (Source
. Consent: The Blocks anncunced that <ney wore
F ajtending the Congress under the pseudonym of
Dougles". rsa. Glook.evea wrat to the length of |
z wearing @ reddish wig aod ¢ark classes. Neither Plock
ayes an .
piasy LAT 3 sole ’ } E ©17: usa

prets_3t Av!
=~" (3) Eldriczve’c Peaver, Black Panther

Party re residing in Atetora.

ar re Li ik Heist thalcra se Nasties cama Sth aires Bas ult eiba wee

hoety teen =
<4%) Don“{Lxu). a Nege» (rem Chicago who -
accompanied tho Blocks and whe claimed to be a
.. ee AG IS TS Black Panther iart7. M er ISA
OFe Be? ost.) SEX Siri v
: - ie tle ie Rerqguan, ‘former sender
sec BCAMEER of tae Comauuint Party of HSA tn Chicags who now

- SBC RE TANG FORSIGE CISSOY CONTI SST PISSEY ABROAD.”

‘@aee
etwonese:

ry

Frerrverrrerecy

eeee
ann eos &'e

CVTaMDAaRaAResove

wWweeeevcwwevys
Sea eahanaeae

ECCT ST
eh ee

Tite

A LASTIRRARIR om Man seccpemninrTh te Mens

.

we REENGTE Ly

Bree

iat

|
|

sate epee nine

*e
cone eemeneeenneen



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

eer)

AF inst tamedeeraisd beak cio wits ed Bs Rear et

Sehr ade itp NN

PERI NUTIY DON BER ED I

i
iy
° , . .
8 8 CB .T/N0.FORKIGN DISSOVCUTTRUIIAD HISSBI SO DISSEM ABROAD/
BACKOLOUND USE ONLY “4
. . — Page 6 of & psgen .
cok ae . : ores -
= 7 westdes 10 Gan Sor estesc. oo get
sje ETC YS USM, Carre Me Prk eet “) >
LSA 1 pavidul® fae wan, eho resides in a
i2C STUDERT San Francisce - . - t
rr .
. (tource Comment: . The LS dolegacien eas accompapicd by
two newsreel pags parapiers frow the West Coast, ove who
gave bis oume Fr OTerdecty"ewy Thay only attended che
. ftaal sesgitou of the Conircds ar) were primarily concersed
with lobbying the PLis fas facil<fex tn go to dJorcana to
£ photograph cuerrilty ectisities iocre.* .
. A Sex m Jf.
: esA_
. _-PUSTOERAPHER
: . £
. - -
é
a
s
. . +
- . 4
. i¢
ry
. : ‘
- e s
: & 6
. bss
- ‘ bes
. eo:
es
- 4
e ’ Pel
‘. . . wg?
t - . .

arveny

EERE ELE THD BLESS - NC D(RNEF AEWADS -

_1..Zae-1-SY4
ieee

S&C RE WD FOREIG:



--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

oo .

204060 ,0hOs x ee ee ee ee ee ee .
See el cOn tale tole tet et ef atstotstatats® 3¢5¢
f. OnE... © Co 2 5e 8 eee ee ee ele 6 8 et
- Fy Bee oer ete Pe tere Fete tesa tate atelotetet
ob 1869586 FoF G2 Sat Sok 4d ee Pe be Bek Be be be De ee
. ¢ One 0,0, 6,28 9.9.9.9 9.9297 98 8 &
FILS IS SLE CIS EEC het Pe SEP OP CPE PE oe

ART me +

STE SAS de CT SERINE Vo 6 . irae

| (DISPATCH [_Tressmak

603, London AED

Through London Btation's liaison with JAGUAR we are sometimes

rps
se

mas

. able to monitor the reactions and attitudes of ORPHONE/1's enenies

We are foryvarding, u/s/c,
In this case they

within radical circles in the 9.x.

copies of two such recent JAGUAR reports.

were particularly helpful in underlining the continuing need for

attention to the cover backstopping of QRPHONZ/1‘s sources of

income.

Ae f_
Aaron C. LAGINESTRA

»

Attachments: u/s/c " Br RIDjSP
atatod above sic re: JicG

>

Distribution: . - .
~ C/MOLIME w/atts
- C06, London w/atts

2 - C/EUR w/o atts

to ne nee eee oe cane eee as em anes eee ag even meee oe
:


--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

rk aA a me ae

- - 194 18 le.
tone 20708432 os onasd’ a z 200s a An au

oe ne cee

VORRTISOT cays Richard GIS%07 is gunning for tie decane . oe
he fe too involved with GIRS 'n wife Barn. MORRISON had hed on ae
effeir with Sara when he was working for the “Afrosdsien . _
Joumnaliet" end wee vielting London. GIBSON hed found cut, and”. ©. SS. a
told a canbder of the PAC. about it. Rp in tum told IcaRIgcet, _ / 7
and he told Care. She challenged her husbeng, ‘and esked how he :
Gare anrend rusours about her. Oree beforo she- hed walked out . \ .
on hin. . -

2 WORRTSAT wold CTBSOT wee wo.sied because he 414 not know
exactly what inforration SOXRISZ nos about hin. There was @
confrontation of the two at a meeting of the Roce Retations
Inatitute at which GIBSOT refused to eit vith MORAISON. MORRISOH
asked fila on that oscasion to rect the satter to “hie sastere",
foplying that GIBSOY wes an agent grovocateur.

3.  SORRTSON cays Sara told hie chat thoy live fer atove their
seans but are never in debt, and ene could not undereter$ it.
That ie why she hed started a nursery school, and no longer aid -
any work for GIBSGY. Previously ate hed taken pert in 4 nuater.

of CIBSAI's activities, for instence “the MLICAIDA atteapt to
dreek up the Vietnan Solidarity Canpaign”. :

4. Once GIES! went to the Foreign Pross Asecoiation claizing
that MOSRTSON nad forged an application fom ent wes not working
for “Zsnbien Keil". MORRISON ie now a wekly contributor to that
paper but was not when he first enplied to the P.Ped. LORRTSO *
saye thet at presen% GIBSON and hie wife are on holiday for tro

pentha in Italy.

. ©
.

_ eet we eee oe Pa Re 8 eo re ee te ee

-¥33037 : ‘
2. 201i", secret and reliable source states that. ’

“anIQ ALI ie certain that GIBSON is working for

the Americans. He clains that the Chinese have

docunentary proof of this, and for that reason

they renoved him from the editorial beard of

“Revolution”, the Paris magazine they were

financing. GIBSON hed then come to Lonion.

2. TARIQ ALI saye GIBSON is very wealthy but ~
no-one knows where his money comes from, Frea
time to time he hands out donations to eynpathisers
seying that thoy arg “on behalf of the Chinese”.

4-(0874+6 ¢
sf TARIQ ALI also has suspicions that Robert
3, “who was thrown out of both Cuba and
Peking" may be working for the C.J.Ae . ete tere oe

-“

~
7

°e



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

rey

FQ Leaded FOUTS and Ricnnsd Crna "GBP A- a

meee me ere cowne

oe tes VORTEC? <ome, Bictent ATBG? te pinning for hia beers £
2a he {6 too involved with OT350%'n wife Sarn. LORATEOR had hed en

Se affeir with Sara when he was working for the “Afro-Jeien “Se 7.
ace Journnliet" end wes viaiting London. CI3SGt had found out, and” oS.

told a eanber of the P.A.C. about it. He in tum told NMORATSOR, 7]

nnd he told Sare. She challenged hor husbend, and caced how he

dare anrend runcure about her. Onoe before she had walked out .

on hin.s .

2.  WOMUSAT said CIBSOY exe worried beoaise he C10 not know
exactly what inforvation ; 072183" has about hia. ‘Shere was 6
confrontation of the two at a meeting of the “tase “teletiona

Inatitute at which GIBSCY refused to sit with KORQUIS!. MORRISON
caked Kis on that cooasion to rewurt the satter to “his masters",
feplying that CIZS0Y wes an agens provocateurs ae

3. MORRISCT cays Sara told hie that they live far scove their .
° Deans tut are never in debs, and she could not unterstend it.
hat fe why abe had aterted a nursery cchool, end no Janger aaa
. any work for CIBSGK. Previously she hed teken pert ir @ nuaber
of CT3S0%"s activities, for instance “the AICHATDA etrenpt to
break up the Vietnam Solidarity Canpatm".

4. Once GIBSCI went to the Porelen Press Association claiming
, thet MORRISOe had fores4 en application form end wes not working —
for "Zoabien Kell". ‘%ORRISON is now « weekly contributor to that
paner but was not when be first applied to the F.P.Ae MORRISON
seys that at present GISS0K and hie wife axe on holi¢ey for tao
__Rontan in Italy.

£33039 :

R 2o}-A secret and reliable source states thet.
tpnic ALI is certain that GIAGON is working for
the Americens,. He clains that the Chinese have
documentary proof of this, and for that reason
they renoved him from the editoria} board of

: : “Revolution”, the Paris nagazine they were
financing. GIBSON hed then come to Lonion.

2. TARIO ALI cays GIRSON is very wealthy but ©

no-one knows where his noney comes from. Froa

® tine to tine he hands out donations to synpathisers .
. saying that they erg “on behalf of the Chinese",

pp s087+b °
ZR 3: TARIQ ALI also has suspicions that Robert
. MS, “who wes throw out of both Cuba end
. Peking" may be working for the C.I.A. __. - wee ee

wo



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

reewanne

|

TAT

UUSTUS RR REVOKT #221, supe : 9 men Gen “Fe

Subjt PRASLU.WT BEN ALIA'S VIC b-

PaDar Ben Bella's epert-ent, Villa Jol,, 2-22. Jen A

MB. BEX BELLA RELISTED AXT OF THASS VIEsS RE GPT PRIVATE.

2.The worst of crieis in Algeria fe over, and relatively speaking a broathirg

spell fe vere, Opposition ie mii, with the etd nts and lator unions won over,

th Federition disbanded, othrr oproei*‘on dispersed or ton “norganised ts bs

. effective, and the people persuaded to aive Ber Bella's gove-n ent a lengthy
and sincere support to overco @ Algeria: probla-s. Por th ‘ret tle since
cverging fropripon, Ber Bella is gettioe elx or seven hours eleep per rignt.
He te relaxed, oblm, confidert.

RRS wl MRR

we,

2e Algeria's groateat probla: now te recurs ructiun ef tis economy, ineluairy,
housirg, caricultrual refor-, dare ard irrication, and sow made. In this
Tepect, foreign aid fe cesential. He vishes ‘hat takks with the U.S. could
etart as soon as possitig, and feele tio best wetnod to do thie is to hsve an
@comale delegation visit Al:erfa to see on the snot the needs and special
e@nditions., (He resate: several tires that he wisnet the talks eo 1d ctart
as soon as possible.; Ae for aid, he does rot wish aid “which will help us
eat better r have « higher sta-dard of living” but rather aid “wich ult
be of a develop wntal, constructional type" to pormit the Alcerian esonom
to wip itee’f. In renly to the question whetner he hoped ~ore iid wuld

cove from the U.S. than f roe Pussia, he child °l hope so, I bope oo." (He
gave tha ali-ht icpression ne felt the U.S. wae much better equinped to aid..
The prelizinary estizate of the goverrert co mittee for tha reo nstrusticn

f Algeria Stomzerbemtectxt tive 6 one turiret billion france. This figure
might gv higher, but the final fig-re will be what Aleerts ill ask fros Freee
in tional help over the next two years. He stressed his sppreciation for
tha! rican Achassador, ‘r. Porter, eavine one of hie wet walushle qualities
io that he astually lowee t's Algerian peoplo, « trait extremly appreelates
by his and the Alperia:. pwouplo.

3. The above he p is in adiition to the rovuler againistrotive midget and

the operational budget. The eduiniatrative budget of 2K) billion france is

a balanced budget, with reelpts -en watally becawe of the new taxse—exjected
without fail to equal expenditures. ie rentioned several ti es that Algeria

fe too proud to ask anyone akbe to pa, ite adsinistrative budget, loee, pa ite

Tunning ex-enses.

f
be On the question of tre eouncy, there «ill be a code eotablished soon which
will delixit the private and public sections of the eooraoty. He wes peeved thut
eone pocple do not ballews there will be « private section, and sald “People
will soufday 1 arm to take re ot -y word. If I didn't wan it, I didn't hase to
eay it. And if I change -y wind, I will euy tiat too, and I iil give the
yeesona, But, there wil] be aprivate section of economy, am! we do want foreign
private invest-ent.*

jo Land reform ln Algeria is and ll be en aqeriment never tried anywhere.
re will be both eollective and state farw—Ben Bella does aot belleve in
giving land to individual pease te because cu -up plots are coorualeally
un-produstive. And in ary case, the question of oo muna) lands has bear « trite’
@ato: in Aigeria frr thousards of years, wich even thle Frenc sould never ~
erase, en the new arrer‘quents are tut «@ alight change froz this asc:ert
o To butrese this enu ne. Patios te tne £ ae that the Prasants ate
“"Secte / .



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

iL

Em vil

already aecepted with oo dirficultiss the so:smral erranges nt for the one
milion hectares of Bien Vacrnte (cbendoned french lends) now bel.g put into
production. He contrasted this with the resistance of the Russian peasant
*waieh caused the alauchéor of Ei lione of Russians from which Fustian

- agricalts e has not yt reeorered®. He feels oven if produstior an these
million ty ctares is lower than it wasund. r Yrench control, it is dafinitely
worth it, since the profits wn't go to on. rich class whieh eperis the money
on tho Rivicra but will greatly boost the peasante’ otandard of livirg.
In thie respect, he was dofinitoly rot in agreevont with Prof. I-mont's
wajor eritictccs of Algeria given on § January, and co told t e professor in
private.

6. With respect to Cubs, He was disapnointed to return hone to find thet the
missle bases did oxist. Hie uain hope in vieiting Cubo—es he told President
Kernedy quite frankly but’@ rrostly®—vas to help lower tepemtures, fs had
edvised President Kennedy not to invade, andhe hed advised Castro to be more
Gloerect in acceptance of are. The end result «io not digappaintwont, however,
cings ®no nan em be disapointed if « melear wr hae been ewided.”

J. The U.S. reaction to the Yous revolution disappointed hin also, end he felt
UhS. early actions were .ristakes. It had eppesred relations between Cairo

and Weshington were going to woll prior te the Yercn crisis, endit hed been

@ eho to ruin good relations. U.S. reeognition of the Ropablie of Yeron
howgver was highly colosns to hin, and he feels thic «ill @ euch & retum
U.S./Caire reletions to the provio-is high plane. .

@, Wath respect to a Urited Morth Africa, he feols the tive to act is now on
e caltural and cooncnio lewel. He fesls identics] textbooks, exchanges of
teachers, cult rol excharges, lowering of frontier custom and eduinistrative
barriers, ete. will start a movecnt hich in the ond will fares constantly
greater tnity, oven if the politiclons don't really feel the tins is rips.
Ho feale thie és expecially true in education and the axthange of economic
edvanteree, sich as procud ne clectricity from Oujda for Mamma or Tleseen
instead «f fron Oran.

Ye "Upon his honor es a can* he ewore he nor any Algerian hed anything to do with
tho attonptod esstcsination of Bourguiba. He aleo felt sure the two Youssafiers
in Algerie, who are good friends of his, had not ing to do tith it. He felt his
friendship with these two pervons ucht have led to scophekiees cuspicions that
Algeria was inwlved. He said "th t in not sy way, and I have too meny probleme
of my ow to arddle in Tunisian afairs. It wos a plot wunted andsupported in
Tuntols itecl?.*

Pali

RE SOD TE;
mame eras

10. Porsonal informstion gained: DUB 25 Dea 1914, “aria, of parents born in
Karrakeeh, Xorogoo, seorndary stulics at Tlansen college, French amy in France
1937-40, than dewhilised, then Freangh arey 1943-45 in Italy Wore he received
4ilitery . edal and two otiiers (highest medal possibie, and he was firet of thrice
eo dec rated), then back to Alieris. In 1945 he was in Sth Moroecan reginent in
Sotif when 45,000 people were slaughtered, which martad his entry into polities.
That ection branded hin for life, and he realised that foree was the obly answer
to Algeria's ery for liberty. te does not hate tho Prench in any way, however.
That is in the past.

+s Both et tir beginning and the en! of the ever, Ben Bella rasarked how eacn
tine we wet, he wes reuinded of the “fine” ties at Tleseen and how wich he apprech ¢
the help thoee broadcasts were tu hin. I delivered the tea eat he hed requested in p,

—

aeeitry



--- Page 200 ---
1400000 _ U

 UUSTREA-R REFONT #222, K lga Fan
Subj: Anericars/ ‘are Schlaifor/Michard Gibeon/Afrique Rewlution
” papis Home &¥ Jean ilarke Boeglin (Jeancon tetwork), 7 Jamuary 63

SADE BSORAING OTIS LE

o Bcagiin eshedaled en infor=al Cisecssicn between Mimeclf, Sonlalf
J Exit dood F fron tho Union of Bo th Apvice, and Tees Meikise (onanseis) ot
iathiou apartment. rae “The death ifthean dante comes, Be
for Bchlcifor who speaks no Franch. The South African didn't appear, A)
wd ware Jelned Litar in tho cvening by ® Pranch Layer Hoariea len who corto
in Bueno Vocarte and ty Francois lan, another Jocnesn watacre eraraster.

2. Boeglin hae eecepted me as beirg wery leftist, *objestiv®, ond portups
oven coremmist—an inpreseicn I havo metured vith hia. Thus, bis ecssptance
of cs @9 o like-ainded pornon gave confiderso to the cthersa

Se 3_ ho evening was 0 Goeueston of the Cuban cnt Algerian rovalutionas Schleifer
ts nore or less the araale, having teen in Cubs tules, once for to maths

Bse 60/dan & end recently for nins mntha. Fersonally, I folt Schleifer is 00

emtsercly 1cft that he is e co minist in ov rything excep’ porters the ear’ ani

Dr RD

suthore, Lsnin. Ea is aloo fussy in that be cece to ccapest 0.5.
es propaganda poottions and docs not assund tho m3 cae for.

FE
|
f

@ wealthy stzceph re. HK thicu
srinisetion and distri Of and ene Carne An tne UsS. no Gore effostive

fecret >

nic


--- Page 201 ---
14-0080

tail diel

ey
re a
ee i i

eccticn
Hathies

Nakjoud
Rah jcc
to
be on

of ext to

Bde
over th noxt few wockse At Zerelda, the renional scuitor turned eut

Af

the Bisns
te

tigh
ost up
ett es ct the OD office & Jamary and emt =o on a visit to exscmmal lands in

of

fintal
ecries

of
ry

fo
te

6. Borglin reuseted Msthisa, who
Geoaling vits eqricultures problew
hao'given ae earte blanche for a report in d=pth of the ontiro
Pienon FLH office, and 1 v9 pemitted to photograph any and
To finish this report, I will be fumiched ith eospilte

Srete

x”

7

nee ati om

a

i i

BA



--- Page 202 ---
14-0000

+

pone
iso

USTRIK-R KE US? (223, Lulpe 9 Jan 63

Sebje Rerwested list of contimal contacto, for which -suireoentes ere to be
tailored. .

1. President Ben Bolla sceus to enover quity frandy v-atewer cucstion I pose.

2. Comandant Sli-encs alippery in questions, but +: evidence! desire to mike
recorded Interview whieh will “shock* #serive o> 11 Cever subject I chooss;
3 Algo has sug-ested 2 report on the amy of the pouty vith hin as guide; has als:
ogreed to explain arry eystom to 14; aleo han tgree: +c intereed Mth Pureedlenns
to permit -2 to photograph Anwolen treinees. .

3. Braham Bousars hae sewod up Gendar arto end Arcy <‘! contreeto for Spel) and
geeo army lead-a frequently, worked on bidget with ©. ediunag is earriot to
eister of Hintster of Finanes Pyancing etop—daughter + rried to Bedjaoul of
Bem Rollste office.

he Dre Had§ Hascu ond brother of se10 pane who works in Pinsnes sindetrys has
suggested I arrange inforcal reeting with hin and Ao... dor Porter at wy hos.

So Yohamed Hagjad; forver Director of Scourity, now | > work in Hinistry Poreign
Atraires to present o to hie succeswr Yousceffi.

6. Jemal Kieri, Direstor of Tourlen; good friend Sec :.ty Direetor Tousseffi,
Madjad, other faportant goverment rember.

Te Jean itariea Boogtin, for er Jeaneon hetwork sow u--istart Kintotry of Infarration.
&. Ywou Hathicn & NcFYoub (ponmtis) vf lens Yeoo:t. .

e With: KI/b, now Algerian tule.

10. Mare Sohleifer/ Richard Gibson, Jvorican “leftis.c", connected with APrige
Revolution.
: - to fint
Mi. Louls Aletti, Hotel Alettiy youd friend of Chine: dzebassedor, agreea/and
prodises generally any inforsation 1 request of him. frowp met bloe paoplu.

22. fru Babi (in spite uf lack of Siretnexo, we are juite good friends  exshanse
visits frepiently), foreriy with Shell, novin Gove: =nt offices dealing with all
OAL questions,

13. Noha ed Yeuid, deputy; o ee anxious dwepen gur ol. tut rather Licht friendship,

na

ie


--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

30 dan 63
Stj:s Contacts, Jan 25-29 Jan.

av Serge Michel: Saw him Alttt’ hotel, his house, and three tines my house.

He says Yasid is de facto Minister of Information now, and wild becom Minister
of Information over the meat fee weeks or ronth. Michel ctayed with EL Chand.
Yong enough to get it on its foot, thon x:ved on to plans for Atlas. When Ahles
fe established, hs will move on again to Looks on Algeria and cne-ehot publications.
Ho ie ming to the Congo in carly April for 6 week to gether exterial for axtices
on Angois and the Congo. He is taking the Line that Lannedy and Doruechov are
®alites®, with De Gaulle and Keo ao enaxicos thus Al;zria shoud ut apport sor
attack either one too much. He feele tho Afrique Eetvlation is raking poiitical
mistakes in this respect by attacking the United States (presumbly with ap
article 6n Heredith & Mississippi) and can be termed the extremes left in Algeria.
Re foele Afrique Revolution will be taken over by Atiss staff in siz ncatha or
less, and run on Slices violent beele. Serge teiked of bis ancestore, exiizg they
wero all froa Gcorgia, and that & tronalotor uns used when he telkeodth his
grand paronte who snly spoke Georgian rot Mmssian. He ie en epatride vith a
KHoroccan passport (which 1 eaw but @ukin't get the mmber) which comains his
Rationality ae Moroccan, as opposed t< other Morocezn paseports for Algerians
which have the mtionality lined through. Rio father wag opatride also, and

Sergo eleizs he focels nore for Algcriu than any othor country. He exrivod here

-tho first time when ho was 20 years old, and from tht tine lived vith Algerisn

robalo. Ho is Al years eld now. Ro has three boys, ebout one war, four end
oix, elt with Musaien first noses, end cocuples a vilia in Hy¢rae Els tifo
epeake French with an accent, Russian I believe. His infant is vary sick uith
ethssa. :

2, Bishard Gibson & wife: Saw thea in hie office ex remut of his rescost for
Be for Dave Katts in New York for the latter’s “Liberatoy® publicstion, ubich
Fhe leftist publication uith a format scathing like a crose tovueea

and Tho Wew Yorker. I gave him fourphotos without ey maze, tut he

iinhetea on putting ny nase on the back for credit. Ha sald Katte wuld pty m 7

Girsctiy, oince he nad my address already. He aloo caid I would probably get
photo requests from London from a person whooe mane ho didn't remacbore

Porson ond Watto are aloo correspondento for Affiqzs Favoluticna in tivir cities. wy

Ero. Gibson io white, and appeared to a to be jarss, probebly fra

Judging from hor accent. However, eha could be foreipn cinse the ecovts ig
difficult to pisce. Eduardo dos Sartos was in tho ofrho, tut wom't very friendly.
Gibson knew of iy trip to Angola, pro probably. fros doe Santog via the Congo cubssay

in Tonks, and wanted come photos when I returned.

3. Joan Marie Bogglint Pooglin phoned mo, after having missed @ lumheca with

Be lest week. He has acted on ey request to spenk to Jacques Verges about usine
ea when possible for Afrique Revolution. Vorges is to met me tanrroyv to discuse ©
photos. T an to bring ons—violent action if possible—shich is to bo uscd as the
first cover of Rev suiog, if it ie a suitable phot». Bocglin wili be there, and

we arc to meet today to plan the conversation with Verges to make sure I benefit.

be Dgeal Tohanderli: (br-ther of U.ll. ‘Chanderli, although name spelled difrerentiy).

Be ease to xy hose with Michel. He is going to the Gongo to file Arcolans in
Taper tapi Rn thereat Bhagat bolt Adil gos Sereda ary I
extracting a proaise fren his that be would mot take jyphotos,

Teaving we that monopoly in axchange for the flim monopoly. He & Michel feel

re related, ian ol tes emereneeeie ea

TARR ARES Rint me 7



--- Page 204 ---
14-0000
. : ‘ t

80. .
. wt

LUSTRIPHR RFORT #211, Kulna

— Subj: Cortact« [f-302 Jamar.

‘le Serge Michel: Saw Alm foir times at Hotel aletti, discussed m:tly Satlas®.

Ae ed %e to orepire atx eslor covers in adv-rce, first one to illustrate ancient
Corbusier oler: far face-liftine of Auzeria wich is now planned by Alzertan Goverrrert.
Claims Afriece Rev-lutinn wi.) be “abaurted” by \tiaa (probal .y nth one r sare
editorsiip:. Sbterts olde: phored Joaie Fa:on fro. Tunia, he will be fin Rune
Saturday, wiil serd <= ticnet and visa for corso fron there. I aa tu deave soon

A forribie.
2ylouis ett, abo.t sixty years, 220 poonnts, 5'2*, white hair, biue ees, Prench,
ge\worked ir. st. severti years in i920'«, speaks Enzlish weil, friend of sost

be td ‘diplovste ineludi v Cilrese, in secep-ed ty Alpertara as being anti-OAS in
spirit. He clatas the cast Gerran move tment ws full recognitlon by th Algeriars,
cited Ben Hall atverdarce at national holiday of East Germans, thougn Scharfenberg
fe only Crarre iasffairs. Gave -e Chirese a. asap actress as 35 Rue Luciani, EL
Blar, phone $'7-4F. Sill h.ve .¢ tu cure with East Germans wenever I wish.

3. Talib Jarai, Hotel Aletti & the dty. Jaai nat difficulty with reporters of
Republiquediceric sd -as in rare ower “st-.pid ¢-tmuniate*. Avain clained Irving

ai rown var Cis arent in front of a Prerch mito speekerines
watt Sle
D aj 4, .Brahan Bouzar, at ry home and at their homs.

5S. Fru bu 2ak, pollce sucment officer, plus tw cf his fricris, at Rora. Bothine
of interest except the turce of the: very ideali-tic, insieting everyors met work
to maxtgm for miniram pay in order build Alveria. Seens to be typical attitude
among yours Ak erians. .

/ 6. zerati fFolice ewmrissioner, Les Peeneries for sunch. Sxtrenely pro-Avericer,
Ne po talked of all his OIS friends frva Horocco at 3en Guerir while he worked in
Marrakech. 4e should be contacted by someane under official cover as betre
“sent ty his 51d CIS fricrds* or sim suc: ploy. Ye can te developed.

fT
: “vr?” 7. Abdelkader “a-ery (phonetic), Secret ry Gererat of tne Asse: bly, ty home.
‘ othing of i:terest, but he is quite likeabie ard ecrtainly of importaree. Nill

see hin agsic rather frequently.

SEStSrsts ii teteaatss bay



--- Page 205 ---
14-0000

rare:

motes

as

QIUSTHIKER EEFORT £552, Fulpa
Subj: Contacte, 30 Jan— 31 Jan.

As Jean Marie Boegiin: Sav hin threes tines, his howe, ofrice uf Revolution
Africaine, end Brasserie ¢a Derry, 30-31 vamery. He Crrenged meetizg with
dagmes Verges, Director of Revouution asriquo, having told Verges that I

was “practicariy a misitant® whe would unvk wols for the cause instead of -
the salary. He also ofrored ne the Sexsiisive® job es photcer-sher ror the
Inforaation Buresu of Dicns Vacants, wits ali expenses for triza ete paid ©
for ty the einistry, but «ith wory littlo extra salary. I eccpted, szyirg
thet wes 4 gooa mthod to study the refomes-egraire ceenly for an etticie.
wee Hathica wins bo xy tocs in thet Job. [ocglin then took re to thy Opera
thore ne nse 4n ofrice in cszacity ez Tochrical Director ef the Matészal ©
Theatre. He requested no to furmish hin wlth piotos he could use for the
Teatro posters and for tne progress for the :inst production scoduied An ~

widtarch. I agreed.

2. daeques Verges: Sav his 1100 32 dan in tue orrice cf Esvolztica Africains,

of which he ig director. Hedéxce Ratan bitet ie to be the editor in chef of

this publication. Verges izzcdiately ofrercd ng a fod es a reqtar calaric?

Photographer of Powlution cr es a fliecorcal pootegrerpher. I icvicates I -

thought peysent by the Job ws better, cime xy cover outfit is mt “liberal?

es I ca. Esgular salary for everyone on the papor, Prem the lowest eccrstary

to Verges Lizveif, as decided ty Verges, ia to ba 100,CCO fronss per month.

My Jod paynente wil eanurt to about thatamsh. JZ will take o trip cee @ wock

with Goorges dyno (phonetic) to do photos cn tha fcature article on Algaria

for each wock's publication. Verges alco orcsred elx Protos fooa rs Croa gy

contest prints, end took one Fuote on ths erot for the cover cf +2 second

Secusg due cut 9 Pebrary. Tho cover of the firstisers of 2 Pebrvary is to

bdo a Fucto of Lueata. Verges took ce around to irtreduss rs to the rec’ of

the stagf—oll alien characters who hardly caid bello with the excsption of

Cinst, the ex-Expresa cartoonist--and showed no the pysical leyext. Wo itiaa

invited me to the opening escxtail party for Saturday night aleo. Moeglin scter
- ald he que quite impressed with sy photo collections 8 2 gs, -

3~ Serge Michel: Ces to ry hone 31 Jan when I wasa't bene, bit talked idth

hin from Botres' house. Michol hed with hin fan FLA respodseble*-«n0 wartyto +

comission uo to produce the photos for en FLU publication, elt: style one-uhot

worming to discuss it. We wils take a trip into the Eatgls arca to otart these
shots of ween. . --

re Bisral Tchanderiis Saw bin sow tow, cold he wanted to dleecss wncthing
_ Szportent with Se, made date ior tonight, but he didn't show. W411 ce him tom:

5. Talked by phone with Tony Peli and Frenk Kearns (directing C23 Paris since
Kleizan is in Eew Tork since Caristras with moored sick wife—to my be getting
fired) in Paris. ‘They are extreeely interested in ths Congo trip, epprove it
* fully in spite of leaving radio uncovered Lars, want both radio broadcasts and
. y ttpes. Also want ne to moot movies, and insist I exke « deal with
Tehanderli to percit ne to moot movies. fa to plone thea tosorrow for latest |
word from Hew York ca actual requirements ani possible prexius paynents for

but prozented as 8 “woekly®, on Algerian wurde We set to a meeting for Saturday -

wee he eta

Patti:

pay

AMESTUBE.chva.-p



--- Page 206 ---
14-00000

aeRO APTA one ee nee nee

ee apnea ae ete ete cee pe Tet een eeangtineeten sere tare +

'
i

ER EIR SERNA SR meg eten fire ae

cnearcarn
SECRFT |

- PROCEED aCriges
anaes? fon eae

Sot Ma caiaata et RRRUERER REN on 2 reRSomNRROUTE

W174
Aciioa: FY! zt
RS: Isdem thia dlopeich to O71 Ele af Jacques wt? Vergea.'
wt Fresch ciiizen, Director ef pro-Chinees Communal | “+ ,

yo fat S ", Also index to 201 His at = 7-.,
oT ee bora oer Seamer, ra Caen, Ediiertn-Chict of

the English lengunge odillen ct "Reveluticn”.

14. Forwarded, horowth, ae Atlachmont { to ‘hia dlepetch ta o copy of
the ictlor olfed In the reference fram PADBAYONSI to Jeoques M.
Verges. Atiachmest 2 lo a copy af the repiy written by Richard Giheoa
en behalf of Verges. Atlachmert 3 la a perecaclity akeich ef Vorges
proparad by FADBAYON/.

2, Rogarding Attachment 1, Tilek to a motual friead who currently to
studying tn Cancds. “Algerian Sictor” reforo to Jemfila Beuirkesd. Th
wemainder cf the atiachmente are bdbelloved to be scll-explansiory.

3. Headquarters exked (DIK 05476) f PADNAYON oould furnich any
ingormeiion en Hamsa Alavi cf Pakistan who to on tho Editorial Hoard
@ “Revelufion", PADBAYON/! hed aot previously heard of this
individual.

Atiachmeonis .
1,2,3 as ataled Edmund F. LAHSENE

Distribution:

2-COS, Paris w/et
2+ C/NE w/o
2- C/WE w/ott

2- Fics

Bore


--- Page 207 ---
14-00000 . . : : # '

Peers

3

. af
_ Jecgues Votgeor “ 19 March sand

Phyoigal det vlo

Verges to abowt 38 yeare old; abogt $'5* t2li asd of menium build.
He te fair cslored, hae « Chindee-looking ‘ace and woare ep-ctadice,
He has dark halr and dark eyoe.

Perestage ~

Verges was torn in Reunion leland which tr « French Protactorate,
Hie father te a citizen of thal Teland and B's metiar wae from iNido-China,
Ne has at want one cider brother. Tho father wes a Member of tho
Preach Partlement representing Reuntan Telend, Now the brother Paul
Verges, to a Membor of Partlamznt from that felnnd,

Martial States

Verges wae maertiad about $046 bul wee ctyorced in about 1959. He
haa one eon from thio marriage, li tc now Leara thal he hae married
again tn abowt 1363 to Jamilla Bouirhead, the famous Algerten prisoner wh.
wea sontenced to death bid wae givon o reprieve. tHe defended her during
her trial,

Pereonn) Habits.

Vergeea wae © prominent stedent In Marie acd was trom the very
beginning a very good jobetor, He io a charmiig convernationiiot and can
keep any oudience completely enteptaurod by bis talk, He has been ci-
tremely pupuler with oil groups and partiouiar with fomalee He le very
fond of eating well, He takee apicy food which would pul evan an Indian

to whame, Heo drinke roty Mite, woerke Late novrg, sieepea iong in the
morninge., He hav af artietic lemperament and good laste, .
~ Career : . oo 4

In about 1950° Verges ctarted working is the International Union of
Students in Prague. There he was Secretary of 1.0.3. and later aleo
of Telornaticnal Students’ Relief which was tormed mogeor ives in hie time.
He remzined there Ul 1954, Afler thie he returued to Parte and etudied
lo get hie law degree, From about 1955 to 1967 ho worked ae o lawyor i.
France. Aca lawser he reese to prominence tumediaiady, Ho wae electe-:
to the firet Secretarvehip of the French Young Lewyere' Body, which 1
@ post of academic diptinction, From the vory beginaing Verges started
taking politcal cseee of thcee who were accused tn tin vertous French
colonies af “eettiion®. He wae edopted by the F.L.A. of Algeria as
the Chief of the Legal Delence Bureau in Paste. Hoe conducted opveral
famouse triaie including the: of Jamilla end af the samo ume carried on
the campaig: for Algenan independence in Fraace and elsewhere. For

Stop

|
|
|
|
|
|

a ae ene nce tN
 errwncetna RSE SOTO N cs Et ee hi BS «a anh
°



--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

wet.

Se eee er AN AISI

Le eRe HSE PEE ES IAT

come Un~ he war in trouble af tho nande af the poliucal groupe oppose:
to Algetisn independence, Me wae provited « guard auiside hie house

end for a litle while had even to leave Franco to live in Coneva because of

fear for hie iife. Even in tho legal defence hut be wndvoted. the basic
wee entirely volitical, He wee oll this pestod eubecribing to an eziremist
view which may be called wire-revelutionsry.. For ozemple, in Ne legal
Gefonce hie theo:y was always to juaotify en ect of killing by an accused
@@ the ground thal | was pert of @ war cf independence.

Almoet trom the very beginning and in any case from 1451 Verges
had serione difference with the French C.P. He considered them to l-
Peformete and eccuesd thom cf being cowardly in their exppert to the
Algerian revolution. Ho wee nover e member iboreof in this period en:
Ben worked againel them. . .

In 1062 he ebified to Rabet ao Poliilcal Adviser to the King. He
was very friendly with a Senior Minteler, "Ahinod", and Bie poet ia
Rabat was brought about by the Minislor. Howover, & appoares he did
hot continue long in thie poet end waa beck In Paris in 1963. Now be se
the Chief Editor of a politica! monthly journe] celled “Revolution”. We 1°
@eo reported to te the head vf the China Lotby in Parts,

Acgisintance

The writer mat Vorgos in 1951 when he viettod Delhi. In 1055
the writer elayed with Vo: ein Perts twice and twince again in 1958,
The last time the writer saw Verges wae tn Parte tn 1963. (In 1958
Vergea wee in Welht In connection wHh an 3,.U.S. meeting. In 1955 th.
writer wae in Parle on tio wey to and from Prague in connection with
1.U.8, twettare. In 1958 he visited Paris going tc and trom Stockhoit
for the Youth Feetival Preparatory Commities meeting. And tn 1961 the
writer wae tr Peri to attend an I.A.D.L. Commission on Algortc.!
Verges tise alwaye been very triendly and co:dias with the aries and
openly diecuscee his probleme, views, activities, otc.

“see PREIS Fe

SA aE.

ae



--- Page 209 ---
14-00000

wee 8 . w ae
IEE Guarana” SreOmMSANOe
AGG | aE
mete . Ww. . . ee Sa

eo ol

AGUAR have reported thot
source aad provided inf informatica « “

2 RTGS

the Joornad estebiie: an Itty * the

is 163 sahog Lost, waa bora in Galifornd a
3 Ss EtiVvA f pte

Cy ma ths (e CSET Gi DSO

pre ously exp loys Cod nets in iow York, eho cismiaeed
for proycuban activitioss He is also said to k-va
worked for tho FeLeH. in Paris and to hove had a Fellowsiip
in African | Studies at Columbia University Graduate school

at ono °

2e JAGUAR would appreciate any additi 4onal infornation
background

that Headquarters could provide about this man's
and activities. P

ee eee

LAWRBHCE Le HOLDY

Distributions
4-chief, VE


--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

Msn ne oe

JAGUAR Comaent:

FROM: ENGLAND, LONDON ______DATE.___2h Soptomber i968
WUMB2?. OF NUVE31 °F

PAGES: Lanes LTTACHMBNTS

REPORT [AY

BABS BY: LESOY 7. WADSWORTH DBT: _SICTO? F. CRONRIGH

DIST2IBUTION BY COPY TO: _—Haghington 1

BOURCT, oP OPSRATICNAL DATA AND COMMENTS:

SECVZT CONTIOL/US OFFICIALS ONLY .

8

REPOIT yr NUMBEA: Q2L-3? 25: ‘

c

Parte (LCPIPIT) 2 cHw
Paris 1 OFF

Bern 1

Registry

van 0S
Bs) 2EFERENC3 OSLA-41,545 of 10 Sept 64.

“The attabhed report contains somo futher information
(see reforence which was not sont Barn) about the diffi-
culties experienced in recent montho by “africa, Latin
Awerica, Asia Revolution’.

“Please do give contents of this roport any further
distribution, other than to ODACID, WASHINGTOH, without
prior reference to us.*

cS cory

'. SECRET CONT30L/US CPPICIALS ONLY .

GROUP 1
3xcluded f-oa sutcartic
doengreding snd
Geclassification



--- Page 211 ---
14-0000 ; 3

we,
a5
i neem ce ern ee ee
i Ste epee _ . .
i .* . . . 7 .
_ . * SECRET
| sO
{ Le
| Rucuaro’ son .
EE Se Ope Ue
: es LAvo a out 4
; AE GAT AM, Asia Reva" sePt oH ty -
j Gt Tek.
LGOAW ActioN + £1 S00 DUE WIM WW Pesr
i PALARY. SueT Moesv't Exocer 5. VERGES Wit, OF ~

O AFRICA, LATIB WGAGA, ATA

4 escret eoures bcs provided ths
folloving information about "Africa, latin Anorice,
Apia Revolution and Sto French occatarpart ‘lovolutien*
end ebout the differencsa votwaen Jacques VERE, ths
publication's Dircetes, a4 fichs-4 CID who tas
BAitor unti2 be was dimicss3 ebous tuo months ego.

2. On 13th August 1954, the Suica Peders2 +
Comeil banned “Africa, Latin Accrica, Asia Revolution’,
which hal bithorto tem printed in Lezesmns, ani ths

‘ Sica mithoritios tocs posceasica cf previcus icausg
end cutccripticn iicts. CIDKI cos bewsvep eble to
retein poceonsicn of ene cony ef tha gubsoriptica Mev /
en voll a2 distribution sscomds exd moat of the .
wapubliched aanuscripts.

3% Uhen O1IOH wna rasoved fron bis

poaition en [éitor cf the publicctica he ani his wife

yore owed a cubstcnticl aut in ercara of salexye oo.

Seoques V-oSC} made no attexrt to ray
S

* JACQUES

an
g
a
o
a

ad En mar can

ae EAE SR NE ee ETE ge 264% tne RAEN

AGE Bb ey, --

+ tre

+
ey

2 a
obmemrinine voor

or
ntenk.

eee ns nee ‘se eewwten

*
an



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

AWAR_AD. "AP LAT AM, Psa Rew- set! oF tome. --
BGA. AotioN «+ MW £1 SCO Due NIM WwW POSsr rey

RALAGY. Bey Doeew'l ExPecr 3. vVERGeS with 6¢

O sPRTCA, LETTS HEIBLA, ath DUE Aoce w_eay :

following infomation shout "Africa Letia scerisas
asta Revolution” and ito French ccunterrcés “Covelution®
emi ebout the diffarmeca Sotwanmn Jaouc-a VOC, the
yoblication's Direster, axl Richard Gilg whe ean
Baitor vatil bo was dicnioas’ about tuo coaths afd.

2. Om 23th sugtst 1964, to cules Fotere ~
Comedl Beruod “Afrion Latin Anorida, ‘cls Pevoluticy’s
wAaich bal bithorto Lom printed fa Lawccma, md the
Pisa authoritica toot posssesias ef pourlous domes

end cutccripticn licts. CIR vas boise chlo to
rotein pocacssicn of «9 copy of tha e:“-cription lied
ea woll os distributicn recorts enf Bocs cf the
wnpudbliched canuncripts.

3 then CIDS3 was zoned fron be
position es Céitor of tho publication bs cri his wife
ware oval a cubotmtiol ews in orsears cf calarye .
Jacguss V-255) nase no atterrt to pay ticce exteaTe
with the rent that tho O1D<Js tock lo) sotica anf

+ pooaived juigunent in thoiy favour early ia Coptenber
for a ora in oxcoae of £2,500. GIECY crveots that
¥.2023 will tc cnabdle-te pay this am cz te most other
Gebto and that to will bo Goolarea barcuyt. CTE
Bopos that it will then be possible fer Lilo LID IS,
the Svodish printer of thd Enrlish edition, to take over
Both the ingligh and Fronds oditions. ~

, ; eae caning CDooanss of bis finmcla) difficulties 1 “AF cat Am,
fina Rew sh Cues TWslON Les bad to clive up the tananay of the Paris cffico | .
the jablication at rue Frengais lor, cut has moved $e . -

ree Oalanta, Paris R.cracg G.0sen  eapectS
re wet one cklored nankrupt. > -

4 ‘enecano
Pe inTER

Mos wesascy C-
. . ba .
QwWEOISH PR.WIER OF ENG EO:

*“Richaro Gtawv wre Sar .
— eS eS
OIL Take HER Corts ENG +

S\\9 a ° Fa eoricas =

SECRET
Ko yOREIGS DISSEM



--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

7 DISPATCH | ....:, be"

—
r
Chief, WE
=
7 C7 ~ KW sare? a=
: Chief of Station, London IS CZ Ee
Jaogue VEROES & Richard T. GIBSCH Pepelles from Switserland

seats fF
REFEREBCE+ OFLW - 20652 (9 Deoender 1963)" °° ¢ °°"; .

“~,

1. LOBEFOaE reported on 17 January 1964 thst Sudjeote, both of =,
whce are sentioned in reference dispatch ouncerning Eovolution i
(OIBSON 1a a US oitisen) and were werk:ng from that YON Te

publioation's Lausanne office, tevo left Switserlend at the request: wt / .

of tho Bwiaa Uvornnent. Acocrding to LOBEPORE, O59 departes =o Ad :

Bvitsorland on 25 Novesber 1963 fcr Latin aserio. ibly Brasi.};»* 1

and GZBSON departed on 15 Decenbder 1963. ae a
ae

2. LCBEFORE believes tnat in part it can taxe oredit for ve

theee oxpulsions in view of the fact that LIBERA :tinepire’s publi-

_ Oity about Révolution Africaine bas appeared ir

“and thet thie publicity helped tc draw the matt
authorities’ attention, thue proapting them to e.;9. there two
propagandists.

on

3. LOBEPORE sleo noted cn 27 January <

1963 teaue of Révolution Afrioping liete Li
(ané Parie as the Hain EEC) Woersae tue Cotcce

listed L
bureaus.

the November
@ burea.
awd} teeue

* - Lb ee Zz

LLEB 3.

. Cama ly
3- Sts VE en aga Mess as
‘ OY a a yhice.
Lacan Ge Fh mn Ups
fe peor eb ne ee gh:

Kaacqed verge? Bebe monet ee, a Ry
Whe pee ces Mer? Me © Os camer te 7 CS Capp
ch Re vcly te} Moe
yeas * tae

Gureqies! eC ae Spt
de pe SL. tw
wpeecve 3 Fe lated age
en bly Brat,



--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

mong

[ DISPATCH |

Chief, KUBOLF; Chief of Station, “pari:
tation, Paria (UCPIPIT): Chia’, KUDES

fation, Londop

REF: OSLA-40,542(15 April 1964)

I, Reference forwarded a JAGUAR paper ‘aaltog aith the
well-known Communist magazine Fevolution, Atte. hed are (1)
another JAGUAR pote from SVOCKS office, aod (2) the paper.
Feceivod vith it. Please note JACLAR's caveats on the uce of
the aateriai.

ait 7 al SKIVPISH aleo remarked to 26, on one recent ovcarion,
“ttat be bad learced that Richard GIBSON bed bea expelled fror
the staff of Revolution (ae in tadicated here}, but the reason
that SMIMPISH gave eas thet GIBSON had bean acc wed of workizcg
on bebalf of “subversive” elaxents, ehich SHIM IsH taplied to
mean KRUBAKK, Maybe SMIMPISH! wee speculatiog co ur sisquotiag
this JAGUAN report. f haveu't been ebie to go Lack to SMIMPISH
on this, became he hag suisnequently gone on leave,

3. de (and JAGUAR) would approectate any comtantsa oo
thie report,

Ceorge KE BMBACH

\ me

Attachment: herevith : :
l-Letter : .
2-Report : . :

Listributionu:
3-Chief, «B a/att b/w
2-C/KLWOLF s/att b/w
2-C/IAPIFIT watt b/w
2-C/KUDBSK w/att b/a
2-COS/ Parts wiane fara



--- Page 215 ---
14-0000
. : . '

. . . . a
. oe
eo _e . .
i * . 2p . .
. ° *
-° .
_¢ «| AFRICA, LATIN WCRICA, ABTA REVOLUTICN™ = a
pot A . ,
} .
. . Roporte received fron a number of sources nake 1¢ olear
that "Africa, Latin Amorica,. Asia Pevolution” has been tn diffioultics
. for several months end it appeare chat the last issue wre No. 21 dated

March 1964. The trouble began, ay,arently, vhen the French authorities =~
eeised copies of issue Ho. 7 of the French edition, “Re olution", dated
o , March 1964 decause of un artiole 1s contained on French overseas :
territories. Creditorn bocame alcrned, fearing that the publication
wight be tanned, end dunanded eottiement of their debts ow Wb were then
ef or eatiaate’d to exceed £10,000. Cacc-es VERSIS, the publication's
Director, tried to effect aininist: @ econacies in orter to cope .
with the situation tut aocording to VERGES, A:shard GIES, tie
Editor, argued that th» Coinese ekculd bo aaxod to pay the debdte.
Hatters worsened wher, again according to VASES, CIESGS persuaded the
Lousenne printer to wr.te ic Peking and ask the Chinese to settle the
+Ppublication’s debt to .in. VIRGES rogarted 373S0s's cotivities as

an Goliterately dis=a; and designed to produce proc! of Chins’s
support fer the puti+o tion. .
. 2. ; Aloo, VEGLS ocnplat 2 SIESON wee working for

Communist splinter erc.zs in Curose 70
international Cossmun-s: =ovezent, ad tha
with the magazine's sg:rts o74 contrib:tors 6 situation vas
that VERCES visite? th» V.K. in rid-culy to tiscuss the position vith
ap Fay, a senter of the dtiorsal Pound. BAR’ now Minteter of

0 decrinent of *:

ore™ State for Developnert “Luring of te United Zepubiic of Targenyike
ard Zanzibar, wos tr. Léon. for the Commonvea.th Prine Kinieters’
Conference.
. 7 3 in July 2924 there vore retour

sc were denied ty
. elisione should te
tho former should te ished in Lerdon. at stout
Detweon VERCES ond GIE ON Lecume cor. end t2e la
' fron bis positicn as zor and fron the Edtrorial Board, viich tesued
the following “warning ':-
7 6
“Cagadas fron New Yorx, Loricr. and Accre (Shara)
kave Tatsed uy evavo charges agains? A:czar ‘
These charges icve teen confirced ‘arc underlined ty
Pickard GIESOY's zresent diszuptive activité
Eevoiution's 2 iitcrici Beard nos decided to dirxiss
Rickard CiSS0s fra: cll his respors:t:iities ari exzeil
him frox tke Dlitorial Eoard.

. “rex row on, Richard GIISC's activities can not
ve in ony usy engage the respanesdilicy 2: of she review in
vos glk dts editicis. ~

for the Editorial joare”

& sizilar statevent m3 publiabed in “Revolution” vo. 10-11 dated
July-august 156... :

(sac qes eeces (20. -mm 1 FOIWY) DCECTOR
OF RE RICA , BB LAtIV AMERICA , AMA REVLON
ExPereo Rie HARO BALM COITER, SEC ADE
tatweg ARLEO THAT CHIMEDE Lg, With SIBSOS .
aL O CC ASKED TO .

PAY Gm BIS cH APLALICATIONW.
SECRET °

Ore mary



--- Page 216 ---
14-0000

et tees en nee ng enna ener ae nen ecient emt tie

ee ect eceente necctatn Sheisines tone ae

4 With O©3S03 out of .be wiy, VIASDS and bie supporters
vere hoping to resuse wblication of tue Pnclish editia.. OLESG! also
eeened determined to curry on and 3% hus teen reported woot as early.
ae June 1964 he ves oryuiring into the possibility of publishing an
English version in the Yetherlandr

5. The only other charce of sicn:ficance vhich has
oY) ao cogyrred Joring 19€6 hus teen the seoigrasion from tie TSitordel Soard
[Va lanea“ALAVI who obfsoted to the publication's cro-Ch.nese attituto.
Ieeue No. 11 of “Afrioa, Latin acerics, Asis ion’ ekovs that ke
wos rephased by cnother Pakistan. tke 7é year Maulana abdul Hanid
i Ban IANS, EXASHATI, who liven is, Zast Faxietan, te the seater of
tho National Avani Par-y.

ad- 0703 43

lst Septonter 1%4.

Haman ALAVI
Cir. FAK STAN
REMENED FRO

’ 2bannw AMseica

OO83ECICO wD se

wine de ATE EOE

; Fe La,
Cmavcawe ABRs HAM. ny KAAN BHADSHANI :
CAOL-OTO3YS) LrvEd EAST PAK TAN tT FD
LEACER CF NATIONAL. AWAM. Paert, ow
EQ nce AL PLARO CF HELLA | LATIN AMERICA,
Do Rvcrotte nw" REPLACLO FAMIA ALAN)
WHO OBJECTED IO UTS PRCH Cerne ATT ITUGE =>

PERCE

=

ines

AAS

"< RicuneoG.msons CVOL- Jeu c$2D See LEO FREM
wT Saree OF AFRICA, LATE BOER A, FOA

7 a ‘ ~ng ren 69

Reever ve tioN FACQLES VEC GES Roe 5 Gr

ATEMPT 1 Mave Cemese PAT P-A > 06
Den-enGO re FREE

: “OCLIG OsKoPIvE 7 = .

5 Gare ats BePRORT, TROT HS UR Re FoR ve

ae eRoufS FZ CETR Mant oF .
com amintEeR ry CELLU

vo
nreR NAT Com, , .
ne T LES SCY aa Tet Pas aecnTs - ;

Cewter ®WTORS . ? .



--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

. &C Bow ¢-rO Futese WISER 6 Te ue 2s
. BACKOROUKD vas ONLY Pho,

. .

An SONA Ht co emetic,

{ros Londod who coxe af an 'olsorver

: . SEAM Fons] ore
: @) waz hin an sCleuche@_(n Landen who
xt Sine as aa observer fog, ae Ase weaia Action
Unlo
tates F ate og. —
SEX M (Qy watt "L- & ao, wanager of the Scottiabd

Vanguard Kontshop at Ziu Pibaley Qoad, Gliusgow,
erry which 18 owned by, the Svu:ticl Rorkers, Raviy.
P mAnasee AISCCEAIED We ie reer
ees 0 (0), navia we VE ans, trom the
caScottiab Corkera Party 20 Lives st 66 Tusdee -
Street In Kéiniurgn .

sexmM
ext UNS— pelegation frum the Palertine Solidarity Campatgn ‘PSC?
. as follows: let
° a anc o ung, preasueer of Erienda
. Of Palestine oer is now atfilfated with the PSC
rn |
(2) Noraan YT oa pile, cf the Friends
of Palestine . ' PEMber
- oo at
_ Es . (4) Abdullah We s A aco, of the Friends -
sa of Palextine Bempe
2UK 4 wegrl
wt * (4) Louis akes, of the Young Liberals
: SL EMBER
“Arertxar ee + Fay (5) an untgonti ited firl [rctend of Eakes
“A ~ oe hier er on ee
PALESTINE ee (6; ‘rou a tlie Tih AgitcProp
. SOLZOARITY CAMPAIGH. (a PST ecelor) Fy weet. =
7) (tu alker, viv case 84 an
observer .
AS a2
(8 BALL Guu we firch’s Ceaaunist
Party of Sritain. Mara stat and of the PSC
ve re a! MEMBER
_ . (9) Dave “3 a “4 e 11, of thelRevolutionary
uu Socialist Studeuts Fouerotion (A5SF) 1n London
x (Source Comment: This delegation had heen se oO ens
SEXM Ly the London-based PLO representative, (fou reana

who is apparently the tor of the sews: “Free
F Ealogg sac. The pewspaper,hovever, lists ita oditor as
os yp Ani orar Armanazi bad supplicd the airfare for this
‘t ‘delegation vecause he did not vaut the PSC people to go
to Algiers under the arrangewents of Manchanda. All of
the PSC people were young and no xatch for Manchanda who,
fm the final sexsion of the Congress, was able to igolate

of Al Fatah aud the establishocnt «f the information |
bureau in Algiers. } “2

. e. Italy - Represented by delegates fron the
italian Communist Party and the Socialist Party of
Proletsriao Unity (PSIUP). They decided to ve in an
‘ > observer status, although they «cre entitled to le

we Solidarity Comaittea tn Itely. The only open political

. a oppnsition te the overall palitice: line of the Congress
cane from the {taliaus who pases) out a atatemenor at che
final sesaioo Jepioring the importation of left-wing
quarrels insn the tusve ot Palesciae. -

rad) Fonet REISS IN al

ISAS) DESSEN ABROAD

them completely inasmuch as they ~ppoased the recognition . .

participants 4y the fact that taey Lelong to » Palestinian

FevTeveccwe

nN

b dh dtndind dd adh tk kn

yy

“TCTeCTGeeoveves
eeeceverecevron

@eeede’



--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

a ‘divided into factiona tet, or 27 Secearer, o sort of
Wtruce was worked cut aad there o-s ro overt troutle.
Roger of

Jperosinest peabers aL: the deleser.on vere:
Sur y tin Sf Beiversis uy EyealcanePisereg™!~ .
igie oy tfaus! Rav t wo, her of Ajsio . .
AF Cra. astroy and Mar, Cisude

igoau d, ibe wistrens of Aiderrecak "8, 52h" d jt ol
(Algerians living in paris). — eo ef CIT: Alora

‘
6. West Germany - The delegation eas ccxposed
pricarily of unidentified stliiants of the Socialist
German Student League -- SDS. fhe grcup took a vory
left sectarian ponition and joined with the PSC rrom
Britain io openly refusing to give full support to the
Al Patab. On the other band t's Germans played ro
role, spesking only Uriefly ion the Political Comaissios.

s .

evevoetvTrervs vw eases vweuverws LASSER SRSA ABR 8 ee
00 2.0! .

poe ceecemenkmnse ewtepnaee medee a
.- 3 7 oy : 7 et
8 EC B E T/HO FORSION DISSEY/CONTROLI.ED DIRSE'/NO DISSEM ABROAD/ °
BACKGROUND USE ONLY : ; ° e
: . , . ° + e ,
Pace 5 of 6 pages : . e
an : : : e
al . °
~ : ¢. Praace.- The delezatino vag initially e
°
°
°
°
s
e

wietiweonenee®

eoveen.
ae ee oe

: é ABDERREEAS. SENNA TI
| Assectais of N- ®&. Spain
- Switzerland oO
: -* e ra Fue, 7 !
— Le ia ~ - The Netherlands - Repres 8 observera
ly Kesa*¥ agtendonk and bertu @epdriks ea

1 Me razetioas eke cane from Amaterdan. (Source Comment: Wagtendonk
seid tnat he was etill a wemder of tho Pacifist Socialist
Party; Hendriks deacrited hisself as a Marxist-Leninist.)

&. Scandinavin - Included Sweden, and perhaps
two other ferandinevian countries “svurce Comment: The
. j sas)l Scaodinavts. group, which caze as poevers. was 2 * Uf
j ~x uM Ruided dirsoy, rhe orevcedings Ly sSupir © ou tani
: ‘, who resives at .tulracsen 31, Haeercten, Stochhoim. He

Poa) eee

1-53
Sc-> SwWEpEN is an Aral journalist wha chins fo .rit# tor Lebanese and
: OCG Jounnausr Syrian publications and who tad st'caded the Vietnam War

Crimes Tribural jn St eckholn. +

B. Algerta

i<J
°

uw. Palestine

aa . : : a8. United pointes - Relegation as follows:
++ aot SEX err:usn
ay nernV% { oc (ree Ad Hoe Committee
. es 4 for & Marxist-Leninist Coanunist Party who led the
. ) delegation
a wer ve) SEX EF <orvr.usa
; sa (2) urs.“ 1 oc k, “wife of Hert Bloc (Source

fy, Compent: The Blocks anneuaced that *noy wore
ending the Congreas under the pseudonym of

en
AKG, WU pouglas”. Urs. Block even erat to the length of
wearing © ren rhs wig and cark glasses. Neither Plock
ows vv am sole.) )SEXM CIT:uUSA

“~~ (3) Eldricve Veaver, Black Panther
Party leader & residing in Meters. r .

Codsarecivane

‘wh Virdee we eo whe

wot y Thon :
<a>) Don LNU). a Negs> {rcw Chicage who -
accoapanied tho Blocks and whe cleised to be a
wsester o° the r plgck Panther rye

we POR: S May 15 vom ¥ yt EXM SAT: USA
- 0 tle ie Revrges p, WTormer sember :
sce BCUMtEPER of tne Comaunint Party of WSA tn Chicago who ace

NTR) SS OLN? DTGSEY ABROAD.’

-S BCR EK IVNG FoRsIGs LESSey 10

yoann AF cement nr oe a
a,



--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

BACKOROUND USB ONLY

. —_ age’6 of @ pagen .

. oo re wee tne eerie tag os
. . J . ‘

8 8 CBB. T/80.FORKIGN DISSHN/CONTRUILED DISSE SO DISSEM ABROAD/

fa

eS vesites 10 Gan Srezstene.,
- se USM, CALIF Qryp rie )
= USA 3 Davide F foe wan, who resides ip

oC STUDENT
——ee

San Franciace . . . a

(Source Comment: Tho 1S dalefacien ons accompapicd by
tuo newsree) page cg Piers {row the West Coast, one who
gave bis rine Mirdecty"eyy Thay only attended che
final seesion of the Comircds ‘J eere prigarily concersed
with lobbying the PL.) fos fact ies to ga to Jorcap to

! photograph guerrilis artisitics incre

‘sex m
CIT: UsA_
. - LEC: PHSTOE RAPHE R
. o£
ad ”
1 .
-
. -

VETV OT ETT evrwvew

Te
DP bio.

oat

a
“4

2
i °% :
on a
Sa) &
a A
2 i
rs 7k
» 3
bos
oat
big

e e

e

° e

. e

a

‘e

e

. a

si

e@vevewew wre

s

aoe
.

Roe eeee”

eegecaeece
(ee



--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

Pa

eS RENEE REM

KGYEAY
CUA vi

ACTOR QUAD MITES
REFERENCE: O8LS 6746 (7 January 1964)

ERTS ARRSENEATE >

ek

. ad

1. Reference authorized the St-tion to pass the 3 Jan- . 2
uary 1964 issue of Propaganda Notes, Series H-40 (b) on fe
Bubjoct Chicom-financed publication to liaison, : ba

2, We passed the KUBARK paper to SSOTH, LCREPORE, and
JAGUAR and requested comment.

. 3. JAGUAR's 3 April 1964 response, prepared by SHOCK,
is attached. Ploase note the caveat in SMOCK’s paragraph
five; and that SHOCK indicates in paragraph four that the
JAGUAR response is on behalf of ICBRFORE and SHOTH as well.

9 Syo7 2
za iA Us Yes i a

LUKE B. TANCHRSTER

' .
Attachment: herkith

1. SHOCK response

2. Note “Africa, LA, Asia Revelution”

Distr. tion.
~ Chief, WE w/att.
1 - Chief, EUYOLF «#/utt.
1 - COS, Paris w/att.
1 - Chiof, LOPIPIT watt.
1 - Chief, KUDESK w/att.

Peta
OAL LD

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

ay

aneteth coerce ae

St.

a OS nat ne,
}

ceetinnt tae —
enliaeet RS et. + y Tag armen tt oe enna



--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

pCR ROD RREA et. aerate y nests 22 eaten ne,

a ee

i
|
i
i
,
;

;
|
|
|
|

gh

SECRE T $912952 we

DIR INFO ROPE LOND cre PALP 6112

DIDORIC QAZBONY ovpneyl Oy .
REF ee sini (o/ fe06s). LL a ‘ 2D

Bo

RUT

URGPRIOVY REPORTS HIS FAMILY SITUATION DIFFICULT
BECAUSE HUST LEAVE APARTHEST | JUNE AND MAKES LOT OF
DIFFERENCE WHETHER? MOVE IS PERMANENT CALLOWI!S Loua-

TERM ADVANTAGE{OUS LEASE 09 PURCHASE) CR TEMPORARY?

IF STAYS LONDOH WIFE CAN GET JO8, 4¥9 IS TRYING AT

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR FAMILY PLANNING, “HICH

WOULD INVOLVE TRAVEL NEAR EAST ETC. WIFE ¥OULD NOT

WIND STAYING It!) LONDON SUT WCULDL LIKE ROME AS VELL. >
‘

IW ANY CASE, DECISION NECESSARY. YEQUEST ADDEE TCMMENTS,

2. @ WOULD LIKE HAVE WIFE IN SCE OFR AT LEAST 3-4
DAYS DURING HIS END-APRIL STAY THERE TO IMPROVE HER
MORALE (COMPLAINS SHE NEVER GOES ANYEHERE? at:

MAINLY TO HEET CAROLE PINA, A3OUT WHOM SHE HAS HEARD.

MORE INVOLVED USE OF PINA WILL REQUIRE PUTTING TO

REST VIFE°S JEALOUSY. PALP REQUESTS AUTHORIZATION

TRAVEL NOT PER DIEM FOR 0 WIFE TO _ CREI a « :

20% -124-/s6/e.
Be meen Ge



--- Page 222 ---
14-0000

ad “Africa, Latin Azerica, 4

@ ey co. -
mee qh tg
. -t. |
. AFRICA, LATIN AMERICA, ASTA . i i
~  BEVOLUNICH : é
t . 4
Stisia :
The ronthly publication “Africe, Latin Azerica, Asis Revolutios®.

ie the successor to “African Revolution” which vce the monthly Paglishd
digest of the Algorian weokly “Revolution Africaina’. ‘Revolution >
Sfricaine", which io published in Frensa, first appeared in Vobruary > oi
1963 with the declared aim of holping *o build soctaliga in dfrica. In :
order to increase its offectiveness it cegan to publish a matbly edition, _
"African Bovolution", consisting lergecy of saterial selected froo previous
desues of “Revolution Africaine’. The editorial office of “African .
Revolution” was cstabliehed in Lausanne, Switserland by March 1963 and the -
iret decuc appoared two months later.

.
—
te
t
error pre
EST RES

Fat

a

eset

/

MELD

a

2. Then the first editor of “Aevolution Africaine”, Jacques Kanscur = - = *
VEROES, wae replaced by Mohamed HAZBI in May 1963, bo left Algiers sad

took control of “African Revolution" in Lausacne. After two issues had . te
Deon published the connection betweon 1¢ and "Revolution Africaine” was 7
eovered and "African Rovolution"” bocaze “Africa, latin America, dota =~

Bavolution”. In Lecenber 1963 the editorial tcard soved from Lausame to

Pario, and the publication now eppoars contkly in English and French,

Githough the two editions are not idoatical. Tis former is printed in

Sui tverland and the latter, which catrics the title "Revolution", is printed
a Paria.

a Rovolut:

3. The Editorial “Burope too...” in issue Yo. 8 (December, 1963)
urged the Europoan working-olass movexent to taxe up the revolutionary
struggle. Thus “Africa, Latin Acerica, Asia Revolution” made it clear that
At intended its message to have a world-wide azzlication. At first, .
however, it had directed its attention to the destruction of colonialisa in
Africas and the establishment of national inte;endenco and socisliea, and
bad later scknowledgod tho logic of ite arguzentes by changing ite title to
“Afrios, Latin America, Asia Bevolution™.

lee fo begin with, "Africa, Latin Azorica, Asia Rovolution” did not
Give tho impression that it was advocating any particu'sr brand of ~
Goolaliea. The Editorial on "Ideolcgy”™ in issie No. 3 acknowledged the. .
existence of various types of socialies in Africa and recognised that they } 7
were based on the "profound logic of experiecse". In time, however, it-
beoane increasingly srparent tkat the publication was lending ite support
to the Harxist-Loninist theory of revolution, acd the Chinese Cocmunist
iptorpretation of it. The princizal article in iesue Yo. 7 (Hoveaber, 1963)
which had the anodyne titie “Third World? Which Third World?", was largely
@n exposition of tke Chinese Communist attitude towards the national
liberation movement, drawing material and ins;iration from the Chinese
Coamuniet Party's document "A proposal concerning the géneral line of the
Zaternationsl Communist-Movenent". (This was the lotter, dated 14th Jime
2963, from the Contral Committes of the Cainsse Communist Party to the
Central Committes of the Communist Party of thé Soviet Unions it is a cajor
Gocunent in the ideological dispute between the two parties.) The article
oontained the following quotation from the Cxinese letters

"The various types of contradictions in the contemporary world
sre centred in the vest areas of Asia, Africa and Latin Americas
. these aro ihe most vulnerable areas under inporialist rule ocd
"the stormcontros of world revolution dealing direct blows at
fo dsperialia:.”



--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

policive ani at tho sare iim0 to donigrato those Communist Partios which.
Bapported the Soviet lino, the Editor'nl in issue Ho. & refarred-
soornfully to "tho proponente of tke ssacoful road to soolalisa™ and the
““ezuncon of the rovisionists™, and Previsirod tho ond of tha “isolation
dn which revolutionary darxists have oeen bold tocause of tae. :
Fevislonisa of the leadorahips of the Comcunist rertios", Clearly,
therefore, "Africa, Latin Azorica, 4c14 Revolution” supports the Chinese

. Cammuniet arguzent thot it 48 cost us! ikely that socialiea can be
sobievod by peaceful xoons.

5. "Africa, Latin Aserica, dois aevolution” bas for tha most part wy
abunned theoretical discussion, althougt issue So. 9 (January, 1964) bas .
@ heavier idvological contunt than provioue issucs. It has nade ite
copes in oxtrosoly practical tormss ite rango of subjects has been wide

dy HO mosns confinod to politics. éppondix A contains a list of the
artiolos, end the namue of their authors, which Lave appeared in iscues
1 <2 of “African Revolution” and issues 5 = 9 of “Africa, Latin Azerioa,
doia Revolution".

Chinese Support and Influence ‘

6. Woon VERGES was in Poking in tke early art of 1963, the Chinese
egresd to take out 3,000 sutscripticns to “African Revolution” and these
were in due course traneforred to “Africa, Latin dzarica, Asia Revolution.
It de quite likely that this vas a form of subsidy and, initially, when
the publication sold for 5s. Od., 4% was worth £750 a month. dn article in
“Wovewook" dated 9th Karck 1964 refers to a roport that the Chinese Exbassy
da Berne provided the publication with £25,000 in 1963. In addition,

esob issue has containod at loast ono full pag advortiecnont of Chinese
Cocaunist publications. In thoss cireuzatances, it ie not surprising

that it has baan stotod that tha Chinosa aro in a position to centrol to
ecce oxtont what appoare in “Africa, Latin Amerios, 4oie Revolution” but
to clear, roliable inforcation is available tc show bow this ia dono. The
pudlication kas also had contact with tho Goinuss through Abdul Rahman
Mohanoé BABU, a centor of tho Editorial Board who is row Minister for
External Affairs and Tra¢o in Zanzitar. Ho visitod China in 1960, booame
the Zast African corrsszordont of tha Suw China Nows Agency in 1961 and
went to China again in October 1963.

Giden Support

| oa A Spanich edition of tha publication was envissgod as early oo
May 1963 and it has baon reported that moxbers of ite ataff have been in
touch with QGuoan diplomats in Duropa with e view to the latter editing the
proposed Spanish sdition. Thare ia however, no confirmation that it has
yot been published in Spanish. It cay bo that this Cuban connootion was
of assiatance in providing the pictures of tho Cuban revolution which
@ppoared in issues Yo. 3 (July, 1963).

tho Cozunist Splinter Grou nthe U.K.

8. By the ond of 1963, “Africa, Latin dsorica, dsia Revolution” had
established contact with the Cocmunist eplic:a: group in the U.K. which .
fs sympathetic to tho Chinosa lina in tco Sinc-Soviot dispute.

Publications of this group = tho British Coczittoa to Defeat Revisionisa,
for Conmnist Unity ~ were advertieed in issues So. G and 9, Anarticlo .
on "The Fight Against Zevietoniem" by Michao! MoCreery the leader of the
@®oup was pudlishod in issue No. 9.

i ~ _ oe cee
Q _ . Oo a
H ° secary .

| . -
qo, o |

| As if to cxphasice the extent of Coineso influence in the publication's

|

i

CS Ri

Seeeenidin ees amen ee

.

~/Stett, Baitoriel . .

we nie
TMT 6 pel ee TR ECL etme ict a epee Pete ete nt one ee ae gy



--- Page 224 ---
14-0000

9. The following percons are listed in iscue Ho. 9 as condere of the
Editorial Steffie .

2 f Rireotor Jeoques i. VEELES
° BAdtoris) Boom) Hansa ALAVI ~ Pekioten
: AB. Mohamed P:BU @ Zansibar
aeiloar CABREI. ~ Venssuela
Ricberd Thomas OYBSOZ - U.S.A
Nguyen KIEN ~ Vietnaa (Tate rv) polieved
. te bo a pamudonyn)
Hassan RIAD © UAB.
‘ Castro DB SILY., = Angola

The eave names aro listed in issue No. 6 of “Revolution” as meadors oF
the editorial stafi of that paper. ¢ -
10. Secret sourcas havo reported that the Business “anager of

“Africe, Letin dnorica, dela Revolution” ts Nilo ANDERSON, a Swede, and
the Legel Advisor Bornard Arthur ZARDER, a U.k. lawyar whose main task ie
to chook proofs. B3risf pen-picturos of soce of the individuals :
prewinently concerned with the production of tke publication are given in
Sppondiz B, from whick it will be seon that, of sie ton porsons nened in
this poregreph and paragrepe 9, at losst three ars Coccaniste and two

\ Coneunist ayapsthisure. Appendix C contains detsils of the Féitorial

. Office and Agencies. .

* LS and Circulss fo:

ll. “bfrice, Latin Anorica, dela Revolution” is published by
Heuvellos Sditions Internationales end ie printed in SwitzerJand. Tho
Olroulation of the -Engiish edition is believed to to about 20,000 while
that of tho Franch udition, which 4s printed in France, cay be as much a8
50,000. The English edtion ie given a worldewide distributions


--- Page 225 ---
14-0000

Sane ae emidhibmine Balsa memees mecca fe? Pa crs cca aerial I mf pete see

mt. Te :
111. Tho Com=une of the "For Grosn Sosscne”

LIST OF ARTICLES THICH HaVF APPEARED IN TSSUES .
“APRICAN REVOLUTION" ond ISSUES .
Bou $ = 9 of "AFHICA, LATIN ALTRICA, ASIA

Boal - 2 of

“unnitus amie
| Melung 2 Buster 2. (ay 3963)
PY S AS
to we Siswo

For Revolutionary Unity

Blita, oar Ona

Yenons £ Yaw Soginning

The Yow Btratugy cf Icporialics

Tae Soly Aliionce

"Our Vietory Soporde or. 41] tho 4frican
Peoples"

"Five Months of Induponcerco in Angola”

We #121 Avange lozurca

Harcer or 3icklo?

Far in South Viotner

The Sluca of Nantarro

Moscow, Peking and the Taird Yorld
(dccununta)

. Guinoas Two Stops Forward?

* Malaita Road to Sociaiioz

Swaziland, Vorwoerd and the British

Lard’ Bon B'#idi

Bina Looks at tho Nowa

London, Colonial Capital

Add-El-Kric Is Dod

dgrarian Rofora in forocco (document)

Yew Colonial Zar in Bornco

dn dzoricorn in aigiors

Quba Si! .

Bogroes with Guns

African Art

Jass: Bonaiseance cr Dacline

Jaszs Tho Avant Cardo

Bporte and Reciet in South Africa

 Voluzg 1 Kuctor 2 (Juno 1963)
Tho Cainosg Spring . “oe
X. Intorviow with x30 Zso-tung

drty ard thy Part:

Tho Peoplos Will Docide

Africa in Qestion

The Working Class in 4frica
Tho Perspoctives .
Tha Stegoa

Clarity in tho Strugglo

Econcaic Planning in Tropical Africa

Modibo Koite Spooks”

+ Sing Looks et tho dows
The U.a.2-'5 Now Victory at Suos
The Poopls Eavo Spoken

oo.
.

" Agostinko NETO

- Oe

ce ea ae
s Peat Sete wee,
WIR ce

REVOLUTION? © ~
Jhood Bon BELLA |
Oliver Taleo
Bakary DJIBO ”

J. MINCES and M. BEXXOUGHE
abcod WINE ~~
aR.

Josquin DIAZ

Conzandor BENEDITO
Abdou ALFA .
Coarles BETTELERIM
Ir. BaKSaT

PoP.

Gerard cuiiasp
Gorard CHALIAND

ee Ty
re ee et erry :
STuz

Abdou aLFa

kK. VERSES

er Te TY

Or ee rT

Don STEFFEN

SIKZ

Robert F. WILLIAMS

oe eee oo
Philippe KOSCMLIN

Lo Roi JONES

Rosalynde AINSLIB

Djactin BOUAIBED and M. J.
VERGES :

Mourcaddine TIDAFI

4. SPANELA

anuese SALAR-BEY

re .

Charles BECTELEEIM ,
Gararé Cas.

SIsE
Mansour EL BIFFT
6.8.
“ .
/tigeria's . ..

i oan



--- Page 226 ---
14-0000 Le

RPMI ee

Jerard CHALIAND .
» KLCES End Kh. BEXKOUGES
Albdert-Paul LENT

Algoria's Inveetuent Code Jacques GLARKIERS

-Tho Kenya-Somali Crioie Tony HUGHES

The Malagasy Rebdoliica Aristide RATSDBAZAPY
Tee Tostansnt of Andrianeapoinicerina ee te eet

The Virtues of the Truth

Tbe Tar in “Portuguese” Cuirea
Black 4frica between tho Two Vara
The Workers University in Conakry
eat Ie Sanwit oo ss oe

: Foroe and Violence in South Africe Jobannesburg Correspondent —

j Valter Sisulu, Underground Lester Johannesburg Correspondent

: . South Jest Africa and che Se ey ee Td
ey ey ey

Agrarian Reform in Morocco (
Teare: "Begritude? Lanzeroue Kystification” .. «1 of o8- oe

Towards an African Cirera 0.¢.

. Martiness Painter of tho Repression 0.¢.
Tho Civilisation of Benin ee ee ey
Algeria: Sports ard Irdeyerdence oe en Sey ee TT

WAFRICA, LATIN AMTALSA. ASZA REVOLUTION .

we) Muzber 3 (J3iz 3763) -

Pe pase Revolution $5 Pictures ee | ey ee TY
of ow base YY |

Ideology oe ee we
Obane Builde Sccialise Tack WODDIS
Bational Zevolution in Africa and Asia Wehdi BEN BARKA

. Modibo Keita: Lenin Peace rrize re rt er 1)
Africa ong the Coczor, Lsrzet Ve PILLIY

‘ Merocoo and the Cow-on -arcet Abdelaziz BELAL
Tro Dangera of Foreig: Aid Afens OSENDE
“I Scouse:" Helson MANDELA _
The Pogo sffeir Jobannesburg Correspondent
Algiers, Capital of Youth oe oe ee oo oe
4 Bcbool for Building +e Future a Mohaced BIXKOUCHE

4n Ozon Lester to Prosident
John F. Kennedy -. oe

oe Tho Coinese Spring . Djentia BOUHIRED and J. Ke
VERGES
Bpanich Studente Fight Foscisn ry ey ey ee TD
Four Deserterse frox uoza=bique ry eS ey rT)
Por the Defence of Denocratic Freedoms of
in Africe : ee ee ery)
7° ine Looks at the Jews - ot sue -
. The Politica of Culture Abdou ALFA :
- : The Manding Epic: The Death of a Tyrant ee ery ee ee
. Young Artiste of Soutkern Rhodesia ve oo”
. Two Jazz Artists Pusippe KOSCHLIN
ta 3 Bunbdera August-Septexber 1963) .
*. oo oe oe oo ee .
Harold CAUSE
Julian MAYFIELD
Willtam WORTHY
: w —- fatding . .

eaeabemeter amie ene ,
7 nee Rt Pic igt ates RRO



--- Page 227 ---
14-0000

Aiding the Struscsie in “Yortuguese” Guinea
The Mew Slave Trade
Aswan. Monunent fer the Future
- The Battle of Dien Sten Phu
Towards Victory in South Vietnac.
Tae 7.B.L. of South Vietnam
Botes for a Biography of Fidel Castro
"If Fidel Castro Sere Bleoted Prosiden.
of the United States” —
African Bationalies ard the Connon Man
Tee Var of Fational Literation of Irak‘
Kurdistan
Dogusente from Adéis Ababa:
Bolutions of tho African Summit
Conference vo
Quarter of the Organization of African
Unity
Tue Powers Bebin’ dpartboid .
Education for African Servitude
Two South African Poutss
Musiei Kunene
Dennis Brutus ‘
Modern Poetry in Africa
Xba Waldun Today
Tae Kagic Art of the Congo
Binkory : ;
« A Jags Uroat: Jokn Coltrane

¥ Buzber 6 (Ccoteter 1963)

Dr. DuBole is Sead

My Last “esssgo to the Yorid

State Capitaliss in Egypt

The 0.4.38 "U.S. Uinistry of Colonies”
Thy I Came to China at tho age of 72
Socialist Planning in Cuba

Barbudos Si:

Techniques of the Guerrilla Fighter
The Beal Meaning of tie Tashington March
The Agrarian Situation in India

Pive Poens

Will Handicrafts Survive?

Waite Critics, Slack tusicians, New Kueic
Appeal of the Exucutive Committoe of
Afro-deian Griters

¥ Ruster 7 (Hovember 1963)

fours Borja? weich Third Jorld?

Waite Dictators of Southern Rhodesia
The Agony of the Spanish Bourgeoisie

A Day with Francisco Juliao

Venesuelat Expire of 01) and Iron
Quba at the United ations

ps Freodoz Struccla in South Africa
ia introduction to 4frican Economic Problezs Stephen KAZADO

: Malaysis" = the Joo-Colonialist Federation Abdul RaxIM KARIM

duriio donteiro DUARTS :
MAURTENE t
Wilfria LURCHETT

General Vo Yguyen O1AP

Pre eee

Nguyen KIZW

Cerlos FRABQUI

Zilliem TORTHY
Julius SYEAERZ

Tenet Choriff ViNLY

SELENA AR Bears AMER Hy OR oat .

: #
oe "

+. 08 ete is
rT ee ery) &
C. FASULO : ei
Johannesburg Correspondent . e7 5

8

Ken GCEERI“O

Kouloud MACIERY
rr ry er rT)
Koits

Le Rot JONES

Julien “AYFIELD

Dr. ¥.E.58. DUBOIS

Haesan RIAD

Carleton bEALS

4nna Louiee STRONG

Yajur Srreato "Che" GUSVARA
NUEZ

Robert TAZER

A.B. SPELL

Dr. Sulekh C. GUPTA

Feiz dboad Faz

Intorview with Leonardo
CREAOUINI

Le Roi JONES

Biorre JaL5e
Fenner SR0CKWAY, MP.

EB. FERNANDEZ

Dulce ROSRIGUEZ |

Carleton BEALS

Tatarview with Dr. Carlos.
LECHUGA °

~ fres..



--- Page 228 ---
14-0000

“he

The Preparation for Yovesber
Vervoerd's Bantustan 3.uSf
Tllusios, Bniiation acd integration
Free Mae -‘alloryt

+ Rodert Williacs Speaks froe Peking
Qur Struggle in British Culans
Walch Way for British Guiana?
Crude Joapone that Helped Sestsay en ..ruy
Mew 2ritish Poste of tho Left-
Mr. Bockafelier's Husouz of Prinitive Art
& Eandtul of “heat

¥ 2963)

¢
are ~ the Strikes aré the Parties

The Crieie in Soviet Agriculture

Toe alliance for Plunder

Tho End of the Mexican Revoiution?

Why Yo Tent to Cuba

Tae Road of Revolution in Peru

Cartoons fros Cuta

Tae National Litereticn Struggle in South
West Africe

Underdeveloped Countries and the Problea
of Peace

The Konnedy Aesachinatior

* Tbe Righta of kan ir. er. age of Abundance

Repression and Torture ir Souts Africa

“Hogroes” (filced and steged in the U.S.4.)

The Failure of tho "Peaceful Road" tn Chile

U.S.4s The Shady Side of tre Street

Protest Through “usic in Scuth africa

Ornette Bevisited

8 (Deceze.

Nurber_ 9 (January 1354)

Penaze: “Big Steal"

Support the Penacanian People's Just
Btruggle -

The Unfinished Revolution in tke Philippines

Chinas Shere, How and Tkitser?

Woat Cotna hears by "Zeadjuetrent”

The Keaning of Black Revolt in the U.S.a4.

Five Young Afro-Azericar Poets

©

Sonia SATCHEZ

* Unchaia 2y Soul
Don Cherry: Truspet of the Year

Ratab BITAT .
Brien BUNTIEO
Wilmot Alfred F2azea

Clarence Sericce

Dr. Cheddi Jaca
Jeannette SOOT?
Crou Chiheohirg
Ken GEERING
Xerion BROW, Jr.
Pres CHalD

ees

Tew et

oo oo

Martin VALDES
4.4. EVANS
Rotert TARR
Carleton BEALS
Peillip Abbott LUG
Tre C.C. of the M.I.R.
CuaGO

oo ee

sh

J. XOWsQUIZI

Andrew Gunder FRisx
Fidel CASTRO

Jasee BOGGS

Brian BUNTING

Wilsot Alfred FRASER
Petro aNDINO

Tescas TOPOR

Tedc T. VATSHIXIZS
Barion BROWS, Jr.

“et,

Editorial
3... VERCZS
Virtato da CRUZ

oe we o oo

oe oo ee

Michael KcCREERY
Carleton BEALS

“MAO Tso-tung
Fillies J. POmaAoY
Keith BUCHANAN
“buna Louise STROG
Janes BOGGS

4.3. SPELLUAN
Lorenzo THGUS

Joo JASON

Le Bot JONES

C. LINDSAY BAREE??
Le Boi JOKES



--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

: APPENDIX B

INDIVIDUALS PROLISENSLY CONCGRNED ZITH THE PRODUCTICT OP

SpFRICA, LATIN 4WERICA. ASIA REVOLUTICN”

i
—~ “Freddy Bile aNoERSON
At? ketal Radcan kiohesed BABU

o

yeh >
fe ae ce mnoek eBsci

t

‘pie

— Bernard srtbur LARDER
-

ae

Crecques Carille Raymond ‘VERSES
goed ‘eliee Jacques Yanesur V=R03S

po Hans

§ C1 WECBiag born on L3th Kay 1931 in the

LOMA Gererta | feits Levcte tion and works in the Editorial Office in

este Belen . .

” he was Defence Coucsel in tke trial

SARL sebastian ese

born on 10th April 1921. He ie .-
akistani rosident ir. the U.K. .
and has strong Commni.t syzpathies.
Kembor of Editorial Board

= vrs born on lath Februsry 2933 at
Liusanne. Ho is a Swete end the
Dusinees manager of “Revolution”.
Ke tae teen o Communies for a mover
of years.

= wae bora on 22nd September 192, st ~
Zanzitar and te at present Minister
for External Affaire and Trade in
the Zanzibar Governcent. Hi)
sympathy towards Coccuntes ie well
known. ember of Editorial Board

U.S.A. He ie the Editor-in-Chiefof * Africa,

Paris. An dcerican negro, bo wae
Executive Secretary of the "Fair Play
for Cuba Cocmittee” in the U.S.4.
until Sopteaber 1962, &>

~ wan bom on 25th Septemder 1926 at
hanckester. He te a Comauniet ond
has taken a close interest in African
effsire. Reported to be Legal
Adviser

- was born on 5th Marck 1925 or

5th harch 1929 at Oubone, Thetlend.

He was a.mcsber of the Frerch
Comaunist Party in 2951 and
subsczuontly wae oaplayed by tte I.U.8.
ee Secretary of ite International
Relief Organigation. More recently

of a nuxber of temters of the

Algerian Yational Liberation Froat
(P.L.¥.). Director end key figure

of the publicationg” AF&ICA

LATIN AMERKA, Jasin Beverettenl o>

oe



--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

Bor ee ie een ree me ae

Troe co SECRET

SPPERDIA C

EDITORIAL OFFICE AND AGENCIES CF
“AFRICA, LATIN AMERICa, ASIA REVOLUTICN”

Let and “REVOLUSICE”
Syne : ”
mo The Editorie: Offices ie at 40, cue Frengo.s ler,

«. ’ Parte Ge and there aro the foll-wing agencias.-

Brasti © Juresa FISA°XR, avenida Viera Scute 86,
' Tpanexs, Ri: de Janeiro, Guanabers.

e Britaia - b, Leigh St.eet, Lovion, 7-C.2

. (Note - Tale te the business address of
Faxisterd Cocrunist, Tusadug Abed)

China - Ack. KHETR, 9 Tal Cal Chang, Poxings .
distributions Guozt Shudian, P.O. Box 339,
Paking (37)

(oz: - KHEIR, o Sudanese Coccuniet, fe a
nazcer of tie Soria Council of Peace and
works for tho Cains Peace Committee which
is located at >, Tai Cai Chang, Peking.
Guozi Skudien is tko official Chinese
Gevarntent cartre for the distribution of

- Chinose literature ard propaganda)
i Guta - Coreral Suarez entre ayestaran y Calzada do

Rarcbo Boyurcs, Havers.

Figoriea - 7.2.7. TuGiGial, 309, dolows Hail, University
of Siguria, Nauka.
Switzerland ~ kvtrozole, 10-1), Leceeare.

- (Hote ~ Thia ie Niis ANDIRSCH'e home and
: business address)

Tangaryika ~ Jwell AGOGO, P.C. Box 922], Dar-es-Salaan.

U.S.a. ~ Rooc 6034, 1 Union Sguare, New York, 3.Y.
Zanzitar ~ P.O. Box 1146, Zanzibar.

’

7

'
TT Nene te STE Wt Te RS tc ate IE i Sih am
.
« .



--- Page 231 ---
14-0000 . . + . + yee Oe . ? i

ony

mm ig saesiah deere ap os

SLAG SEIS, fo) aR RE “to arartrte Tere BS oe

sf.

Attached io a recent JAGUAR ropert dealing with Bubjoot
Putldeaticn, end the cocasnts of Richaré Gitsis. In lignt of the
continuing interest of the Addrecece offices, this material ia
being afc evailadle on o strict KUBARK IFTEZHLL UGB OULY basie.
JASUAR beo asked thot the report's PBPRIHS distribution (if ony)
bs limited to ODAOID only. Any Cietritution tsyond that
Aindionted above should firet be cleared with JAOUAR.

ig ux 7
wo

Report, herewith

Distridutions
—drOhief, WB v/att b/w
SOnief, KUVOLF w/att b/w
BeChicf, KUIGEK v/att b/w
Chief, AF w/att b/w .

2-009, Paris v/att h/v °

2-008, LOPIPIT v/att b/w : -


--- Page 232 ---
14-0000
a GY

pores “4

~

o

SAyOICA, LANDS aNERIoa, STA REVOLUTION”

Ricnpes ae
“Sar ooe A eee cana
Sess R co”

SAO

Fite Oe

ae Toe folrowing information was received

"> dm the firet bel? of Ootober 1544 fron a source in elese
.- souds with Richard OIBSGY, the former Editor of “Africa,
latin America, Asia Revolution”.

GIES vas avare that a masber cf poople hed
taught that tho Cainese Cocmunists had provided ooce
financial teoking for “Africa, Latin Anorios, Asis Revolutia”,
but thie was trus only to the extent that tho Coinosc bad «4
stending order for 3,000 copies of each iscue of tho Inglish
edition. If the Chinese tat given wore general finaotal
asciotence VERCES, the publication's Director, vould not have
bed to contend with tho present financial difficulties and
possible bankruptcy.

Tete ae

3. VERGES heft ket access to « relatively large
wun of ponoy which hed been keid in Suiteerlend fros the tine
of the Algerian wer of indopertonce. When this bed dried up
VERGES bad teen unable to ropleish it. Reporte that VERGES
hed etolen thie monay were rot true.

4. Tae publicatian owed 45,000 Swise france to
& businessmen, poosibly Svies, zos0d and 30,000
franca to the French printers. in CIESCI's view too mich
money had been epeit on caintainirg prestige offices at

40 sue Prangsois lor, Paris.

3. Noon “Africas, Latin arorica, Asia Revolution”
was banned ir, Switzerland al? except 100 copies of isme Ho. 12
were seized ty the Sviss aittoritics. These 100 copies bad
alroady been sent to GIDSa.

6. The Franch edition "Revolution" bas not
appeared since August 1564.

Somment 1) Pare. 4
Source ooct4 =0% provide exy further
pertoutece edout KESSE..

Ben aiels neta Se

an te a tat .



--- Page 233 ---
14-0000

1

teary

PAVEXOA, LSTOS A) AIGA, Sadaal sevouw7iar

. —

RicuAes or ‘

fir BR b CRB LONE ae
EeSMeeR eo ae Lt WIR tw!
Bro Aceme “wn
Cecom >

t

” the fol: oving inforsation ves reosived

FR Mune ft : fn the fires balf of Cotuber 1944 from o source in olose
ee touch with Richard GIESA!, the comer Editor of “Afri sa,
re Letin Azcrica, ssia Rovoiution’.

a OTESOS me avare that a muster of people bet
thought that the Cuinsse Coeraus‘ote haf provided scar
finmoial docking for “Africa, “atin Anerica, Asia B-volutim"”,
but this was true only to the «tent that the Ciines bed a
@tanding order for 3,000 copies of sach iccue of the English
edition. If the Cuinese bed g-~en rore general fing cial
essistasce VERGES, the publicat‘cn's Director, would not beve
bad to oonterd with the presen* financial difficailtins and
possible bankruptcy.

shyes ome
3. VEAGES bed bos ‘adooss to  relative.y lage
wus of renoy which hed toen beid in Svitseriand fron the tine
of the Alcerian ver of indopentence. When this had dried up
VE2IES ted boan unable to replenish 4%. Beporsa that VEROES
hed stolen thie conay wore not true.

4 . Go publication owed O80 Swiss francs to
it~ @ businese-ran, possibly Swies, raned ed 0,00
frence to tho Frosch printers. in SIBSOI's viow too cuch
fig soney had been apet on caintelning preatige cffices at
40 rue Pransoie ler, Paris.

5. hen “ifrica, Latin Anorice, Asia Revolutiaa®
was benned in Qwitzerlend all except 100 copies of inaue No. 12
were seized by tho Suies mithorities. Thess 100 copies had
alreaty deen cent to GIS.

6. The French edition “Rovolutian® has not
appeared since fuguet 1964.

2Stb October 1964.

Comment £) Pave. ¢
Source cold net provide exy further

& . pertioulacs about KESSEL.
& ——
B . 31) Pare. 4
z *
& - Sourcs did not say whether the eun owed to
Fa EO the Proncb printers waa in Freccb or Bvies
2 ¢ JRLAE BS Le cag HN STONES
| EO HECED LAE LM MONE 7” . :
a . . x Jd - out
& HELE Baa ER “ALG 6 " uve . ;
q AE? ante Te GS oe +
a hE tee KEPLER eet ER ECE TS

a

TRAT S,AT HAR mio. SELAET
: rested” U . 2H TRUE >.

CELA- won “Catl-)


--- Page 234 ---
14-0000

me

NIN et ONY FARES RVD LOS eg TENE RAH FETE

TT TAN AR KEE ANCA HOUND a a ON

a

| eee at NE ne ae es nate ahah ah Minh ecko ee Re

foty . . “4

DISPATC snare

: Ropge
= - —_
Chief, a nee —
< Oniet, LUNG, ond Statice, Pert (GF?)
pees -AMy_ Sasa, MDPRMs Solel of B atiro, Faria

_. Dele of Stotioa, benica.

sean :

wx SOPRTCRE Pratt of Bovad-us on Serskewse |

Se ee eee:

v

REFS OBLAGI,23}. 5 Semussy 1765

- Ye de nated ta Ref, esation wee vasa during ore of ICTETMEts bi-wsstely . -
peetings thet) 414 pot attend, cf @ “fount—ar in ereparetion®. tha epparont
ustecent eas Atohard Thoese JIRSGK, ant 3 unfertock to fiat out froe LORERRE
Suet whet fac whet. .

2. Ja 1% Surme out, LORRPOPE wee proparicg a rourd~-ar of tnforeatiza es
Fptedasien, rutner they oo GIASOE, In reezense to my eczevbat egitetes query
Gua Vo recent traffic releting to ULZSO%, is pertioular), LOARFORE rusted
fertd with tbe rough draft of their resnt-us, whiod 18 stisohed. They paiat
out, however, that thie raft ie completely unslesred; it tne not sade the
rournde of the cveponeible politioel departments and aboul4 not be regertsé oe
«@ final fredunt, fe ef€ition, tt ehoctd be eared that tt ts tatended, shee
evapleted, caiy fer ofsevletion vithin the BFOOTEET gorernnent ~ principally
in oversese sleuente - anf not for genere) parlioaticn.

3}. LOBtVCRE, efter exrressing the foregoing quelifiecticae, invite eny
Geatributions thet KUBAME would like to offer, Tse qudstance of the revné-up
gecue to offers Little eooe fur voutruverey, altboags LULEM/ISC say ne able
te oootritute sdditionsl inrarcstion. 2 cleo renter shethar the Pugliese
language e41%iu0n hes cate soy inpect in the Yaotery Seatapcere,

ieee ENR

7 he Fe osase Ubat the eppaodizs Cf parevseiity data will Se Sorwaréni tc
ae eloug witx tee fined draft, oF the {Jani od; teas . : .

a 75 . . . . ° i” .
pe too . " Gaarge B, Barsuebac Log

Atvteoksents herowith ©
Dietritutionr .
~J-Chief, Wz w/att a/v .
_ 2-Chief, KVVULF v/att b/v
2-Chief, LCYIPIT w/att o/¥

2-Catef, ar w/att b/w : |
Q-Onier, Kumsse w/att We... eee eee
20S, Paria w/ats b/w asnnees

ee ws Stu:



--- Page 235 ---
14-0000

DART | SeORRT

* MALE LEE I

fn RN EMEADREAT BRIE Doo Cea

feportant shangee, Por a cine during posi
Feported that the pubideatios use sn finsasial. eheracaathn
bad An the zont raceat Freak ofittom, Booty abe ¢ Outs
-Movenbor 4% nae anounced tist the Bagosing wid eostinaa ea
/@ new tania, with an enlarge’ Advisory Board, epredring ony
two mosthe, not only in an Fagiieh and o Pronk efiticn tae
also inn coning Spanish editien to be pablichsd da teeta
for Iatin Anorioa.

2. The changes which ave boing nade Go not in eny way
alter the pro-Chiaeso complexion of the nagasing. .. Though -
the sagazino now seems on a mich firmer finenedal basis,thsre

4s ao yat no evidence that the Chinese are direotly subciéising -
it.  Thev are however buying copies and taking edverticcssnte, ;
It hao beon reported that whon Verges was in Teking in tho early.
Jart of 1663, tus chincao agreed to tako out 3,000 sabseriptions |
to "Afrte ttt -" and thece wore in duo course transferred
-orien Aria Revolution. When the publication cold
for fivs caillinic, tuts was worth £790 c tonth. Each desue

hao couvalucd 2% leas; one full page advert. “Zant oe ees
Consualst gublicaticaase ested x

3. Guo publicationshas qlz0, had a Contant with the Chinese .
through Abéuk Rahaan ohana: aba, e a nonbder of the Advisory .
Board who 4s “inister for Cos-erce and Comoporatives in the -
Tonzoalan Govornzent. > vabu visited China in 1960, becass the -
fast African correspondent of the How China Rows Agency aa ge
_ and went to China ogain in October, 1963. : % TE i
‘be <Gy the end of 1963, Révotution had eatoblished orate |
i she Co yates oaltntercreuy in the UX, led ty Michack

HE RRSRAGU

a

SRO kt

Mfricn * 27!

ff

rs 5yf whoa loon the Chingee aide fn tho SinomSovdet cold’ ear,

Dre rene EINE EL iby Ton nt



--- Page 236 ---
14-0000

"la tas
Vhen in tho sjrinc, tho Direct... Sooques & Vori16, &
into financial difficultioas, ho found cheaper pavatecs £52

38 ez. -3 shat Revolution was ‘ta financial cifficalsies for .
@vorcl sonths. Tho trouble began, apparently, shes the /
z8encs oathoritica ooi7c3 cozica of isous Hoe] of the sre
e@ition of Larch 196% b2cauca of on article it contained on -
“voneh ovcra-a3 territorics, Creéitera beoase alarssd, feasteg Bi
that + .9 publication =icht so danced, and Genunded esttlessus
ft €:. veh sica estimated So excced £10,000.
: Al 1 DIG

be ents Jacques Vorges rezains -
Giterl.2 Dirce sorgel n ae foliowing as Advisory Board (°Cota~
ere. cca pers cate"), Scwecozers to the Doard eines tha |
ast teoue in. -7/hucust ere rarked with eotoriokae rf
Lohans. ;

r ie $3 lich wor.

= raven Mie. 1- SFIS (+. 2 eG¥fetnas,

— taanadlaten go a

“Castro frase OT eg TN .

—sortodre gor eisai
tk Ve@P!l | wdtolenhia_

er aptut BY arty tc 32977 = eptistays
The firot cheace o2 the origtzal Advisory Board cace vith the |
Anelusion in 0.8 of iartin Valdes = Spaine-~.The next change —
was in iesuc fo.9 when Hanea Alavi = Pukisten-was replaced
. : DY coe



--- Page 237 ---
14-0000

” were yrinte?, thc top cale of exy isoue was never more than

. of Revolution are civen cet Afrioa: 2.5 dirham, 2.5 diners,

“International Workers’ Kovanent and tho Struggle for Ho!

an nectar ; ay Airet ore

Nee” slay

wy fin sth et Rata he

“Fe icertoan iMate of having “used bie former pecdttea es

the "7, fon On tea" to intitrate ©
the International Rovolutionary Movenont®. Sone Gotaile ef © ,
personalities are given at appendix. . .
7. In Revolution Mo.12 1t fe olained that the total desue
of the new and enlarged bi-ponthly cagasine,, dnoluding French
Feglish ané Spaniuh cditi-ns, will be 50,000, However, eince
bie dienisecl, Richsr2 Gibson has stated that, during his tine . 3
on the regazire, suite atout 20,000 copies of the French efktien a

%,500 copics. In the czee of the April No.8 tesue, he cays
that the total sale in Frcnoe nas 3,000 copiea. The pricea

150 C.?.A. Europe: 4.50 Proncs. ‘This represents a 15%
4norease in the price of the French edition. But this 4a / ¥
aoconpanied by a lowering of the price by Ba in countries .
of Africa, Asia anf latin America. Those teking out enmul,
subscriptions are inforned that they are entitled on request
not only to make use of Révolution’s Documentation Centre ¢

Liberation, but also to free copies of the mogasine Pokine “: \"!
Znfor-.*ion. Those taking out « long-tera cubsoriptica
will also be entitled to "publications in foreign Tengnee
fron Peking".
8. A asin fenture of dasue Fo.12 is a leading ertiole ty
Incques Verges entitled *Hirochina, plus jamaisl® Possibly
dy coincidence, this was published et the same time as the >
’

oe EES SI ES ct aa end oct a AL

.


--- Page 238 ---
14-0000 oe : 7 a ee . : - 4 r

sree, in ‘.
. ‘first ascao wialeae Gsvice was exletets
- eo”

” ef Bfvoution.®
10, Wow entitled Africo latin Anertoa Ania Reve“ntion, tho
Maglich edition wae originally poblished in Algiers with the ~
title Afvioan Revolution. From tha third iccue osvards 26
was published in Laus=moe as £¢9 in Anorion Anta
In iseuo No.7 of Noverbder 1963, 1¢ was announced that tho |
editorial offices were tron located in Paris, with the offfecs
of the Prencn e2ition, but it continued to de printe’ in Sedtsere "
land. In Aucust, 1964, tho Swiss Governzent banned the oprinting.
efition ond the tronsit" tirsagh Switzerland of the Englieh efith .
dooaunuc they considered J2rioa Intin Anoriea Asia Royolugion 3
“an orgin of »roracands of tho Chinoce Comaunists, denigned for
non-Iuropeon cointries, which does not limit itself to eapporte

ing the libsration strugsle of the so-called colonial peoples

but also projalates the zolitical views of Red ‘China.

11, ‘The lost English Ssoue in the olf serics which bas como |.
to hand vas 30.11 of March. The first in the new serien, Boot - *
“Vol.II dated Sopteabor/ctober 1o ‘published in Paria ty B.BeBsde,
" Nouvelles ZAitions Internationales, fron the case afdres’ ay
‘the French Fdition, 52, ruo Galanio = Paris 5°, this mga
edition, which was previously similar in format to Restoran tees)
is nov gloccy and cinilar in forast to the 7rench editions “Niet a

of the articles in 1¢ nre reeprinted fren the French edits ie
n&volution. : au
She Titorisl Fo=nd . . a YOR:
We As with the Fronch edition, the Editorial Director recaing
“Jacques 3. Verses, with the sane Advisory Doard exce;t sont

a ey

PEAT soe

Fee Blears tec oS rr ge Mette lan Reeds Maem eA Te ets By re

Se



--- Page 239 ---
14-0000

1


