
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000 L
[2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 | Be
F
{

104-10227-10000)
L i

eof

Poa

2 i Ms AL ULVIEVED AT CLA HEADQUARTERS VY .

é { .

i HOUSE ! COSALTTEL ON ASSASSUINATIONS STARE SENDERS |

a de

BE . | TS Material from Dergs ite “ E :

& i FILE TI TLE/NUNBER/VOLETE 2 ee ee _ go
oe eee
et” |

INCLUSIVE DATES: i :

CUSTODIAL, UNI T/LOCATION : : :

DELETIONS, IF ANY:

DATE DATE a
RECEIVED | RETURNED | REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) | SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING O7FICIA

NO COCUMENTS. “AY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS PILE



--- Page 2 ---
1400000) . 1 .

Cl cunctassivien =) Mttenat (CO conripenriat C1 secrer
KOUTING AND ReCOn 57 : Lo

SUBJECT, (prone!)

Ton

~.
i . TSO
Rodger S. Gabrielson REF_ TO: Con, No, TSI91722

- , . OLC/C&R 1133

1oy Lomeer dengrahen, room number, Comments {Number each comment to thow from whom

me @ line oor column ater oath comment.)
Shep

MIN DBI NOTH

SA/D0/O Tube: #6 Attached is a letter——

from the House Select
Committce on Assassinations
dated
Please respond "a as soon ‘as
possible.

Shep: Please have cr look -

atthia, It's the T.S, matertal

from Deryabin's safe = Feque ste

by Blakeys Thanko, _ .
Rodge ee

Pree

ee oo |

ON EE ot a BRE aay ant eon cae

Mt

Font

wr O10 “ater C] secret =] conFipentiat «= iRTFAMAL ©=—-)sUNCLASSIFIED

ES



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

” s e
a, : TOP SECRET
PUNCUASSIILO when tlank-—TOP SECRLE when altached 10 Top Sanret Document-—Autortatically downyraded to SECRET when
j tied in form is.deta-hed from contrailed ducument,
: ENT

CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUM

cul Control No,
ww TSH INT;

‘hee,
main aliached fy the document untd such time on it
fof matter ia timited to Top Sazsal Content personnal o
# and/or t the attac
head columns provided. Lach indiiduat who the Top Secret document w: \
Diansture
™,
a

Zz
°

- na

ee om ed
-

TOP secaey QB ED

ICE OF DETACHMENT: When this ta
mitted to Centeat Top Becret Control for 64

GRADED When finished with th
be . Chew to DIOTTSCY as wi
for these documents, —

documenta return
: the contro} Sifice

To

By (Signature)

TS*® ty1729

OrricE Bare 1917224
1917228
fee 26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS. ; '91722¢ : i 90)
see Nort) woe '
‘ z ~ - we Ue ie
Ss ° 5 EY S08 CREES oe
_ “ he ao ve Cot ne 2 .
n ot o Eek&Or” GS ac ws a
[-4 z n O4twond on ew on
w : mae en a oO ee
e vet BLS
“ 3 2ekaune SOROS ze
a e 23235 a Ux oa

. oO a0 be .

3.3 £ et eS er ee
Lod > o $5462 us avaous bead
< “ a Pe ee! SHE” eS ae
4 ay 3 SES LED 4 Ow oO 6&5

OG Ot Eee a eoa ne ox
tle a3 ” 0
w
oun aa {9:9 ” on
pas C on a ov
wa 2 © Sa
I~


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

TOP SECRET

SHLD when blank—TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document—Automatica

AINCLAS: Hy downgraded to SECRET when

AMBAMA TOF

filled in-torm is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
1 WIL222A____- --_. ———-
Date Document ‘Received
arm will be ploced 0m top of and attached fo 7 the Central intelige
thin the CIA and will camain attached to the document u downgraded. Sestroyed, of tr
2 to Top Secret matter a to Top Secret Controt personne! official duties relate to the matter. Top
at Control! OF ho recewe and/or the attached Top Secret m. ima.cote period of custody in the eh.
hand columne pro Lach individual who sees the Top Secret document w: ght-hand columne. .
“Rererrco 10 | RECEIVED | eee ‘SEEN BY a
Office Time Signature ‘Ofice/Div. |" Oate

below and trans.

NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When thie form 1s detached from Top Secret mate it shall be completed on the appropriate spac
rd.

emitted to Centra! Top Secret Control for rec

OESTROVED

DOWNGRADED

To “BY (Sipnature)

WITNESSED BY (Sagneture)

—~"T oprice coe Torre ‘pate ~
FORM — cee
foes” 26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS. TOP SECRET EXQUOLD FROM ALTSMATIC COMNGRADING f wor
{OP-1) LAND Sicassiicarion

Di ad



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

TOP SECRET

UICLASSIZIED when blank—TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Decument—-.
filled i torm is detached from controlled document,
fs CONTROL AND Cover SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT

Automatically downgraded to SECRET when

NUNT DESC pte eee we - en ee —~.
UMCENT DESCRIPTION H . REGISTRY
CIA Cont 0.

TS# 1917228

SR/CI/K
17. Document Recetved
ASiuz0
“Logged By

“22

“Humber of Attachments

nd sttazhed 10 each Top Secret docamem roc

* ATTENTION: This form will be plac
fred Top Secret within the CIA and
Of CIA Access to Top Secret m.
Secret Controt OMicers who rece:
hand columns provided. Each indivi:

‘ited to Top Secret Control personnel and thor,
the attached Top Secret

of custody in the left.
of handling in the right hand column

REFEPREO TO |

.
NOTILE OF OLTACHMENT. Whan this torm ia

mitted to Central Top Secret Controt tor recor
DOWNGRADED

*ATCHED (OUTSIDE Cia)

BY (Signatures

To

By (Seneture) WITNESSED By (Sianature)

ornce Toate OFFICE

bres, 26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
ioomumnr-"S)) AND OLCLASS FCAT :

aAMRAMY 704.


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

TOP SECRET

UNCLASSIFIED. when blank—TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document—Automatically downgraded to SECRET when
filled in form ts detached fiom controted document. .

CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT

” DOCUMENT DESCKIPTION ;
{ . | CIA Contro! No.

|
j : .—. TS# 191722¢__..-___

Date Documpnt Received
fret
1970

aAmmAMA VO4

ATTENTION: T
tied Top Secret within the CIA and will reman attached to the document untit such t
of CIA. Access to Top’ Secret matter ix limes to Top Secret Control personnel and tho

Secret Controt Officers who recewe and/or release the attached Top Secret material will &
«hand columne provided. Each individual whs sees the Top Secret document will sign and indicate the date of handling in tho right-hand col

Taeceweo” *

ign this form and indicate period of custody in the left:
lumns.

REFCHACO TO

Unt

4
Da/,

mitted to Central Top Secrat Control for recors.

SOWNGRADEO | ; DESTROYED
BY (Signature

WITNESSED BY (Signature)

To

"By (Signature) "| BY (Signature?

~~ ———- ob -——— a ea oe .
OFFICE o OATE OFFICE .

~~ “7 gRour tl '
CARUOLO FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING ;
LAND DECLASSIFICATION soa

[ORM 26 use PREVIOUS EDITIONS. TOP SECRET
(OP-1) Lo


--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

“TAR

DEFECTORS - NOSENKO

TITLE

Report on: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko, Soviet

Attachvents:
1. Mere for Record from David &. Murphy, Subject:

Discussion with Deputy Attorney General on

_ Nosenko Case

2. Memo for Director of Security from Lawrence R.
Houstan, Subject: Parole Status of Defectors

3. Memo, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO

. Letter for Mr. Richard Helms from J. Watter

Yeagley, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko

Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrel! from Richard
Helms, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
(Forms 1-125 and background data. attached)

Letter for Mr. Loufs Wienckowski from Frank E.
Bartos, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko™ —

Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Victor R.
White, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO

Routing Sheet from Chief, SR Division to
00/0S .

Memo for Mr. McGeorge Bundy from Thomas H. Karamessines,!1 Féb 6

Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko

Memo for US Intelligence Board Members from Marshall

S. Carter, Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko

Newspaper clipping: Nosenko's Account Disputes
Charge by Soviet

Newspaper clipping: U.S. Lets Swiss and Red Envoys
talk to Defector

4. Meco for Acting Chief, Support Branch from Jack
M. Bauman

5. Memo for Special Agent in Charge District Field

Office from Victor R. White, Subject: LESNIK, George

M. (Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)

DATE
2 Apr 64

2 Apr 64

. 3 Apr 64

Jan 75
20 Oct 69

- 90ct. 69...

24 July 69
“18 Jul 69
13 Feb 64

12 Feb 64
15 Fed 64
12 May 64

10 Jul 64


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

TAB. . TITLE OATE
“a Memo for Headquarters from John D. Noble, Jr., , “Vda 64
Subject: LESNIK, George M. (Emergency Instructions
Regarding Custody Of) with Attachment: Emergency
Instructions (2) . ;
weet 6. Memo for the Record from John M, Maury, 5 Aug 69
Subject: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts
: on the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko Case w/att :
-, v4 2 _” Nosenko's Request for Political Asylum 4 Feb 64
co +2 - - Secrecy Agreements and Financial Arrangements .~ 21 Apr 69.
Between the CIA and Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko

3 . Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge, 31 Dec 74.

. Subject: Office of Security Reports on PARAGON,
oon NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and II and MOCKINGBIRD

4 Memo ‘for General Counsel from S. Breckfnridge, 3 Jan 75
Subject: Nosenko

Vv Attachments: as
1. Memo for IG from C. W. Kane, Subject: Yurily | 9 Jan 7S."

Ivanovich ‘Nosenko;

oe 1A. - Memo’ for USIB Menbers from M. Carter, 12 Feb 64, 12 Feb 64 .
- . Subject: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko . .

‘5 ' Questions and Answers Concerning the Treatment of Soviet
; ‘Defector Nosenko .
.§ , Memo for the 16, Subject: The Nosenko Case 67
Attachment: 7

1, Summary of 1967 Document Which Outlines the
Nosenko Case


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

_ Wee Cet,

Yurily Ivanovich N

\
IDENTIFICATION: NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet
H . KGB officer who defected -in 1964 and
: was subsequéntly involuntarily con-
i 1, fined in the U.S, by the Agency for
Hi . a period of approximately three years,

BACKGROUND : .° NOSENKO first contacted Agency per-
: ~ sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962
t 7 ° and subsequently defected in January

4 Tas “2 1964. NOSENKO was brought to the 8,
- . and after a period of relative freedom
he was involuntarily confined in
April 1964. From April 1964: to
August 1965, he was confined at an
4 Agency controlled site in Clinton,
t Maryland. From August 1965 to
: October 1967, NOSENKO was confined
at Camp Peary, Virginia. . In October
1967, he was returned to the Washington
area, given increasing amounts of
freedom until he was given total free-
dom in April 1969, NOSENKO became a-
po - U.S. citizen in April 1974, -_NOSENKG
G a was. employed by the Agency. as a °
consultant in March 1969 and continues
under contract to date. His present —
salary is $23,500 per year, :

(1) The legal basis to confine NOSES KO
against his will was discussed by

Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with
the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April
1964 (Tab 1), On 3 April 1964, the
Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence
Houston, advised the Director of Security
by memorandum that such confinement was
Proper (Tab 2).

APPROVAL

(2) There are a series of letters from
the DDCI, DCI and others to various
agencies, including the Department of
Justice and the White House, covering
the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing
awareness of these agencies of the
NOSENKO affair (Tab 3).

(3) The conditions of NOSENKO's confine-
ment were established by the Office of
Security (Tabs 4 & 5).


--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

RESULTS

* TERMINATION

COMMENTS

Ry memorandum dated 2 October 1968,

the Director of Security forwarded

two reports to the DUCE summarizing

the results of the NOSENKO case to

that date. The reports are voluminous.
One was prepared by the Office of
Security and the other by the FBI. .
Both reports conclude that: NOSENKO

"was a bona fide defector. A draft

* memorandum attached to this file,

dated 21 October 1968 and prepared
by the CI Staff, raisés question
regarding NOSENKO's bona fides ©

und challenges the above two reports.

NOSENKO continues under contract to

the Agency. He is brought to Washington
periodically to consult on matters
germane to his background and experience.
Various reports are availnubte in the
files of the Office of Security which
detail financial aspects of this case.

No final accounting has been made since
the project continues.

(1) While the Office of Security files

‘do document the rationale for the original

ENKO, they do not

confinement of NOS

-document the rationale for his continued

confinement over so long a period of time.
A memorandum dated $ August 1969 states
that various congressional staff officers
were briefed on NOSENKO and states that
concern for his safety, as well as con-
cern regarding his bona fides, prompted |
the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6)

(2) Office of Security files document
a period in !969 during which a mail
cover was placed on NOSENKO.

(3) During the above period, NOSENKO

was allowed a pleasure trip to Florida.
During this trip, Agency personnel, with
apparent Headquarters approval, obtained
the services of prostitutes. This
apparently occurred on at least two
occasions.



--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

FILES

tenet

8
ee,
Office of Sccurity Files on NOSENKO
are maintained in the following
locations: :
OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen)

OS/SAG (Contact - Mr. Bruce Solic)



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

i a

an)

(2 April 1964.

MEMORANDUN FOR RECORD

, < SUBJECT: Discussion with Deputy Attorney.

_, General on Nosenko Case

I, Mr elas, Nr. Houston and Nr. Nurphy met with
the Deputy Attorney Goneral and mesbers of his staff to
discuss subject case. Present fren Mr. Katranbach's
staff wore Messrs. Foley, Yeagloy aad Reis.

, 2. Mr. Helms oxpiained the Nosenko case briefly
and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what
we at least considered to be two problems on which we
would like the advice of tha Departaent of Justice.
First, wo would secon feel coapelled to begin hostile

interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth

with respect to his mission for the KGB and ve wondered -

“what the legal position would be in circusstances in

_which we detained Nosenko against his will for this pur-

. paso. Second, wo would have to be ready after detorzin-

ing “that we could obtain no additional inforantion fros —
Nosenko to deport. hin... We had thought of taking hin to
Germany and transferring him to Sovist custody in Borlin ~
where this has been done:a number of tines in the past,

32 There was soso discussion of whether deportation :

to another country aight be a consideration, Nr. Helms

explained we would probably face publicity problems ta
“deporting to a third country of the kind we would en-
counter if hé were free in the U. S. Nr. Helms noted

there wero many items of inforsatiog which we and the

FBI realize are of no significance because of the file
holdings.wo have but which an unscrupulous Newspaper san
could use to create sischiof, This aspect was then dropped
and it was the consensus that 3erlin was probably the best

place. .

4. The question of the basis for detention was again
raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under
-which Nosanko is in this country. He is here as an “ox-
“clusion and parole case" which aeans he bas not been
admitted and has been paroled to the Agency which is
responsible for his while ho is in this country. This

enagy
ier kt
mer matt

“its va

vw

H


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

__in_Bertia,

So Seearp 3
. EYES pty:

So eae

“pafole can -be interpreted to moan parole to a specific

provide sone justification for our.

locale which would
uestioning, It was then pointed out,

detaining hia for’.
however, that if ha sald he wished to leave the country

. . to raturn to. the. Soviet Union, technically we would not
- do able’ to deta
be

io further. In this event, we vould
d with: ied-to'deport hia quickly and quietly

and for this pu Ose. the janigration warrant of arrest

“ aind deportation. was probably the best instrusent,

Se Ure Ka tzéabsch asked ur, Foley to check into:

this and Mr. Foley will in turn contact Mr, Houston.

Mr, Houston will in turn discuss the problem with CIA

the INS Oo. these matters,

‘Office of Security officials to get the background ‘of

their liaison wit
. 6. Mr. Hels thanked Mr. Xatzenbach for his assistance
and wa departed amid sone jovial banter with respect to
"The. Spy Who Cawe in From the Cold" about what we expected
to happen to him when he started to climb aver that “wall”

bayid E. Murphy”
Chief, SR Division



--- Page 14 ---
fee

Z

6%

3 April 1964 ©

we tem eee

MEMORANDUM FOR: : Director of Security

oo SUBJECT: oo ; Parole Status of Defectors

en paroled to this Agency, *
sition of the Department of Justice that we were responsible

“for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole,

. * *. 2, As you know, a basic parole agreement was executed by the . .
= : Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955, After setting up
co conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states:
“" MAfter parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume *
: . u) ¥esponsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree it
: " believes consistent with the internal security needs of the United States” mm
: during Continuance of their parole status," This means that the
responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary
> to protect the internal Security needs of the United.States. The word :
“minimum” is not necessarily a limitation. It merely means that good -
judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary,"
a .

case, the Agency will inform the Service in advance of each proposed H

departuce, -
. horse DESH .

: . LAWRENCE R, HOUSTON an
: General Counsel

aT

“ ae |



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

‘the United States,

La ; : joe “January 1975

SUBJECT: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO

1, Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United

States in February 1964 was known to. appropriate agencies and articlos
had appeared in the Public media,

2, NOSENKO was in the United States, under an 1 I&NS Parole aa
the responsibility of CIA... . The FBI wae! “fully advised of the Presence of
NOSENKO i in the United States and interviewed NOSENKO on several
occasions in March 1964, The United Stateu Intelligence Board was
also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning the defection of
NOSENKO, On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet

in the presence. of 14 NS and State Department officials :
officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum in



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

/?

¢

. Anwerier arrcaney Gememan ( ti ChE : FT.

treremen, SECURITY Leet nace

teK

we re

Bete af Justice :
3Hashyingtan 20530

: oe Cstoser29, 1963 |. * . -
-Mr. Richard Helms .
Director ‘

Central Intelligence Agency .
Washington, D. C. 20505 ‘

Dear Mr. Helms: Re: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko ©. eee

. (ER 69-5003/1)

. . - r

Reference is made to your letter dated October 9, 1969,
concerning | the above casa, in which you urge the concurrence
‘o£ the Attorney General in your proposal to have the above-
named alien admitted for permanent residence in the United
States in accordance with the provisions of Section a of the
Cantral Intelligence Act of 1949, as amended.

Tha Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization has
informed me that on the basis of the records of his Service
and the information furnished by you, and in the absence of
any Othsr evidences adverse tothe align, We concurs in your
proposal that the. alien be permitted to enter the United
States for permanent residence under the authority of the
foregoing statute. : :

‘Upon the basis of all the evidence received for consid-
eration and your statement of recomnendation and approval
which carries with it your determination that the entry of the
individual concerned is in the interest. of national security
and in the furtherance of the national intelligence mission,

I concur in your recommendation that the admission for perma-
nent residence of tha subject alien be authorized under the
provisions of Section 7 of the Central Intelligence Agency
Act of 1949, as amended.

_ Respectfully,
For the Attorney General

Q, ate ate

(Xssistant Attofaey Genelal

|
3
4
i
4
3



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

> SECRET

» 3 90Cr eet > eR 69-500371

: Mr. Raymond Fr. Farrell *
Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization . . :
Department of Justice -;
: Washiagton, De! ¢.

7 Dear Mr. Farrell: :
supsecr: Yarly Iwanovieh NOSENKO

to, Pureuant to o the authority granted under Section 7 of
. the Central Intelligonce Agency Act of 1949, as amended,
I approve and recommend for your approval the entrance ~
. Of subject into the United States for permanent reaideacea -
‘since his entry is in the interest of the national security *
and-vsseutial tothe fasthes ance zot the national Intelligence
. mission. In accordance with previous correspondence in |’
OO -.. Section 7 cases, it ls understood that you will present this
-¢ :Jt | J matter to the Attorney Genoral for bio approval.

. ao Since ‘bis defection re February 1964, the subject has
- 27." provided valuable information to this Agency and he will
"continua to be of value In the future. . :

a :
: Sebject bas been investigated abroad and here overa™
‘period of flve years and has submitted to a technical inter-—
rogation, The question of bona [Ides {3 a continuing one and
/should any. information be davelopad definitely disproving hls.
bona fides, it shall be made available to your Service and the stan
Attorney General... : : ;



--- Page 18 ---
14-00000

fooltas . .
Donk .
aad . -

Let .
oF . * . \ .
af :

‘ Tnare are enclosed Forms 112s asa bactgrossd data, .
| te duplicate, eoncoruing ths sanlect. 2 ; ces

” Pickard Helms
“Director

‘Ysf H. x Osorn
- Howard J. Oodara

. Od ho be be 0 be me pw



--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

Yurly Ivanovich NOSENKO (Aka: Yuri NOSSENKO)~
30 October 1927 . Nicolayev, Uxraine, USSR ;
Male Divorced Brown Blue/Gray. 5ft. I inches
Soviet - Caucasian -- :


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

“venly tranortcb HOSENZO

Tart NossraaK0 -_

(lees FLLICU), 1945 ©  Bazarated and |
‘1951 @ divoread, .-
23 Juma 1933 = Married Ledmila Yoliancvns -
| WOSENKO ‘ea KOZHETAiZC VA), daquary .
$§9S4.— separated and 3969. - Overceds,

ghtore « Cana HOSZH9, bora 2 Angart .
1954, Moscow; Tamara NOPE 2 domme

“33 aby 33 395%, | Moscow. om Uelag in UszD)
1942-1943 - Attended various E552. Raval .
“Sehedls, yr
3948-2955 « Attecded Inatltate a Interia~
Heal Relations, Moscow. . ite

bares lystestazen, i933 < - Series Naval nw
(Maval Inteltigonca)s. | 2 :
March 1933-Foebroszy 1944 - ‘Ctness ia KG
(The Committes for Stare Security}

Eielna In U3 Mary 3A a acect nad
faring I sexvice.. °

PRESENT. AND PAST ” sp4d-igse - Member Koa eorrol, pssa
PCLITICAL ATFILe 1956 | ~ Candidata Com-ruztst Party
TATIONS: _ 1957-1964 © Member Communist Pestz7, SS3R

-SEORET



--- Page 21 ---
Pawn

t ’

' Mr. Raymond F. Farrell: i
' Commissioner of Immigration
and Naturalization “~~
” Department of Juatice™
., Washington, Do 6... <5

SUBJECT “Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO —
PE nde teh AL oe Vea
. Reference ts m,
in this case. oS

ade to Previous correspondence ‘
of operational interest a
7: erelOre, ITs requested subject's

Bis stay of 16 August 1969,

Your cooperation in this matter ig very much ap-

: oe .
i
. ™ : ' Victor R. White | ;
. an ’ Deputy Director of Security aT
, m) - {lavestigations and Operational Support) .
os/aas/lies 16 July 1969 ‘

MT 70 85

SeGaeT



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

( EP SCT
. SEGRE ;

MITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUST ~3
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICe

Wasninctom, D.C. 20536

. July 2h, 1969

Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational Support)
Central Intelligence Ageacy

Washington, D. Ce

Attention: Mr. Louis Wienckowst

Gubject: Yuriy Ivanovich Mossenko,
Your SP-1687.

Dear sir: ;
As you reque:

February 16, 1970.

Sincerely, - ; a a

Frank E. Bartos

Ase QDS ARAL TD

2x0 RETR TO Tes PRE R

Al3 72% 817

sted in your letter dated July 18, 1969, the.
_-gubject-bas—been-givea-e-further period -of stay to expire oa

Chief Intelligence Officer
Piela Inspection aod Security Division nd

ee

i
:
|
:
i
t
E:
E

CHES yr te ET beers: sees AB ne ET bins aan ct Cin cnc sept Ps cee, a fPharece sepa

iy

RAPS Rede

SEAN


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

as)

, It February 2954
MEMORANDUM FOR: itr. MeGoorze Sundy
SusJzcTs _ Yuri Ivanovich nosayzo

As a G3 stare officer, NOSENIO is Yogularly
o the Counterintelligance Directorate ofthe
KG3 in Moscow but was incladed {n the Soviet dolegation.”- a
to the Disarnaneat. Conference ag part of a cover arrangee . .

gent which peraitted hiz to carry out intollizence and -.
Security functions in’ Geneva.on behalf of the KGB...

3. .HOSENXO also attended various Sessions of the

'.Disaraasent Contersuce held in Genova in 1962, During.”

the course of. theso sessions NOSENKG souzhp Contact with
officials of the U.S, Governaeat, inforaed these officiats |
that’ he was afiilfated vith the Soviet State Security ap-
~ |) paratus and yOluntearad to aid tho U. S. Goyernsont in. ..
dotocting Soviet subversive activity directed against the -. .
UL Ss. Government, During the coursg of his contact with .~ *
U. S. authorities NOSENXO stated that bis’ cooperation with
the U. S, Covornmont Originated with his distaste and hatred

for the Soviet ‘raziae in general, with his desirs fo obtain
revenge for the uajust doath of his father, a Sonior official
in the Soviet shipbuilding industry, ang with the goneral

- 4. In tate January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Geneva,
again Basquerading as q maaber of the Sovior delegation
to the Disaraasene Conferenco, Subjece SecTetly notified
ais CIA contacts in-the United States concerning his pres-.
Sace in Geneva ang atTranged to aeee with these contacts,
Duriag a series of seotings NOSENXO provided inforaation
including decunents conceraiagz Soviet Stato Security acti-
vitios within the USSR and abroad and a detalled accouae |
of the Xs3 operation against u, 5S. Professor Barshoorg
which NOSENCO said he had Persunally suservisad at the
direction of SEMICIASTNIY, tas Chairaaa of: the Cowniitee
for State Security (Xe3). : :

by rt



--- Page 24 ---
14-0000

wey

Thee,

5. . uring these most recsat Beetings NOSENXO announced
his desiro zo laave the Uss2 paTraanenatly and seek his. fucura
in the west. fle Clained nis new work in the <¢3 (Firse

. . Ceputy Caisz of that dopartaont charged with. tho Surveillance
Do, and recruituant of Aaofican visitors to the USSA) was oz-
an, panding and that he would not be abla to visi: the Yese
sy, with any froguency,. Accordingly, ho Prepared a request foy

" political asylua in tho United Statas. ite was taken to

Frankfurt, Gersapy where he is currently undergoing Laterroe.
-. 7 gation. Plaas “area Bow being nade to vezove hix to the U, Se

: * 6. It should be. noted that Cid-contact with Subject,
has not been extonsive and that we will require additional”
' thorough interrogation to Ostadlish Subtact’s bena fides,
It should also be noted that SOSZNXG's duties were. not cone
Ccarned with Substantive aspects of thy Disarnsaenr Confer
ce and he therefore ts noe expected to be able to Shad auch
any, Light on that aroa of aur interose, . .

“hl Dy. The possibility that soSenxots sefection was de-
Signed to ‘wrack the conferonce was Best carsfully considerod,
The decisicn to ‘accept bia was taken on thé conviction that
the Soviets sould not have chosen Such 3 yutnerasio agent”

| Qstafl ofZicer of the XG3) for tals siad of govo,

Thenas fie Karazessines
« Acting Ceputy ‘Director.
for Plans. -

: CSR/DEM/Ji£ 0 11 Fob 64. eae
. . Distribution: : . oy re
a Orig ~ Adse : So
. : 2 cc - S2/CI/K-Downey ote
Ne -dbec-C/fcr se,
TA - Lee - csr ; oy
ao : c¢ = DD/OS .

Fa ne

Fei


--- Page 25 ---
00000

“tional background as woll as inforaation on hls ¢urrent:

eos
) CANTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23 ag

OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE
12 Feorusry 1964
NEHORANDUM FOR: United Statas Tatollizeacs Zoard Menbe

rs
Yuri Ivanovich XeSENxO :

SUBISCT)

ote Mis meworandia rofers to the Stato Departaent we
Toloasea of 10 February on subject Casa and provides addie .

status, : Se

voy 22, AS 8 KGB tafe officer, noszxxo is-regularly. |
assigned to the Countorintellizeacs Birectorata of tho

“KG3 in Moscow but was Ancluded in the Sovist delegation |

to thy Disaraaaont Confsranca a3 part of a cover arranges |

- Sent whieh peraltted hia to carry out datollisence and .

security functions fa Gonova on eshalf of the KGa. .

3, "MOSENKO also attended various sessions of tha”

» Disaraazent Conforanes held da Ganava in 15962, During the -
course of thesa Sessions, NOSEXO sought contact with ~ .

orlickals of the Uv, S. Govornaont, informed those officlats
that ho was affiliated with the Sovist Staro Security ap- . :

’ psratus and voluateered to aid the U. S, Governaear in

detecting Soviet Sudversive activity directed asainst the -
U.S. Governuent. ‘During tho coursa of his contact with

“Ue Se authorities, NOSENS9 Stated that his cooperation with .,

the U, S, Govornaent Originated wits his distasts and hatred .

’ for the Soviat Tegine. in general, vith his desire to obtain

revenge for the unjust death of his father, 2 sonior official
ia the Sovier shipbuilding industry, aad with the genera.
adsiration of tho Agericaas’ wits whea he had ccae in con-~
tact within the Soviet Union, . . -

4. In lato January 1964, NOSENKO arrived in Geneva, |
ayaia sasquerading a9 a nosbyr of tha Sovieg deleyasion :
to tho Oisarnanent Conforence, Subjset Secroazly notizied
his CIA contacts in the United Stctes concerning his pres-
@ncs in Geneva and arransed to neet with thesa contzcts,
During a series of ‘Meetings NO 89 provided inforaution
including docusents concorming Soviet Stsee Security oethe
vitios within the ussa aad abroad and 2 detailed account ,

cary rt
YS

foe Beal
sys GLY



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

of the KG3 operation against U. S. Professor Sarzaoorn
_which MOSENXO said he had personally supervised at the
direction of SEMICUASTHIY, the Chairaan of the Conaittes

for Stata Security. AKS3) 6

pote. sae S. During these. nost Fecont nootings HOSENZO ‘snnounced
_ Ste his desird.-to leave the USS2 peraanuntly and seex his future
in the Yest. “He.clained his new work in the 702 (First :
- Deputy Chiof of ‘that depsrtaont. charged with the survelliance
“gna rocrultnent of Aaerican visitors to tho USS2) was axe -
'.panding-and that he would not be able to visit the Most —~
_ with any frequeacy. Accordingly, he preparod 3 request for |
political asylun in the United States. tle was taken to ot
Frankfurt, ‘Goraany whores ne is currontly undergoiag interro-
gation, Plans aro now being nade to renova hia to the Ue Se

TMs 6. fe should be “noted that CIA contact with Subjoct

-has.not been extonsive and that we will require additionul
thorough Intorrogation to establish Subjecr’s bona fides,

_ [Tt should also be noted that NOSENKO's duties were not con-

Mee . corned with substantive aspects of tho Oisarnazent Conforoaca,

nd and he therefore is not expected to be adlo to shud Buch, if: 7

. BBY» light on phat area of our Interest. “ oe

. ‘ The ‘possibility that HOSENXO'S defection yas doe :
. |. signed. to wrock tho conferonce was most carefully censidorads.-
: . The decision ta accopt hia was takan on the conviction chat.

' the Soviets would not have chosen such a valnerable agent” : ee
(stake officor of the ‘&G3) for this Riad o£ nove. rE

Marshall S. Carter "|
Licutonant Goneral, USA
Deputy Director



--- Page 27 ---
be

* By TAD SZULO +?
>)" Semen te The New Yors Tine:

WASHINGTON, Fob, 12

Yu bk Nosenko told x Soviet te:
Satasy offteral.at there: can >
lant Friday that
the way

 frontation here:
he leit Switer!,
Unitat. States 28 hours
5 ls defectinn: was ore
[Ratt dy- the: Russ:

‘Swiss authorities,»
: Tiks statement.

ans to the:
bythe former]
‘of the Soviet Com-
tate: Security,
Secret police, a;

.t2 a dental of the Soviet charg

{hat Qe Swiss:

eefection.. 2

Mr: Nosenko! “
Taember of th
to the Genev:

eu

Authorities Badtthe Suty:
deen negligent in Preventing his/5 that

. but ny}

siker details.were made public.|toa

[Tse departhent..said that a
a deeinartad

eee ae

tovay “has : thrown
defection. 22 Ms:
Soviet... delegatfoa=" in
va, it was “reported,
is police 203 PLL Fi
Mr. Nosenko~was. miss-
Nosenko's state,
a presence of"
¢ Soviet delegation /Yoviet Embasyy official
‘disarmament con-|te have. shu:
fereace Few 4).
Meet’ with "a.
here la the: presence o} 2
States officals. 7a ge. ere ie nounced
‘Tre. State’- Department . aa-

oneal at.the Ume Ural ‘
jeontrwatation was taking plice/Nosenko and’. the
tg Wastextom at the

hefon th
ppeared toamount] -

pearance Fev Aine: 5"
‘Th

lomat (Bad) bee,
mittert ta tlic:

ma that b!s actuall

ecting . belweer
*Sovie? En

west ofp bassy offical.took place in the;
rs headquarters of the: Washing-|
oC, the, Lm,

Noseaks.
haviag been complet

Alter Me. Nas:
ILA the Save!
es

iaterview,

os

q

Presant.
was déscribed as

omat duriay thols)
busizessiike cuateren,
efectad ef his.

own volition,
without any outsic,
S

ralization,

aly” rul.

ce that hy,

ressuren



--- Page 28 ---
14-0000

4 * otticial was presest each tie:

eae y Btett Bapores

Soviet -secret.- police d
fector. Yuri I). Nosenko hs * 2
in the United States where:;
he: was Interviewed -yest
day by officials of both the
Russian and S*iss Em:
hassies. - : ”
The State Deractineat said

jan Sour and thata Departmest

‘Noseako reafiirmed his ear!
crgeuest for astyum. fo, th

| granted..

1. Slate, Department ess
‘Rivbard- 1. Philips, in giving’
‘out this. laformation, declined’ -
“to say. where the. interviews’ <
‘took ‘place of to- =
"ails. Earller be bad said 1
twas. Passi ble” tht. _ pewsmen:

‘Sovten Kicks up F

| These developments came
‘as the Soviet Union kicked up
“\q diplomatic fuss over the dis
‘appearance of Nosenko or
Feb. 4, from Geneva, “where”
ne had been assigned as a2
expert" In the Soviet deleqy
‘sion at the I7-nation disarma
meat conference. Phillpps
said he was “on temporary
‘duty from KGB. (secret por “4
Hee) | headquarters in Mow

tp to yeaterday Moscow
“had been cirecuag its pualig
plomatic wrath at
‘Swiss, charging them
loose secu The provision
for a Swis. iplomat to inver-
view Nosenko w3s ta assure:
the Swiss the United
States had ce part in £o
ifezal act on their soil

“The Swiss alreacy had
strony ay resected the Soviet -.°

in Wednesday. Psillips ce-
See DEFECTOR, A5, Col 1



--- Page 29 ---
00000

aboutthe defection.also was
gtvenc to. the Soviet"Embassy.
Iso-ont Wednesday, in. Gen-
Soviet disar
Semyon KT
wamen Salanucy Statas
at the Swiss and
provocalive..activi-
ospecified * Western
‘agents.cUp- to then: Tsarapkin | ©
bad:been saying, both ‘private

'y, and* publicly,:that: the Nott. -
nko defection would’not af.
ect.the disarmament :talks.-

4, Yesterday the Soviets stepped}
p their -provest-in t o plac

CGB ait oth therethad beea

leer, security: man operatizg,
fe thes, Sovie practice, * fo the 1 Soviet.

ze as te ‘alter- Taarapkin had

at the | Pubdicly downgraded the case
ia.Goneva. At. any rate U.

vearvld Nosenxo Is a geo-ldisarmament negotiator W

tine defectoe though the pos itiam C. Foster and Tsarapain

‘sibilityof his teing a coublejnetd another business session \

as not’ been overlaok-jin Geneva yesterday at which \v

ed. It-also Is, felt here thatithey sald the case was not a Vv

the Soviet, protest:' was co!cussed-.
stronger than, could ‘te ex:j It also was nated hece that

4. for anrthe Soviet. Communist Party}
tare:buti-not un: Central - Comm ce has “eal

west
was!


--- Page 30 ---
74-00000

12 May 1964

MEMORANDUM FOR: “Acting Chief, Support Branch ya SS ,

Chief, Operational Support Division .

AEFOXTROT
4262 622

pote ‘Vy This ‘merhorandum is primarily, for the record and will,

record the essence of a meeting held on the morning of 12-May, =

1964,. at. which “the following were present; Messrs, Charles Kane, ae
“Jack Bauman, OS; Dr. Charles Bohrer, Medical Staff; Messrs. oa Ste
Bagley, Karrfévich fate), ‘McMahon and David Murphy, SR Division, a

The essence of this meeting w was furnished to the Acting
ort Branch on 12 May 1964, as follows: . Loe

“Subject will receive a “yegular diet with modest regulated |
portions, He is to have no dessert or "trimmings,"
but may have the necessary silverware with which to
eat properly.’ (CAUTION--Extreme care should be ©
exerciged with regard to controlling the silverware,
and it was suggested that at least two of the guards:
be required to count the silverware in and out; that . *
the silverware be placed on the tray in a manner
where it could be observed before the guards enter

the room, etc.)

Anos; 2

(2) Arrangements are to be made for the installation of
adequate air-conditioning equipment to insure that a
comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under-
stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available
through Logistics channels,)

(3) Subject is to receive a bath; change ‘of underwear;
change of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed,

SECHET



--- Page 31 ---
14-0000

ceive a haircut,’ the shorter the better,’

ive one cigarette on 12 May 1964, : a

peo hota Bossa, . : oe
(NOTE--These changes with regard to the bath, haircut, -

' cigarette are not to-be considered as something tobe.
. done of a regular-schedule.’ We will await specific
instructions ‘from SR_.Divisiog as to when these items

are to-be accomplished in the future.) --

(6). Effective immediately, Dr. Bohrer will visit the
Subject only on Tuesday each week, oo

In addition to the above, it rafist be emphasize that :
.our. attitude toward the Subjéct will remain precisély -) *
he Same, and‘sur security procedures, including

wil! continue to be at maximum control,’

3.—It-was further ascertoined that we will have custody of
the’ Subject utitil atleast. July, : It was suggested that perhaps we may
wish to explore some modifications in the assignment of personnel
-or schedule of assignments. In addition, the Acting Chief, Support
’ Branch has suggested that immediate consideration be given to
“devising necessary procedures to be followed in the event of an :
emergency involving loss of control of the Subject, This should “~~
be discussed immediately with the responsible DFO supervisors...
and specific procedures devised, and all guards Properly informed
as to their responsibilities in this matter, -

Jack M. Bauman

Bauman/ewd(5-12-64) -

enact
eaeeaes 0

Ubu .



--- Page 32 ---
[14-0000

(0 AUBNSTRATIE:

wt

ee at

NS AT AM OOM yagi Tye

. .M@AORANDUM FOR: - Spotl Age Agent tn Charge » Soo :
en District Field Office _
1 “y TESIIX, Goorge George ¥.

¥ Instrictions Regering Cus yet). 7
8262 See ee 8D/1 tety

a 7 ls Reference Sh tee to tha outdo of crgeney Sastrctna
: eee ng cou cn 3 iy 1980 tor lesdguartere epspval, a

“Sg, cig.) nM OuMBea Ae arzroved end stout be teptemated _
tmaediateay.”

PRT E RPE epee,



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

. . a TQ BF Crovca por ananeeee
ws a “ . Of be eG tase § ud BOLIC €.

. ‘

1 July 1964

MEMORANTUM FOR: Headquarters:

‘SUBJECT «ss: LESHIX, George’ M. ; “
ee . . (Brergency Instructions Pegariing Custoty’ or)
. #e62 622 sp/r ; :
: . ’

l. Attached are inatructions and. procedures, to be followed ‘fa.
the event of | emergency situations affecting the SUBJECT 's health, ces
'" gafety and custody, as vell as the security of the safehcune vhere’ :
“SUBJECT 19 currently teing held. : sous

2. This is toforalize instructions which, for the ‘most fart,
are already in effect and have been briefed to the personnel of the

District Prelt Orrree ano are cOnvEMET With this case.

Be 3 Dissemination of copies of these instructions to’ resbers of .
: the Special Security Tetail will be made upon notification of Headquarters
~ approval. . .

Attachment:
Bnergency Instructions (2)

CEI OY ALOELHE On



--- Page 34 ---
fiz-o0000

Ais quarters during an energency, a minisen of four guards 5

SENGHIcY IystRcTIONS:

. Instructions and procedures are set forth below for the handling
of emergency situations: such a3 fire, “the-escape or attexpted escape
of SUBJECT, and the Sudien {llness or serious injury. to the SUBJECT, —
Should such ‘situations Srise, 1¢ might de necessary to call on the -
Police, the. Fire: Departzent, or outside. modieal facilities for asaistance,
Tt. 15 possible: that~in: such an event. representatives of the presa or _ .
curlosity-seekerg in.the local comunity miuht be attractea to the site,
thereby creating security. problems with reopect to the custody and -
protection of the SUSIZG> from a publicity standpoint, . eS

. In view of the adove, it ts therefore imperative that these ins
otructions te thoroughly understood and memorized by all personnel
assigned to the Special Security Detail on this case,

. a (Main House):

.1. In case of fire in the Main House, the person discevering the
fire should apply ‘the .nésrest ‘fire extinguisher, unless, ia his Judgment,
the fire has reached such ‘Proportions where avallable equinzent would be
useless, Simultaneously, he sneuld dispatch another memde> of the Security
Cetail to alert the Sentor Security Agent (SSA) and the othe> occupants
of the house. If no one is available in the immediate vicinity, the
Ferson discovering the rire should alert others in the house by shouting

2. Upon being notitted of a fire, the SSA shall be responsible for
directing the fighting of the fire, protecting classified gn3 sensitive
dccuments and equipment on the Prenises, calling the local Fire Department
1f ctreunstances warrant, and evacuating personnel. Also, at the first
avallable Opportunity, the SSA should call the SAC or ASAC, or if they
cannct be reached, a senior D570 Agent, and furnish hin with nay particulars
concerning the Situation and the acticn being taken.

3. In utilizing merbers of the Security Detail tn ferting a fire,
1t should be borne in that tvo guards mist te rainta on the
third floor at al} tins So long as the SBUECT remains oo:
his quarters. If it should becane necessary to remove the X!

shou

resent unless Circumstanss are such a3 to make this infeasible. In
pre:



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

= Clinton Mre Deyartoent. |

of available personnel and fire extinguishers to combat the fire.

EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS

-(Cént inued) : ; ; .

- any: event, every 3 “poootble ‘security precaution should be taken during

the novenent of & SLSECT , | Aneluding the. use of handcuffs or ary other.

; restraining devices deened necessary in order to maintain Hoar custody
and control over the. SUBJECT and Prevent his escape. so .

ee aes: the. judgment of ‘the ‘SSA, a fire has reached, or ‘is likely
to reach proportions that it could not be controlled by firefighting -

equipment on the premises, ‘it shall be his reaponsibtlity to netify the”
In this event, the Security Detail snows

“to remove the SUBJECT from the premises prior to

move with diszpa:

_ arrival of the Pire Department.’ The SUBJECT should be Placed in an

automobile, accompanied by four members of the Security Letall, and
driven away fron.the preaiees. At appropriate intervals, teleznone .
calls should te made to the safehouse. If no anower 10 received, the

. cognizant DEO. oftictal should be nantacted. for..instructions as 6 wheather -
-to return to the safehouse - OF. ‘proceed to an alternate site. . cee

FIRE
. (Tenant House)

1. In case of fire in the Tenant House, the occupants thereof
should be instricted to inmediately notify the Main House and +o use
any available mezcs to combat the rire until assistance arrives, unless
the fire is out of control, in which case all efforts should te directed
towards the evacuation of the occupants of the premises. It eroudte .

‘clearly understood that in no case should any of the occupants of the

Tenant House call the Fire Department. This decision {5 the zole respon-
sibility of the 554.

2. “Upon notification of a fire in the Tenant House, the person
notified should immediately inform the SSA and assist in tre eispetching

in the judgment o2 the SSA, the fire has reached, or.is 11h
proportions that 1£ could not te controlled by the avallayle
equipment, it shell be his responsibility to notify the Ci
Departrent and to taxe necessary precautionary measures to preven
observation of the SUBJECT by riremen or other unauthorized Fercoas wno
might be attracted to the scene.



--- Page 36 ---
14-0000

: . EMERGENCY ICISTRUCTIONS
i (Continued)

3. At the first available opiertunity, the G2A should call the
SAC’ or ASAC, or if they cannct te reached, a senior DFO Agent, and
furnish him with full partioulars neo erning the situation and 2 the
action deing taken. . oO

ESCAPE OR ATISNSTSD ESCAPE

. l. Strict vigilance and security should te maintained ona | atl
fh. - au hour basio in accordance with established procedures in order to :
“ discourage and prevent the SUNEE's escape. If GUBJECT should make
an attempt to escape, sufficient force should be used as 18 necessary
under the circumstances in ornier to subdue the EVEJECT and maistain —
custody and control over him. SEcveres, unnecessary brutality and the ’
indiscriminate use of force will nct te cordoned. .

, ‘2. AU personnel assigned to she Special Security Detail on duty

. at the site shall be alerted by means of the emergency alarm anefor
Q, : other appropriate means, and brought into play on any escape attexpt.
a “ Should: the SUBJECT succeed in es = from the house proper, the SSA. ; 7 .
po shall be responsible for coordinating and directing a hot pursuit of Soe
the SUBJECT by all means availatis. : : :

3. The use of firearms should Se scrupulously avoided exeest in
extreme circumstances. of self-defense. However, the SSA under circum
stances that indicate there are her means of preventing SCAISCT's
_total escape, may direct a quai Sivearms-trained agent to fire
“shots over SUPBJECT's head folloves ty verbal varning to halt. In no
event, except in self-defense as maint above, will an agent shcot

directly at the SUBJECT.

al Dat the first available opportunity, the £4C/DM, or in his
absence, one of the ASACs, shold te lephonically advised of a1
the circumstances surrounding an 2
the Folice be netified unless act

ILLESS O8 TATT '

us injury to the SUNEN,

1. “In case of sudden illness ot
& designated by him in the event

Or. Charles BOHRER, or other phys:



--- Page 37 ---
1400000
“

“-, Jeraons. “ :

EVERGENCY LisTHGrions . :

(Continued)

of his absence, should be immediately notified and advice obtained as .
to any emergency action which should be taken pending his arrival, . :
Likewise, the CAC or ASAC/EYO saculd be notified immediately after — |
talking to the doctor in orter that he might be apprised of the situation
and any instructions or treatment’ prescribed by the doctor. Reyardicos'
of any instructions given ty +2 doctor, no action shall be taken to~ i
Femove the SUBJECT from tre premises or to commnicate with any hospital’
or ambulance service withait tne prior authorization of the SAC or ASAC.:
2. Should 1t become necezsary to remove the SUBJECT to a hospital
or other location away fron tne prenises, every possible precaution .
should be taken to maintais close custody and control over hia, asd to
prevent disclosure of his trie ifeutity and status to unauthorized

‘8S AND INFORMATION

: ” GEVERAL INSTAL ;
-le Two men on duty on third floor who will keep SUPJECT undsr .

constant observation twenty-four hours a day. ;

2. Four men in attendance whenever SUBJECT leaves cell while
confined to third floor. :

3. Six men in attendance whenever SUBJECT is taken to interrogation
rocm on second floor, all tc remain available in adjoining room for
removal signal from visitors.

4. Coveralls taken from SZIZCT at 2200 hours and returned the
following morning at O7CO ho:irs Gaily, leaving SUBJECT in shorts and

undershirt overnight.
5. Military appearance end prompt shift schedules caintained at
all times when in presence cf SJBIECT. _

6. Careful coon search, t=cluding clothes and bunk, to be conducted
cvery tine SUBJECT leaves cell.

7. SUBJECT rust stand fn West corner of cell facing wall whenever
anyone but Dr. BOHRER enters cell.

-L-


--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

ary

EGPSEICY PIsTAUcTIoNS

(Cont toued

& Windovs in cell to remain blacked out.and doors to other rooma
on 3rd floor to be closed and locked when SUBJECT leaves cell, in ofder
to prevent his decoming oriented to surroundings. -

9. No unnecessary conversation shall be conducted with OBJECT or

-anong agents, nor shall any mention of last names.be made Within SUBJECT's -

hearing. . :

19. SUBJECT is not to have accass to newspapers and magazines, nor’
permitted to hear radio or television, nor shall there be any discussion .
Of news events within his hearing. He may be provided selected reading.
matertal upon authorization of Headquarters personnel concerned with the

Cane.

ll. Recording devices to be promptly activated in order to pick up
any comments by SUBJECT or conversation between him and the doctor or

other operational personnel. . co 7

12. Any unusual or significant comments, movements or activities
of SiZJECT to be promptly brought to the attention of the SSA. Sant

13. “Telephone numbers of key Security and Operational personnel,
as v2ll as Photographs and physical description of SUBJECT to te maintained
in @ secure place for ready reference by the SSA, .

14. Should it becone necessary to ansver questions ty the Police
or Fire Department regarding the site, Personnel at the site, or with
Specific reference to the SUBJECT, such inquiries should be handled
by the SCA with the senior Police or Fire Department official on the
scene. The SSA should converse in private with such offictal, and
identify hirselr by utilizing his DODD credential. He should explain
briefly, and only to the extent necessary, that the property is leased
end that tt is used occasionally for training purposes. AL? inquirtes
concerning the SUBJECT should be parried, if possible. However, if
necessary, it may be explained that the SUBJECT has a mental disorder
which soretines requires special treatment. He should not be identified
under his alias or otherwise. The SSA should tactrully but firmly request
that his om identity, plus hts DOD affiliation, be held in strict conridence,
especially with regard to the press. Inguiries by mexbers of the press .
or mecters ef the civilian Population should be answered ty stating that
the site fs rented by a private group who meet periodically fer recreation.



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

EMERGENCY INSTXICTIONS
(Continued)

GPECIAL CONTACTS

1. George PASDTAULIS, Chief of Felice, Prince Georges County.
, (Personally know to SNODUY uster GOLIATH) :

2. Lieutenant MOON, Comanding Officer, Barracks H, Waldorf,
Marylani, Maryland State Police. (Perrcnally know to PZPPRALL
under GOLIATH) , : a oon

t 3. Emergency Ambulance - Greene ei% Volunteer Fire Department.
(Can t4 cotained through SHOTS) : : .

Above not to be contacted unless azthorized by SAC or ASAC.

i - Do,
! : , : -6-


--- Page 40 ---
114-0000

core

MOSANOUM FOR TID RECORD

GCongren: tonal Contacts oa the

SVISZCT: Svisfing of &

Yuriy Iva. sevdich Nusenko Case

The Director haviay anproved tia procegal in my draft remo
sefing of key coazressioaal ©
vanovick Movexno case, I

ney Cony ressioaal Subco

: Seve brisiod tha follow stett oilleses 0 of Ay |
miltega aloas the linea Pa Fopoaed on the Gates indicated: , oo . |

. - F Praak Slatingbek, Asaistant Chicé Counsel, House
—— Arnwd So: svicas Camrittee +. 23 July 1989

yo WwW iam Ww codmu!, Agsistant Chis Clerk, Senate

Appre oriations Conmittse ee 24 July 1969"

Edward Eraswell, Chiot of stait, Senate Arad
Services Committes -~ 24 July 1959 SO

Nacls, Staff Assistant, louse Appropriatians
tea ee OY July 1999

os Robert 44
Cor

|

a the matter to the PFesractive |
None of the starr ofilesea |
!

j

t

“2. Isuggeated to each that they ment:
Fopea wea and if they ihourht di ac
recistezed particulas concers or ecucicsi
eoettfal that al ofc our csasrmon }

$ the case and I thiah it
atormed. Nevertt selesa, £
acd see no need to purave ft

aa
SB rie ae
CUNT AfAUaY
Lsstalative Couasal

wluteiaiioa:
Criginal - CLC Subject eile
lbeooe
Ue Chief, CI sacs
1+ Chief, SB Sivision
1+ SJSecurity
3- coe
+ GLE Chrono



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

. " . OFranns .
- O2U5kE EUES AY
iiss see

| DRAFT: MM - 19 Juno. 1969°
SUBJECT: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts on the Nosenko.Case : .

‘The “following paragraphs are proposed 3 ae guidance for briefing key .
congressional ¢ contacts on the history and status of the Yuriy Ivanovich } Nosenko
, ‘case, They aro based prinarily on material provided by S3 Division, and have .
been cleared by SB, ci Staff and the Office of Security, Iti is proposed that _

" the (Chairmen ‘and/or oenior staff of cers of each ‘of ‘tha ) Agency: Subcommittoos

‘be briefed along the lines indicated,

. ees

peo re This: case goes ‘back « sometinie’ into aistory and you may, Fecal

4
"naving heard of it several years ago. From time to time it has roceived a

press play, both when it first broke in early 1964 and occasionally, since,
2. Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenkxo, ‘a Staff Officer of the Committee for :

- State Security (KGB) of the USSR, and son of a former Minister of Saip- . .. a

buiiding in the ussR, detected to the e Agency in Geneva, Switzerland, oa

4% February 1964. He waa then brougat to the United States where ne has

since been in the custody of the Agency unéergoing extensive dedrietings -
by oiticera of the Agency and the FSI.

: . ’

os v

ase ®



--- Page 42 ---
14-0000

3. Nosenxo had buen a KGB oiticer for approximately ten years .
at the time of hie defection. Nosenkxo has providud a large quantity of -
counter-intelligence data and a limited amount of positive intelligences
For exampie, one of his reports played a part in the negation of a major
hostile penetration in Great Britain. Whero appropriate, ‘his information
has been shared with the FBI, other u. Ss. Government agencies and 7
fordign Laiaon porvicas. This has resulted in extensive and ‘continuing

a invostigative ‘activity. In addition, Nosenko identified many hundreds of

Soviet Intelligence Officers and provided a considerable quantity of useful

i information on the organization of the KGB, ite operational doctrine and

‘ite techniques and methods.

bbe, 4. In debriefing him it became apparent that Nosenko, the priviloged

> and undisciplined son of a former ranking Minister of the Soviet Government,
wae a particularly complex personality, one given to exaggeration of hia own . :

; importance. In this regard, certain aspects of hia life history, when

: , weighed against other information already in our possession, -raieed some

doubts concerning hia veracity. To permit extenaive and prolonged debriefing,

arrangements were made to accommodate Nosenko under highly secure .

conditions. These arrangements were dictated, during the initial phases

at least, by the additional need to provide Noseako with continuing personal

ptotection since there was the distinct possibilicy thas, as a KGB officer,



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

ee

wee nen

. 5 Py
he would be fargotted for "executive action" if the Soviets should discover
his whereabduta: With the pascage of-time, thi lalter factes is ecsidored

. to be sufficiently diminisned to justify a phased normalization of Nosanko! 8

situation--this despite tho fact that-somo points remaia unresolved concerning
hia bona fid

@ full’period of his

-otay in the United States Nosenko has cooperated with hia interrogators and

. with the other. officara raszanaibla far hin safety and welfare, anc. our

current efforte are being directed toward his gradual adjustment to a normal,

6. This action ia being taken in full recognition of the normal

sete apts A ee en - a

problems of ‘readjustment experienced by many defectors ae @ well a asthe

fact that Nosenko ia a potentially greater problem than most, He is: an
individual whose actions during resettlement may not always be predictable

or wise from the point of view of hia own security. We are hopeful that

Nosonko is sensible enough to realize that undua publicity caused by any rash

action on hie. part could lead to unpleasant, perhaps even dangerous consequences,

particularly for himself, ‘Ye therefore beliave it appropriate to take this

oA

calculated ziak in an atierat to steer him toward a reasonably normal live, .



--- Page 44 ---
14-00000 eal

u.

NOSENKO

Question #1 - Conditions under which Nosenko was held while at,
Clinton? Locked in? Let outside for entertainment?

Prisoner? Treatment?
Answer:

. During the period of 4 April 1964-13 August 1965, Nosenko
was held in strict confinement under the following conditions:

a. Confinement in single room except for
periods of interrogation.

: b. Constantly under guard and subject to 24 hour
— visual observation with regular room search,

ce. Dress was coveralls and food was of sufficient
quantity but limited in variety.

d. No unnecessary conversation was permitted, radio
and television were not allowed, newspapers or
any information concerning current events were
forbidden and reading material was extremely
limited. .

Question #2 - Conditions at ISOLATION. ‘Same as above.

Answer:

During the period of 13 August 1965 to 25 October 1967,
conditons cited above were basically maintained with the
following additons or changes: . ‘

a. From February 1966 to May 1967, Nosenko was
furnished no reading material.

b. After May 1967, Nosenko was periodically given.
a different volume of the Encyclopaedia ae
Britannica to read.

c. From February 1966 to October 1967, Nosenko
was not permitted cigarettes.

d. Subject was permitted daily exercise in a small
confined area outside the building when weather
permitted. :

’

en

SN tere Bae cre sane’ UW

Mah?

aie

te;

n
i


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

wy

Question #3 - Did McCone or Raborn have any information on this:

What? .

Answer:.

Office of Security records contain only limited information
in regard to this question. The SH Division (then SR) was the
responsible office for the confinement of Nosenko until late
October-1967 when total responsibility was transferred to the
Office. of Security by the DCI. It is presumed that the DCI was
Bo. _ at leust generally aware of the confinement of Noscnko and the
: conditions of. confinement, but any definite statement must be

; - based on SE records.

Question #4 : Where is Nosenko working now?

Answer:

Nosenko is currently employed at hls personally owned’
residence in North Carolina, We is engaged in research and
analytical work based on his previous knowledge of the KGB.

F and other Soviet matters. He is in the Washington, D. C. area
ad for several days approximately every six weeks for direct
interviews by the FBI and Office of Security personnel.

Question #S - Is he working for CIA?
Answer? :

spo Nosenko has been employed by the Agency on a’-full-time.

! contractual basis since 1 March 1969. The original contract

i has been periodically amended to reflect additional remuneration,
primarily to compensate for cost of living increases. In late
197%, Nosenko was compensated by mutual agreement for salary —
not received during the 1 April 1964 to 1 March 1969. In addition, ;
on 12 July 1973 Nosenko signed an acknowledgement and release :
of the United States.Government and the Central Intelligence

Agency from any claims prior to that date.

Question #6 - What is his legal status?

Answer:

Nosenko was naturalized as a United States citizen in
April 1974,



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

SECREL.

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Inspector General

SUBJECT : The Nosenko Case

Attached please find a summary of a document written in
1967 tothe General Counsel outlining the Nosenko case and ~
explaining to him actions which had been taken with regard to
Nosenko. As noted in the first paragraph, in October 1967

‘ Nosenko took up residence in the Washington area and was

advised that, should he wish to leave the apartment for any
location whatsoever, he was’ {ree to so do. In other words,

“from that date, Nosenko was essentially a totally free man.
“That he chose not to flee in any way may be indicative of his

“attitude towurd the manner in which he was handled prior to —
October 1967. :

While one can criticize the fact that Nosenko was kept
incommunicado for approximately three years, and therefore

presumably denied full civil rights, the attached document
docs indicate, we believe, that the Agency was on the horns

“of a dilemna in this regard. There were legitimate doubts

about. Nosenko's bona fides and concern that he was a Soviet
plant. There. was no Country.to which he could be deported
save the Soviet Union, and Nosenko himself refused to return
there. ‘Yet, in the United States, save when isolated from
society, he was considered to be a continuing threat to
national security.

Recognizing that only legal experts can judge defini-
tively the merits of the case, it seems to the writer that
the Agency had.no choice but to hold Nosenko incommunicado
pending resolution of his bona fides. He was admitted to
the United States under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (§)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act, namely as a parolee
to the Agency. As a parolee, Nosenko de facto from the date
of his entry to the United States did not enjoy the full civil
rights of the normal citizen. He was a ward of the Agency, in
a sense, and the Agency was ultimately responsible for his

£2 IMPDET
CL BY 018307

SECRET


--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

Bote | ; in a a

“ SECRET

\
conduct. There were at the time very legitimate reasons: to
believe that full and total release of Nosenko would be an
_ abrogation by the Agency of its legal responsibility. To
i gainsay that decision in retrospect is, we believe, an error,
:In sum, ‘the act of defection places the defector at the mercy
of the: laws of the country to which he defects. It is the
obligation of the accepting country to see to it that the
laws are followed. In the Nosenko cuse, it secns to us that
the Agency acted in a fully responsible manner to ensure that
its responsibility for the defector was met. While it was
unfortunate that it took so long to resolve the matter, we
can find no fault with the fact that the Agency met its
responsibility to both the United States and to Nosenko
himself. :

Attachment: A/S

SECRET

os

Gabe

mh
fl in oe

i
ae


--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

“* SECRET

“em,

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Yuriy Svanovich NOSENKO

~ In early or mid-1967, the Agency General Counsel was
; . , provided ‘a summary of the Nosenko case. The nesorandum
sought an advisory Opinion from the General Counsel on the
Agency's legal basis for its handling of Nosento through
; that date and on the legal aspects on the eventual disposi-

tion of Nosenko,. Shortly subsequent to this gsexorandum to

the General Counsel, Nosenko took up residence in October 1967

in an apartment in the Washington area and was reminded that

_ Should he wish, he could. travel freely anywhere ‘at’ anytime,

He gradually Created a new life for himself in the United

States and hds indicated on several Occasions that he holds

no ill feeling about his. handling by the Agency at anytime, :
Background - ..— : : . |

' Nosenko voluntarily established contact with CIA repre- ,

sentatives in Geneva in 1962. He identified hinself as a

staff officer of the KGB's internal security directorate. and

offered to sell counterintelligence information. This offer

Was accepted and he was recruited as an agent in place and

SECRET


--- Page 49 ---
14-00600

ey
3

SST

debricfed on countcrintelligence matters during five meetings

in Geneva. He then returned to the USSR. He came to Geneva |

again in January 1964 as the security officer for the Soviet

disarmament delegation, After a number of mectings with his
CIA handlers “he defected on 4 February. 1964 and was secretly
taken to Frankfurt, Germany, crossing the Swiss-German border
on the night of 4/5 February with alias U.S. Army identity
documents. In Geneva. and again upon arrival in Frankfurt,
Nosenko wrote out’ an asylum request, requesting political
asylum from the U.S. Government. .

Because serious doubts about Nosenko's bona fides. had

arisen on the basis of the information he had provided both

in 1962 and in the meetings in Geneva in 1964, it was orig-

inally planned to do a detailed -bona fides debriefing and

assessment in Germany before making any decision about moving

Nosenko to the United States. However, unprecedented action

by the Soviet. Government in respect to the defection of one
of its citizens forced a change of plans. On 9 February,

unidentified Soviet sources in Geneva leaked the news to the
Press that Nosenko, described as an “expert attached to the
Soviet Delegation to the Disarmament Conference" had dis-

appeared, and that it was presumed that he had defected,

2

SECRET



--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

oe . \ _ a,
“ SECRET °

aly

\
Because of mounting pressure’ ‘from the press, which included
much speculation that Nosenko was a high level scientist or
disarmament expert, it was decided that the State Department
would make a brief announcement acknowledging Nosenko's
request for asylum in. the U.S. and identifying him'as a
member of the KGB. This was done on 10 February... On 11 Feb-
ruary, the Sovict Government delivered a note to the American
Embassy in Moscow asking how Nosenko left Switzerland and”
requesting an immediate interview with him and his ‘release.
On 12 February, Soviet Ambassador to the Disarmament Confer- |
ence TSARAPKIN held a press conference in Geneva in which he
accused-the Swiss Government of failure to Cooperate in

locating Nosenko. Although the Swiss categorically rejected

‘these charges, the American Ambassador to Switzerland recom-|

mended that Swiss authorities be allowed to interview Nosenko
to convince themselves that Nosenko had left Switzerland of
his own free will. ,

On 12 February 1964, on the instructions of the Director,
Nosenko was brought to the United States. He travelled by
commercial air, again using alias U.S. Army identification, ©
and was admitted to the country.at New York City (in true
name) on parole under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)

of the Immigration and Nationality Act.

3

SECRET



--- Page 51 ---
4g-00000

SECAET

On 13 February, representatives of the Swiss and Soviet

“Embassies in Washington advised the State Department that

~ they desired interviews with Nosenko. On W. February, in

Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GRONYKO called. in- Ambassador

“KOHLER and protested, "impernissable activities" on the part”

of the.U.S, in Nosenko's case. Soviet press spokesmen took

an even harder line to Western correspondents, and accused
the U.S, of kidnapping Nosenko. On the afternoon of 14 Sep-
tember, at two Separate interviews, he spoke first to Swiss

Embassy and then to Sovict Embassy r representatives. At

‘these interviews, which were also attended by State Department’

and INS- officials, Nosenko confirmed that he left Switzerland

of his own free will’ -to seek asylun in the U. se In addition, |

he replied to questions of the Sovict Embassy representative
to the effect that he was renouncing his Soviet citizenship.

On the evening of 14 February, the.U.S. State Department made

a brief formal reply to the Soviet protest, then issued a
brief statement to the press noting that the interviews had
been held and that Nosenko had confirmed his desire to remain
in this country.

From the time of his arrival to 4 April 1964, Nosenko
was housed in the Washington area. During this period, reg-

ular systematic debriefing was’ commenced, and Nosenko was

SECRET



--- Page 52 ---
14-0000

SECRET ee

made available to representatives of the FBI for debriefing

on mutters affecting their responsibilities. Although allowed

out for evening and week-end excursions, Nosenko was ut all
times accompanied by O/S personnel. In addition, he took a
two-week vacation to Hawaii, again accompanied by caso offi--
cers and security guards, Evidence continued to mount that
he was a KGB plant, and at the same time it becanie obvious
that it would be impossible to proceed further, to. resolve

the many suspicious points and contradictions -that. had arisen

without changing the conditions in which he was being held.

Nosenko was growing increasingly uncooperative, especially
when sensitive areas were touched upon, and constantly pressed’
for the legalization of his status in the U.S. and the issuance oe -

of an alien registration card. .At the same time, Noscnko's

heavy drinking and other unruly personal habits were causing
increasing difficulties to the security personnel charged with
keeping him under control and out of trouble at all times in
accordance with Agency local responsibility. It was clear
that it was only a matter of time before he created a public
scandal. More importantly, he was in a position. to communi-
cate with the KGB since physical control could not be absolute.
On 4 April 1964, Nosenko voluntarily underwent a polygraph

examination. The resutts of this examination indicated deception:
‘

s

SECRET


--- Page 53 ---
14-0000

“ SERET

en a number of critical points indicating that ‘he was sent
‘by the KGB to perform one or more missions which also involved
his penetration of the Agency and its. operations. It was

decided, therefore, that the physical circumstances of Nosenko's

stay in thi

be more easily controlled, and his outing privileges were _ .

suspended pending resolution of bona fides, Lone

It is worth noting that had we not taken the above action

but accepted Nosenko.at face value, it is quite possible that

ould ha rit eries of operationa.
ay

actions could have been very embarrassing to the U.S. Government . 4

Ma Te we politically and-damaging~to-U:S. ‘national-security: “FOF @xar

ple, his chief operational Proposal at the time, and one that ’
he was most insistent that we should proceed with immediately,
involved the compromise of @ very senior Soviet official,
Beginning in April 1964, hundreds of hours were devoted
to interrogations of Nosenko (in which he willingly cooperated)

ania great deal of time was spent on exhaustive collateral

6

SECRET

wee



--- Page 54 ---
™

SET Ss

investigations. We concluded that it had been established
beyond reasonable doubt that Nosenko wus a KGB agent who.
established contact with CIA, subsequent ly defected on _KGB
instructions, and that he came to the United States on a_
deception mission. The implications of this mission had a ~
grave and “direct “bearing on U.S. national security. Although
our findings were supported by the results of two polygraph
examinations, the nature of the evidence was tnadmissable in
a court of law. In any case, it is clear that Nosenko had
not been in a position to perform any overt act of ‘transgres-
sion of U.S. espionage Laws since 4 April 1964 whén he was :
placed in-a. restricted area and deprived of any conceivable
means of communication with the KGB. oC
Nosenko did not admit that he defected on KGB orders

or that he came to the U.S. on a KGB mission, He has admitted,

however, that he made numerous lies about- his personal history
and about the details of his KGB service to U.S. officials,

both before and after arriving in the United States.

Coordination with Other U.S. Government Agencies

. USIB Members. [n accordance with the DDCI's ruling
relating to a defector who has been a member cf a hostile
intelligence service, Nosenko's status and handling was dis-

cussed at an executive session of USIB and decided on. an

7

SECHET



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000

. SECRET

ad hoc basis. Nosenko defected on & February 1964, and the

Secretary. of State, the Attorney General, the Special Assis-

tant to the President on National Security Affairs, McGeorge

Bundy, General Carroll, Director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the FBI were all notified immediately. On 5 Febru-
ary 1964, General Carter reported the defection to an executive
session et USIB and followed this up with formal statements ‘to
USIB members on ll and 19 February 1964, which stated that -—_—...
Nosenko's bona fides had not yet been established. It was ‘3
agreed that no DS number would be issued to Kosenko, and that
he would be handled on a special basis by this Agency. In
fact, normal USIB interest in Nosenko as a defector dropped
off drastically as it became quickly apparent that he had no.
positive intelligence interest of value to any part of the’
community. '

he President was informed of the full extent of our
suspicions ‘about Nosenko's bona fides by the then Director,

Mr. Mccone, on 11 February 1964, Nv. Patrick Coyne, Executive

, Secretary of the PFIAB, was given a similar briefing by

Mr. Helms on 19 February 1964.

Generals Carroll and Fitch of DIA were also subsequently
informed of: the problems about Nosenko's bona fides.

SECRET



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000

_~

EGRET

The Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson, and other,”
senior officials in the Department of State were informed of
our reservations about Nosenko's bona fides and our fears that
he might be a dispatched KGB agent. In discussions about the
possibility of Nosenkots eventual deportation, the Secretary :
of State expressed serious concern about the adverse reaction :
that such a move night have on other potential defectors.

The Director of Security, State Department, was informed

of the bona Fides problem at an.carly date. We have worked
closely with this office since then on the problem of eval-
uating the significance of Nosenko's information as it affects
the security interests of. the State Department.

Because so much of Nosenko's information affected U.S,
internal security matters for which the FBI bears primary
responsibility, and because the possibility that Nosenko was
a ¥S2 plant had a direct bearing on the validity of certain
F2i operations, the FBI was kept fully informed on our views
about Nosenko's bona fides and our progress in interrogating
and investigating him from the moment of his defection. The

FEI liaison officer was told of our reservations on Nosenko* s

bona fides as early as 5 February 1964. The Director of the

F31 and his deputy for Internal Security, William Sullivan,

were kept completcly up to date, and we coordinated all major

9

SECRET


--- Page 57 ---
14-0000

Purports to be.

SECHET

aspects of our handling Noseako with them. After a long
meeting with Sullivan and other FBI representatives to review
Nosenco's case on l April 1964, the FBI interposed no objec-

tions to our proposal to restrict Nosenko's mavements and
commence hostile interrogation. Subsequently, -the FBI for--_
mally agreed with our findings - ‘on Nosenko,: at least to the
extent that "On considering carefully the results of your
interrcyations of Yuriy Nosenko and your analysis of his
statements and activities, it does appear he is not what he

While this Bureau is not in a position to

draw any conclusion in this case, we do recognize it is

‘possible that Nosenko could be a Soviet plant or agent pro-

vocateur,*

Tae then Acting Attorney General Mr.

(and several members of his staff) were apprised of our res-

ervations about Nosenko on 2 April 1964 and an opinion was

sought from him both as to interpretation of the exclusion

and. pzrole agreement, and as to. how we. should proceed in the

event that it proved necessary to deport Nosenko from this

country. .
Efforts to Keep the KGB from Learning of Our Awareness of

Nosenxo'’s True Status

From the time we learned that Nosenko had been sent to
this country on a KGB mission it was obvious that if we were

10

SECRET

Nicholas Katzenbach

Bard


--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

SECRET

to have the time to analyze and resolve this case, and to
plan and execute appropriate countermeasures, it was essential

that we attempt to keep the KGB fron. learning of our awareness

_ of Nosenko's true status. Consequently, detailed knowledge

of ‘the depth and scope of our suspicions about Nosenko, and
the implications thereof, was restricted te a very few people
in the Agency and the. intelligence community. Nonetheless,
we did advise key policy echelons. and principals in the intel-

ligence community, even though this carried the inevitable

_Yisk of leakage.

Soviet Inspired Inquiries

In 1966 there were several indications that the. Soviets
were making a serious effort’ to find out what happened to
Nosenko and to force him to the surface. The most blatant
and unusual of these was the ‘approach by a Soviet journalist,
Yuriy KOROLEV (a known KGB agent), to the French magazine
Paris Match with an offer to provide photographs and materials

for an exclusive story of Nosenko and his family. According

to Korolev, Nosenko's wife was considering an approach to an

zation in an effort to obtain

international juridicial orgai
compensation from Nosenko for: damages caused by his abandon-

ment of her and her children. ' In responding to this approach
we quoted a statement, purporting to be fror Nosenko himself,

, oa

‘SEORET

a: a

TEER. SGETE TS CIT CUES TITTY Te



--- Page 59 ---
14-0000

SECRET

to the effect that Nosenko considers this approach to repre-
sent blatant and’ cruel manipulation. of his family by the KGB
and that he will not lend himself to the scheme by agreeing
to an interview or in any other way.
Nosenko's Status .
To recapitulate, Nosenko entered the United States on

12 February 1964 on parole to the Agency under the provisions
of Section 212 (d) (5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act. Parole résponsibility is delegated to the Agency by
the Attorney General under the terms of an agreement executed
by the Attorney ‘General and the [<I on 10 February. 1955,
which states:

“After parole of such aliens, the Central Intel-'—

ligence Agency will assume responsibility for

‘care, supervison and control of a kind and

deyree it believes consistent with the internal

security needs of the United States during con-

tinuance of their parole status." ;
In accordance with our understanding of this agreement, and
because we had reason to believe that Nosenko was a conscious
and willing agent “of a hostile intelligence service, we.
ensured that he was under our direct observation and control

at all times from the moment of his arrival in the United

12

SECRET



--- Page 60 ---
14-00000

At

SECRET

States. From 12 February to 4 April 1964 it was possible to
keep Nosenko at a location where he could enjoy a certain
amount of movement and of contact with the outside world.
A£ter 4 April 1964, for reasons explained above, it was
necessary to keep him incommunicado at.a location which is
known to no one outside of the Agency (and to very few within
it). “Authorization for Nosenko to remain in this country
under the Special Agreement Procedures was periodically
extended by the Immigration and Naturalization Service. _ ne ae
Although his freedom of movement had been severely
‘restricted, Nosenko was not maltreated and, he made no com- , .
plaint about his treatment. On the contrary, we had several
written statements from him in which he stated that our.
handling of him was justified and even beneficial.

Disposal

From the time that Nosenko was brought to this country

we thought about the possibility of his eventual deportation
asa contingency measure, In carly 1964, we thought that it
might be possible to mitigate the political and propaganda
drawbacks of a forced deportation by announcing that Nosenko
has confessed his true KGB role. With the passage of time,
however, and in view of our much firmer conclusions about his

real role and mission and our clearer understanding of what

13

SECRET


--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

tors. Forcible repatriation of political refugees is

SECRET

this implied, it was apparent that great practical problems

stood in the way of his deportation to either the USSR or a

’ third country.

USSR: Nosenko has categorically stated on numerous

“ occasions that. he will never contemplate return to the USSR,

and, although we suspect that-he might secretly welcome such.
a move, we would expect him to act out his part to the end
with loud protests that he was being shipped to his death,
etc. When the possibility of expulsion was discussed with
Department of State officials in 1964, both the Secretary of
State and Ambassador Thompson expressed their concern for
the adverse effect this might have on other potential defec-
against
long established U.S. policy, and would be certain to arouse
violent reaction from ethnic minority groups in the United
States. Under. these circumstances an alleged "confession"

by Nosenko would have come under very close scrutiny, and

“might have backfired very badly. Another point that had to

be considered was the possibility that the Sovicts, again

playing their part, might have refused to accept Noscnko on

the grounds that he has renounced his Soviet citizenship.
‘Third Country: Although we believed it likely that

Nosenko would accede to deportation to a third country,

14

SECHET


--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

‘ te, SECRE

there is certainly no country in the free world on which we
‘could conceivably have untoaded Nosenko without first inform-
ing them of his true status. Even if we considered this a
desirable objective, it seemed certain that the Department

of State would veto such a picce of intergovernmental duplic-

5

SEGTET


--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

- Justice Depar

-NOSENKO's initial entry into the U.S.

eceacey
OLein

Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO

NOSENKO is a Sovict intelligence officer who defected

in Switzerland in 1964. He was subsequently brought to the

U.s., and after # shore period of relative freedom, he was

conflied under strict and relatively austere conditions |.

for a peviod of approximately three years. Commencing in

1967, he was #iven increasing: amounts of freedom until he

was allowed tvral freedom in 1969. — He subsequently married

a U.S. citizen, eettled in the Southeastern United States

and became a U.S. -{tizen in 1974. Ile 1s presently under

contract to the AgencY» providing consultative services

and information on sub,iccts germane to his background.
NOSENKO was confined yhen as a result of his debricfing

substantive questions were raised concerning his bona fides,

and his general behavior raised=.urther concern about nes

cmotional health and generai safet,’’ NOSENKO? 5 debrickans

and confinement were ended when it Wes concluded that h

was not 4 threat to national security ~ he advice ° tin .

nt was obtained at the tine Srl Conte

subsequent debrae BB.

was coordinated wit.
periodically advised
the time of his

ment, and the FeI participated in his”

the Department of State, and they were
o£ his status during his confinement up to

final settlement.

The strict conditions of NOSENKO'S confinement were
intended to convey.to him the seriousness of his position
as a suspected disinformation agent and to make clear to hin that
his free settlement in the U.S. was precluded as long as
this issue was unresolved. It was understood, however,
that at any time he could have elected to end his cenfine-
ment and return to the Soviet Union. OS files do not document
that this latter condition was explicitly conveyed to
NOSENKO, however, it is the recollection of senior staff
officers (ADD/O and D/OS) that such was the case, and further
that it was a condition routinely applied to other defectors

whose bona fides were in doubt.

ae



--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

Stowe

Se )

MEMORANDUM FORt General Couneel

SUBJECT © : Nosenko

Attached is a report from the Office of Security concerning the awaree
ness of other Federal authorities (USIB, State, FBI, and I&NS), We have-

been advised by ADD/O that Nosenko at all times was advieed that he could

~ elect te leave the U. S,,, but that he could not be ensured of Immediate

lberty if he elected to stay; in a oense, we are ‘told, he elected to stay under

the conditions then prevailing, We do not yet have documentation on this.

“latter point, other than as shown in the attachment,

spe

Ss, D. Breckinridge

” Attachment: a/s

|

Cre
Relate

77 -cr ve &

_ a



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

CENTRAL INTE ot hp
- 2 Wasmineton 29.0.6 se nb . .

1, | OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL JNTELUGENCE
“ . . tee . . ston

“U2 February 1964

States Intalligencs Board Menbérs.

Yuri Ivanovich HOSENKO
. 3 ie th . 7 “
; isv This aczorandua:rofers to the State Devartzent :
Faloase of 10 February. on. Subject case and provides addl-.-.. -
_ tional background as weil as inforaation on bis exrsant .

“ status, foe tka wal. set

Lome : a
ae +

ARR ete a cae
«As a XGB staff officer, NOSENXO is regularly. .
assigned to the Counterinzallizence Directorate of the wee
XCa in Moscow but was Lacluded in the Sovict delegations
+ to the Oisarzanent Conference as part of a cover arrsage-
1, Bent which peraittod hig to carry aut iatelligeace aad.

security. functions in Gonova oa behalf of fhe XG2, -
aa loo at tone vartous-sessions of then”
J Disaraazent Conforenco hold in Gensva in 1962. Guring the
an course of thase sessions, HOSENXD souznt contact with ~~
. orlictals of the U. S. Governaont, inforacd these ofzlcials ©
- | that he was affiltatod with the Soviet State Security ap- - .
- paratus and voluatested to aid the U. 3. Governaeat in.’. vo. ae
: detecting Soviet subversive zctivity directed agaiase the :
Joo. Us Se Governaent,: During tie course of his contact with,
‘1 De Se antborities, KOSENKS stated that his cocperatioa with oo
. the U,.S, Governnent originated with his distasts‘and hatrad -. cae

for the Soviet regine in general, with his desizs to obtain .

yevenge for the unjust doath of his father, a senior official

ia the Soviet shipbuilding industry, and with the general -°-.

acziration of the Aszeric2as with whoa he kad coaa ia con-

tact within the Sevist Unica. Soe ey! ae

4, In late January 1943, NOSENZO arrived in Goneva,
again sasquerading as a mexter of the Soviut delezasion
2 the Oisarmaaeat Confarence. Subject secretly notified
CL\ centacts in ths United Stztes coacerniaz ais pras-
i thas@ cont

j
tucs in Ceasva aad arranged to :

5

CL BY 063344 *

HR 10-23°-° .
9 January 1975


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

SECRET

.

of the xKc3 op gration against U, Se Professor Sarznoora
which NOSENKO said ho had porsonally 3uparvised at the
-direction of SEMICHASTNIY, the Chairaan of the Couaittes

| {for State Security - (KGB) :

we . , Se During these. Bost ‘recent meatings NOSENKO annotneed.
vs “>. his desire 0 leave tha USs2 Peraanontly and seek his futura -
‘dn ‘tho-Nest. -te claized his new work in the £63 (Firse wae

: - Doputy Chief of that départaone charged with the survelilsace. -

+ {0 dad recruitmant of Ancrican visitors to-the USS2) was axe :
panding and that he would not be able to visit the Nost -
with any frequency. Accordingly, he preparod a request for
political asylua fa the United ‘States. te was taken to.
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing intarro-
gation. Plans are now ‘being nade to renove his to the U. 5.

"S  6e cle “should be woted that CIA contact with Subject ”"
we .. . has sot boon extansive and that ve will require additional
; _, thorough interrogation to establish Subject's bona fides,
“Ts gshouid also bo noted that NOSENKO's duties were not cons
cerned with substantive aspects of the Oisaraanent Confere
: shez aa : Teniedted-20-be abla to shed ‘Ruch,
any, light on. that area of our ioterast.°  ~ wood
woe 7. The possibility that NOSENKO's ‘defection was dao”.
. + Signed to wroek the conferoace was most carofully considered,

‘Tha decision to accope biz was taken on the conviction that .
the Soviets would not have chosea such a vulneraole agoat
is kind OF nove, ‘ :

Marshall S, Cartor .
Lieutenant Ganoral, USA
- Deputy Director .



--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

‘ . ‘ ay ‘ : —_
- ES SY

SITS renee 31 December 1974
MEMokanpum FOR: General Counsel

SUBJECT ry Office of Security reports on PARAGON, | ;
. . NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX Tandy
“ . : 7 and MOCKINGBIRD . .

1, Forwarded herewith is a 31 December 1974 Memorandum
from the Acting. Director of Security on subject activities. The

co 2, ‘Questions that occur to us in reading the attached, are:

PARAGON \

We should spell out what is meant by the* +++
statement that the FBI "deferred further coveragé ." *
to the Office of Security," how it was expressed and -
what form it took.

. The taping of two conversations does not seem
to constitute "electronic surveillance” in the usual
sense. It certainly is not trespatory surveillance,
A little more detail on the equipment will be wanted, . ;
. J

NOSENKO

We will go to the DDO for any record of DCI
knowledge, and report such information as we get.

AELADLE .

We will want to verify DDCI's approval of entry,



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

"+ CELOTEX 1

— We will want more detail on the actual —
surveillance, including possible higher approval.

This is responsive to the DCI's request for
newspaper articles that led to the surveillance.

CELOTEX It

Questions similar to CELOTEX L

No recorded (in CIA) formal approval by ,
Attorney General. It may be that Justice will -
have a copy. ,

Does this raise a question of surveillance ~
of congressmen if one is contacted by. someone -
«under surveillance? ~

exp DD. BS

° S. D. Breckinridge

Attachments a/s

3 Cul


--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

(oo .
easy . |
EYES OLY :

i
31 DEC 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
VIA : Deputy Director for Administration

SUBJECT .. © : PARAGON : °
. > 4 . 7 NOSENKO :
, AELADLE
CELOTEX 7
CELOTEX {I
MOCKINGBIRD

: 1. Attached is a report concerning Subject topics
which was requested by Mr. Scott Breckenridge of your office.
As you will'‘note, the report is in a question and answer
format with attachments.

2. This Office is still gathering material in regard Ft te,
to the SIESTA Project and REDFACE I. In addition, other vo
files are being culled to provide more details, ‘if they exist,
on the above. mentioned projects. -

“Sidney y: sfembridge
Acting Di tor of Security

’

Atts —

Distribution:
Original - Adse
1 - DDA

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 010249



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

: I, Yurly Ivanovich Nosenke, request the Governuent of
H : . . .
‘ the United States of Awcrica ty prant ne political asyliun

in the United States of Ancrica. This decision has been.

: - taken by me as the résult of considering this question

the daternal situation, tho mood of the people and the
policies of tho Seviet Governaent, I bocane convinced that -
in the USSR there Is not and never will bo truth and real

freedoa as lony as’ tho country is

_ aware of the oxistence of a real and aceutl free wortd.

Sand the spift of the ~~ eS

rss The evelits in Hungayy”
-Couaunist movenent are for ac vivid exaoples and coniiraa-

tion of tho correctness of sy own decision tu break forevor

'
3
5

with the Sovict Unton, I want to assure the Covornnent of
the United States of Anerica that I will covete all ay
streneth and knowledse to the Government and peeple of the

United States of America,

/s/ Yuriy Ivanovich Naseuno
4 Februsury 1964



--- Page 71 ---
F-00000

OP eae

poo a P :
ML EPO EEN Ke bee Oa EOS

.
AE olan

BOL, Le me
,
Pad bof bh )

pf g & . 7
£ OoRe Che PGR GL a CEI hi
wlikvocspic. fs

7)
ae CCC feed wa
COME “et 2 of CAD otlte ame .

a god ye

2 .
Lites Feerece,

oe Le 2. FLOR
ca

ZU etiex. ¢

Lo Resegpress be eee erase



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

j
i

if 4 Ne i
j the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, with full knowledge that

* authorized to hear it any information concerning the CENTRAL ie

re, I freely
ny nature apeinst the

¥Y. Dfurtherlacknowledpe that there
are nu commitments to me on the part of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGEBCY which retain unsatisfied arising: out of any of my prior
asmociations with the Apency. f fully understand that the current arrange-
mente between myself end the C ALLIGENCI AGENCY are
intended to completely encom 8 al] oblipations at any nature whutsouever
Taade to me by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, ©

‘

Vucknowledge my desire to serve the interests of the United States
by fulfilling the obligations which I have accepted in the current
arranyements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. I assert
under vath, as indicated by my signature below, that I have completely,
totally and permanently severed any and all relationships with any other
government, its agencies, organs or functionaries including the Communist
Party;, that. will not in ‘the. future advocat cach;.-oF become a*member ~
or ‘ome affiliated with any organization which advocates or teaches
become

opposition to all organized fovernment; that Uwill not in the future
a member of or become affiliated with the C
totalitarian. party; and:that L.do-nét-now nor

i Y government

Present and future relationships with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

AGENCY and I agree to keep forever secret these relationships and
my arrangements with the CENTKAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY including

-all information which I may obtain by reason of any associations with |

i
!
H
{ understand fully the need for secrecy reparding my past, |
i

of such secrecy may subject

vidlatic

P a.
pérmanen
after termination of any contracts or other
arranjements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEN Y. 3
J understand.that-I.may.not-discuss:with or-discloseto any peraon not

rtaking

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, its activities, or intelligence material under
the control of the Avency. 1 underetand that the burden is upon me to

ascertain from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY whether or not i
information is clasgified and if so, who is authorized to receive it, !

: i take the obligations set forth above frecly, without any mental
reservations or purpose of evasion.


--- Page 73 ---
14-00000

. . ~
. IN WITHESS WHEREOF. I have Nereanty set my hand and seal
: " 9 at
i : this at day of Aa ska » 1969,
. —— i oT :
& fs} IDEN 1 : :

1 \ b. 8.1

: Subscribed and sworn to before me this 2/2 day of aon, 4

/s/ IDEN 7
Z Notary*Public ee mo,

Wy ¢: expires. SegtsmSers24, 1963



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

i
i
{
i
'
'
|

“IDEN ,

Dear IDEN 1

THOSTATES GOVERN ENT, as represented by the

‘Che TEN

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under

the following terras and conditions:

1, ‘STATUS. Your legal status under ‘this contract.is that of an

independent contractor or consultant. You are not congide radar

employee of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this

contract. You will be required to hold yourself available at all times

ili requests made of you are CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

or to respond to tasks requested of you iby the * CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

AGENCY. You vill refrain from 1 eng gi

‘ore Occupation ‘until approval has been received from the. e,CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, Instructions furnished to you pursuant to

this + contract and within the terms hereof shall be as. binding “pon-you.... -

‘as if included in the written terms: here

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant

ual.he reinafter. referred-to-as- the "~~

"Authorized Government Representative, He will be fully authorized

to discuss matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this

i
contract including, but not limited to, cover arrangernents, place of

aswignment, conditions of work or any cther matters relating to your

relatio: ship with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,

3. COVER AND SECURITY. In the performance of your
SOONER AND SECURITY,

1
re$ponsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be made

reparding cover and §eneral security conditions, You may be required

ployment. Mate

wee en



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover

i .
| arranpements but itis to be expressly understood that such docunsenta

are solely for the purpose of caver and security and confer no additional

i
i

: i

legal tights or obligations and that all of your tights and obligations with i
\ i
i

j

|

'

i

a respect to the CENTRAL INTIS LLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from

this agreement, In connection with cover and security you will be .

Provided from ‘thme to time Specific instructions by the Authorized

tative and you will be required to adhere precisely

Government Represe

ructions,

-#

COMPENSATION, You will be compensated by the CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. at the rate. of Sixtéen. Thousari

3 Compensation ehall be’

able to the Authorized

monthly in accordance with arrangements accept

Governm-nt Representative, This sum is subject to Federal income

taxes and to auch income tax laws as are applicable to your place pf.

curity instructions issued by the Authorized

applicable laws and the se

tative, To assist you in establishing yourself, the

i CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will assist you in Procuring an

automobile and necessary household furnishings, providing funds therefor,

up to a maximum of Eight Thousand Dollars ($8, 000, 00). Payment of all
taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your personal

obligation and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security

instructions which will be furnished hy the Authorized Government

Representative,

+2.


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

i GOVERNMENT rules and reg

as B 1

i
HI

i
jt
7

Inthe interests of Seeurity. you will

be required to live in such State, area, and house or apartment as is

Specifically approved by the CENTRAL INTELLIGE NCE AGENCY after

mutual dincugcion and due consideration of all circumstances, All of

the expenses of such leased house or apartment will be borne by you and

ELLIGENCE AGENCY will not be obligated to pay any

the CENTRAL IM

euch expenses,

6, ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
.

course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this. agreement, monetary

allowances: swouldsbe, _payable under ‘penera ‘UNITED STATES |

ulations, you will be paid such mone tary

avel or are

authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will

be made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial

‘accordance with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

ICAL CARE. The CENTRAL

ou with Teasonable Ansurance. ls

re

a covering medical care ° and hospitalization equivalent to that which could

be obtained through etandard insurance policies: or, the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY may provide directly such medical care and
hospitalization;

8. SECRECY OBLIGATION, You will be required to keep forever
secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
TELLIGENCE

hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL IN

AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledgu that violation of such

-3-

1
;
i
i



--- Page 77 ---
1400000 , x

ter uniter the ernionace laws,

secrecy may subj. ct yoy tow
as amended, and other applicable laws and regulations, Your relationship

FE AGENCY and this contract must be

with the CENTRAL INTELLIGE

kept secret and you may not discues any aspect of this relationship and’ a
" contract with any person other than the Authorized Government

‘ . _ Representative or such other persen as he may specifically approve,

9. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS, No promises or
MEN ES

; commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those

riting in this 2 mend

ie ¥

, Shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.

10. TERM. This agreement is effective as.of 1 March 1969

a: term-of?onée“(

and..shall: bes

|
contract shall be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of !
i

. ; |

termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance of the i
: : . : |

; elapse of one (1) year. Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically!

termination of this contract or: renewals thereof, including amendments,

f any, the CENTRAL INTEL NCY will undertake to assist _

: you in obtaining gainful.employment or to provide continuing compensation

to assure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of

this contract and the continuing: compliance with the secrecy obligations



--- Page 78 ---
imposed on you b saragraph # of this contract and the provisiows of
P y YI Br Ap I

"any secrecy agreement which you-have signed with the C

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,

. . . UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

os. . as Represented by the :
» CENTRAL iD ELLIGENCE AGENCY
. . : By: ;

’ Contracting Officer

i
t
,
H

Date:

ve
1!
Hi

; ACCEPTED:

WITNESS: 0,

BY Cpl 969 bee al) WENT
eek 196F ate DE _

i
1
H
H

i Se - : tee _ i

starts:



--- Page 79 ---
14-0000

Q IDEN 1
‘| Dear IDEN |

a

Ree
GOVERNSA
criective FAG

r te ois made to your contract with the UNITED 5
! phe by the C AL INTELLIGENCE AG
wdGo7, | Give I Mareh 1970 said Contract is herein
. terminated by mutuel con ofthe parties thereto, and in dieu Mepeot
voothe following Aereement is substituted, . 1

Tepres

COVIERNMEN'T, as Yepresented by the
‘GY, hereby contracts with you under

The UNITED STATE
CENTRAL INTELLICEN
the follow

3 terms and conditions:

4) independent contractor or consultant, You are not considered an employee
.of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this contract. You
) will be required to hold yourself available at all times to fulfill requests
made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY or ¢9 respond to
lasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEKCY, You |
WIN refrain from engaging in other gainful employment or occupation until -- i
Pproval-has been ceived, from-the CENTRAL INTE LLIGE! EB AGENCY, 2.5075
Instructions furnic hed to you pursuant fo this contract and within the terms -.
hereof shall be as binding upon you as if included in the written terma ¢
hereof, ,

i

i

1 STATUS, Your legal status under this contract is thet of an |
i

i

f

i 2... COMMUNICATION, in \ SNERAT.
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will pl requests, tayks and relevan
instructions frem an individual hercinafter referred tu as the “Acthurized -
Government Representative, He will be fully authorized to-diecuss
matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this contract
including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of avsignment,
conditions of work or any other matters relating to your relationship with
| the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, |. .: -

cover and general security conditions, You may
to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover
arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such d
Solely for the“purpose 6f éovey End” Pane

id Security and” confer no addi
legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with
a: if respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENC). AGENCY derive solely from this
: agreement. In connection with cover and security you will be provided

* fron: time to time Specific inctructions by the Authorized Goverrnrnent

i
i
i
: . Representative and yeu will be required to adhere Precisely to such :
7 “ instructions, : i
3! J
a i
4 |
i i
: :
: :
7 ne ;
F SEGRE |
a i
if
u
uy
I

Mergen ta octtie e HeE arti yeti a

Bad
ve


--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

SECRET

NTRAL
i Five Hindred
Cof thin comp ation shall be ;
receptable te the Authorised '
rubject Ca Federal ince

500.00) per
thiy in accordance w

year. Payr

hoarrangements
ative.
ch income tax laws

RC wane,

wally, thin compensatio: subject lo FICA taxes, The current
tates and method of payr
the

n accordance with
ued by the Authorized Gover

sidence, | |
licable laws and |

vourity instructions

Peviment of all ta

nt Representative,

and preparation of necesnary tax returns are your .
sibility but in accord with aypropriate security

!
instructions which will bo furnished by the Authorized Government |
4

if
i personal ubligation and res
1

'

Representative,

i
d

|
- | |
a

5. ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
1 i St SEINE ES EE NPE NSES.

course of fulfilling your responsibilities under this agreement, monetary
allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES . i
' GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary
allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations,
Tf, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimburseme t-for expenses. will/be-
shy Made by the-CENTRAINTELEIGENCE AGENCY in substantial accordance
1, with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY reeutations,

6, NEGOTIATED BENEFITS,

na oucpresently-have
“yourself and your wife paid until late December 1970, Prior to
the expiration date of the current policy the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY has the option of paying premiums’ ‘7°
on the current policy until 1 March 1972. or enrolling you ina
health insurance program for selected contract individuals

of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY subject to

- all the terms and conditions of that Program, The CENTRAL .

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will pay the.

PrOpr : x
ortion of the total premium cost of
any health insurance and you will bear the remainder,

ar peatland nm Ee tin he

; The CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will endeavor
to arrange for you to secure a term life insurance policy with

a face. value of $15,000.00, This poiicy contains no additional
accidental death benefits. The premiums for the policy will

be your personal responsibility, The current premium charge
is $12.00 per month,



--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

crn ney :

ue

toppers

Lip work af Vues

rtohe taken only ot times

iy vance Ly the Authorize! Governnie rHientative, |
! on time ja net ace ruable and will net Inc carried -uver i
e ‘ feyeur., Ciyruent for unused vaca jon time wilt : |
‘ hot be suthorized, at
s al?) Uf incapacitated for work due to ineus, injury *
a and the Tike, your « Ipensation may be continued for periods i
. q not to excerd a total of thirteen (13) working Seys per contract |
i year. Periods of absence in exceeds of three (4) consecutive i
a days will require a ductor's certi ate,” Like vacation time, i
; this benefit is not accruable and Will not be carricd over from |
: year to year, Cash paysient in lieu of this benefit will not be
: | authorized. : .
| 7. SECRECY OBLIGATION. You will be required to keep forever
{Secret this agr ent and all information which you may obtain by reason 4
i hercof (untess released jn writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE . |
coe . | AGENCY from-such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of h i
an lee May subject you.ty criminal, prosecution: underAthe ebpionag ° ‘i i
ame and other applicable Jaws and regulations, Your relatiouship |
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and thin contract muot be | 7
i! kept seeret and you may not discunn any aspect of this relationship and |
. [contract with any person other.thian the Authorized Govérnnient - - ne |
; 7 : Sically. approve wha —
te oa . {
. 8. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS, No promises or - H
[commitments Pertaining to rights, privileges, or bencfits other than thone I
vexpressly stipulated in writing jn this agreement or any am.ndrment thereto
['shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, |
| ’ 9. TERM, This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1970 and |
! rm of two (2) years i r I

t period.th

ehall be for a te

y y:

wed automatically on 8

jtnd conditions. This contract may be terrninated at any time by cither

uParty upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice, Upon terminction |

cue, a. _-fJofthis-contract-or-renewalsthercof, including amendments» “if any, the ----~

/  *  * W}CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist you in

flobtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation to

assure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonabl: standard of

iliving. This undertaking is contingent upon your fulfilling the terms of

i
|
;
|
if
f
1!
i

. j
LO SECRET. |

{|


--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

. i i
‘ i :
P .
' i ~ARe :
iH an i
h - SECRET !
u ~ i
;
. this contract and the continuing compliasee with the recrecy oblipations :
Timpored on you by poraprayn out thi parract and (he wravscions of any |
: h you have signed with the CENTRAL i
\ GE AGENCY: : |
!
‘ UNITED STATES COVER NMENT i
As Represented by the ;
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY © !
\ By: . . :
q : 3 : . [
| 7 ; oO , IDEN 6. : 4
i .
Contracting Officer ‘ —s |

H Date: oo : _—

+} ACCEPTED:

/e/ “IDEN 2°

| ree



--- Page 83 ---
14-0000

25 October 1972.

Received this date from an Authorized Government Repre-

“sentative three Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:

“HAL 25-349 Schroder Trust Cormnpany $15, 000. 00

2 AEE 54779: Morgan Guaranty ‘Trust-Co.*” 10;000:00 ~

" #A593613 Harris Trust & Saviags Bank 19,000. 00

This {a an advance against a back salary payment covering

the perio

pril 196% to March 1969 which waa approved on 18 October

1972. I understand that this advance, $35,009, 60, wilk be deducted
w+ ++ + 4.from the total back salary payment covering the specified period whea
bo,

the finalization of this Payment is made in the near futuce,

a *

: tee age see AB hig IDEN. Ue ne: —
few ae beck They SETS BALE ee bette a Ay ee 3 od
io /a/f IDEN 5
Witness _ Date: Cate Ler : 492), .

we


--- Page 84 ---
Toc,
16 CY azo

Received this date from aa Authorized Covernment Repre-

“onthe fol

oo 2° “penta tivefour. Baiike:Cais higrs Checks*ira'

#155734 Riggs National Bank

#01-028564 ° Union Trust Compa

#0661511 American Security & Trust 15,000.00
#2-442275 = The National Bank of Washington 7,052.00

"an" The above améunt, $52,052.00, together with the $35, 000. 00

ayment for back —

advance

a
i
i
te
4
H
i

received on 25 October 1972, constitutes full p

wes FRB ang

Noord ag teen oP ts

i _— . y ; . |
: Witness: ~{s/ IDEN § Date: * heer Cee ded /é, 1d, n
. eee

JS oO


--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

UNUTED SOWCES ©. ERNMENT

Memorandum

10 : Kiles DATE: 13 July 1973
FROM oo: IDEN 2- \
SUQJECT: IDEN}

i 1. On 12-July 1973, the attached Acknowl
“ts Rélea e-ihich wa prepared’ by thé “Gene ral"Coungel wa
the Sudject in the presence of IDEN 5 and witmessed by the
undersigned. ‘There were no Problems involved in obtaining the
signature_of the Subject who had previously voluntarily stated’ he
would’ sigh such a document if he w uld receive the 315,000. 0
Subject.considered was the fulfillment of an-Agé “promise
before his defection, - _

2, Subject understood that the attached did not affect the
existing contractual agreement with Subject and that all stipulations
in that contract were valid and continuing,
- 3. Alno attache

dis aco.
ki gived-to-Subj .
; S

’/af IDEN-2----

to

er)

Big U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan


--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

a

ACK NOW LEDGER ENT.AND RELEASE,

WHEREAS, _ IDEN] » a former citizen of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and an employce of the Committee for State
Security (KGB), first cooperated with Officers of the United States Govern-
iment and then, subsequertly, defected to the United States; and,

f WHEREAS, IDEN 1° . was Promised certain sums of money for
aT
: his cooperation and defection, only Part of which have previously been
i! . :

i paid to him; and,:
iW :

: WHERE S, there Femains. 4.certain. balance® of tiongy agreéd: upon’ by ~

a

IDEN 1 and Officers of the Central Intelligence Ageacy;

NOW THEREFORE,. in consideration of thé sum of FIFTEEN THOUSAN

and: 00/100. ‘Dollars: "(S15; ‘00: ao) t ipt 0 which is “hereby acknowledged,
IDEN 1 : for himself and for hig heirs, executors, admini-

strators and assigns, hereby releases and forever discharges the United

States Government and the Central Intelligence Agency and all of its

7 ment and the Central Intelligence Agency prior to the date of this document,
a)
a
4 12 July 1973,
WITNESS THE FOLLOWING SIGNATURE AND SEAL:
: ? f
u ‘s/- IDEN 1 . ASEAL)
po ; a IDEN 1

‘| WITNESS;
| On Behalf of the United States Government

ad

‘Is! IDEN 2 a

ary



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

i IDEN 1
“hoz,

‘Dear IDEN 1

| Reference is made to your contract with the United States Government,
tas represented by the Central Intelligence Agency, effective 1 March 1970.

‘; Effective 1 March 1974, said contract is amended by revising the first
"sentence of paragraph four (4) entitled ' ‘Compensation" to read as follows:

"You will be compensated by the Central Intelligence Agency
at the rate of Twenty-Three Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars

($23, 750) per year. "

All, other terms and. gonditions of said, contract. remain-in'full: force and

gamer nk.

effect,

Please acknowledge by signing in the space provided below.

!
BY ds/ IDEN 3 coe oe i
ia Contracting Otticer i

i

1

i Pf ef IDEN 2 a KGa LEP
H : : Date . o

tHAPPROVED:
: 7 /s/ IDEN 4 oo, AP 37: TA
. | a . ~ . . Date’
; ;
i be . |
, : " E2IMPDET :

_CL by: 063837.



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

DEFECTORS a
TAB : TITLE DATE
L Memo for Mr. Garttson tres $.:D, Breckinridge, Subj: 30 Jan 75
Information on Detention ef Defector
2 . Memo for [IG from Jerrold RB. Brown, Subjs Request for
Information (res Report that NCI fired an enployee .
for abusing a defector) - 18 Jun 15 °

MFR from Walter Elder, Sub
ntact (res:
or)

abusing a defe

Memo for-IG from co, Wy Kane. Subj: Alleged
Activities (Gnidenti fied Subdect «= Alleged &
Defector) : .

Rockefeller Comtegion

sth” P-"Bue

+, -Rotiting Sbty ridge? c
Att: Memorandum of Agreement. Retween the Atto x .
’ : of the United States and th Central Intell: «© Agency . '
: for the Entry of Aliens of Interest to the Central :
Tutelligence Agency under Specific Cireumstances 10 Feb 55
u “emo for Inspector General from Jerrold 3.2rewm, dated 18 June 1975
18 Juno 1975, Subject: Request for Information + .
we (ro= DCT firing an expleyea for abusing a defector)

7 General |

ee)



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

aa , : _ oe Lit yu

RevicW Staff: 75/880

yu : ga

18 June 1925.

- Inspector General

“Requést” For Information

Tho Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
Cl fired -an® mployee for “abising a de- >”
fector. Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident ;
known’ to us? ‘(John Waller says the DDO has no . oo.
: : knowledge of “any picce of paper" sent to the wf
‘ : : Commission on the Teported incident or of any . to,
i others. He suggests checking Office of Security)

- huge aged sme ae

i

Jerrqid B. Brown

a ee Sete oa - eign te ye Le
aa ec:- DDO
. John Waller
°
poe
\
ay
\
y.
at
, SECRET Po
‘ 13)


--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

BE Pe

a
Qoin rod ach 2 ey

BANTAED 2
lam SE-CARB. | .

MEMCRANDUM OF AGREEYENT BETWEE!
AND THE GNTRAL INTELLTGENC!
te EN ELL 5

N THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF TIDE UNITED states

GENCY FOR THE BNTRY OF ALLENS OF INTEREST To
R_SPECIPIC CIRCUMSTANCES :
Tho Central Intolligence Agency has frequont neod for tha covert

tomosury entry of aliens into tho United

States for intelligence and
Operational purposes within its Jurisdiction, : .

To offoctuate cntry in auch cases, the Central TntulJ.tgence Agency.
7, will suimit, each such alicn!s ease. dn: urdting-to the: Comnisatoign of
wee sont 3 “Inmlerition and“Naturalization w

ith the Tequest to defor inspection of - .
the subject upon arrival and parole to tho Central Intelligence Agency
under the authority of Section 212(d)(5) of tha Innigration and Natio, alt
Act. _ st _ = s ae

In ordox that. e. tntelligence tenofite tobe “détived frm
+ entries’ not’ Bo outwoighed by tho dangers, if any, to the internal security
of tho United States by the prusuney of such alions, Uke Contral Intelligence

Aganey agroes that tt will take all necessary steps to establish the bona
. fides of each Prospect

ivo entrant prior to submittal to the Immigration and
YN ~ Naturalization ‘Service

+ Tt further ayrees: (a) That this mathod of
wht only be utilized whore it 4s strict)

on whose entry ts
fore;oing procedure will be Piroled for such Period of time as may be agroed
cn by the Central Intelligence Agoncy and tho Service, in-no. Snitanse to or one
vexceed one-year.” Furthor “extersions of Parole, similarly limited, may be
authorize: thereafter on awritten statement of need, Which inelude the
results of a current Socurity chech. .

Upon arrival each alten will execute an a
Parole status in a fo

greement acknowlodging
m satisfactory to tho Cen
the Service,

tral Intelligence Agency and

After parole of such alians, tho Central Intel)
assumo responsiblity for Cate, supervision and contr
it bolioves Conststent with the 41
during ¢continuance of their paro
whose physical custedy 4s not to
Central Intellipe;

registration pursuant to law ata
“~

igence Arenzy wilt

ol of a kind anddegree

tterral arcurity needs of the United States

le status, Further, in thevase or any alion

be maintained ‘or is tobe teminated, the.
ation of each alten for |

3 isfictory to the Servica,

S-EC K-EP


--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

i ke tes ees ee A A ee
q Ea : ea a) one .

akWIRIT 2 ; :
rc : S-B-CoR ewer : . 4
=

‘Upon completion of their intolligence or Operational purposes in
tho United States, or 4f internal security reasons soiquire, these aliens
will be removed therefrom through tho arrangements and at the expense of
the Central Intelligence Agency, uxcept in those:cases dn which other dine

_. Position is made of a nature satisfactory to the Service, Also, the Cuntrel a
Intelliponce Agency will inform the Service suffictontly in advance of each
Proposed departure as to purmit verification thereof 1f tha Service so olects,

.oIn-accordance-with-past sPractico,* the: Servico.will- apprise’ the FBI of
the entry and departure or other disposition of these alions.

The Service will maintain separate and secure files under this
agreamente vee : - -

Sfp

—~7 Herbert Brownell, Jr.
Attorney Genoral

i . -2-

S-E.C..R-E-T

ime foe mr



--- Page 92 ---
14-0000

oo rata ay

) UNCLASSIFIED ee C)_ CONF. NTIAL C] secker

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

ee
SUBJECT. 10pronoh Alleged Mlegal Activities .
(Unidentified Sub ject--Alloged Abuse of Defector)

“FROM, : .
nom Charles W. Kane
Director: of Security yy,

parteasicn :

27 JUN 1975

COMMENTS (Number each comment to show trom whom
$ whom. -Diaw @ line arrose column aller each Comment.)

TO: (Officer derignation, room umber, ond bate
beiidng) :

j Onicens
INITIALS.

marae |

Inspector Genera
Att: Mr. i

Ain

_Tequest from Jerry .Brow
oreo “Der 23" Jin, MER by Walt

Elder, source of the story
is a deposition by Mr. Helms

aa 3-5: Attached was Prepired in. |
} response to an 18 June. ~ :

a oe

|
|
—
i

CJ CONFIDENTIAL C) USE NAL, UNCLASSIFIED

wor 610 “torte CC secrer


--- Page 93 ---
14-00000

INSPECTOR GENED AL
J EA

TS.

tay

SO UN 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
ATTENTION + Mr. Neil Ainslie
VIA

: Alleged Illegal Activities
(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse
of Defector) a Ten,

I

1. Reference is made to Mr. Ainslie's verbal request
for a review of Office of Security files in an effort to
provide information pertinent to a case mentioned on page . ;
: ‘+ 170 of the Report to the President by the Commission on CIA
. -! activities within the United States. . ,

2. The case in question from page 170 of the Commission
Report is quoted as follows: "In one other case, a defector
“was physically ‘abused, although not seriously injured. The -

. 7 0 the _

ce. of-Central=Inte

3. A search of Office of Security file resources has
reflected -information pertinent to a case in Which a defector ..__
beets soos moi Nas, Physically. abused~at-an-overseas“Tocation, and the Agency”
“ employee was later, terminated by the DCI. It is not known
whether the following case is identical to the referenced
case on page 170 of the Commission Report, but the facts
appear to be quite similar,

4. Information developed by this Office of possible in-
terest to the Inspector General, pertains to one John Torpats,
an ex-CIA employee, and one Eduard Oun, an Estonian defector.

5.- Torpats was born in 1898 in Estonia, and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1926. Torpats was employed by
CIA in February 1949 and was terminated 30 January 1961. . The
file information reflected that in July 1956, Torpats was found
guilty of mistreatment of an alien by a Special Inquiry Board

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 011018

SECRET ins



--- Page 94 ---
#00000

in Frankfurt, West Germany. The alicn involved was Eduard ‘
Oun, an Estonian who defected from Estonia through Sweden :
in 1955,

fo. 6. The incident in Frankfurt involved wistreatment of
‘ ‘Oun during interrogations directed by Torpats. The charges
‘ - - of physical abuse included the striking of Oun with the fist;
: application of turpentine and ointments to various parts of
the body, the scrubbing of Oun's body with a brush, and fo
‘ing: Oun-cto™ sttand:zin:-the ‘nude “as ight “days during

E

r S$ -Yong™-a's-
interrogations with only very bricf rest periods,

7. Torpats was r
before an‘ Employment. R
tion from t gene mend.
were. thatTorpats "bi ; area outside the
Clandestine Services. Torpats appealed the decision, and a -
later recommendation included reduction in grade from GS-14
to GS-13. Torpats later received unsatisfactory fitness re-
ports and engsged in various "in house" Battles with Agency
officials concerning his employment.

tned to Headquarters and -was brought
cw.-B forsconsideration of Separa-
s_dnitially:

‘ Ls _-| 8. Torpats was later terminated in accordince with the

: . authority granted the DCI under Section 102(Cj of the National
- Security Act-of-194 » effective 30 January 1961

Later in 1961, To gains: i

‘Columbia “granted th n io n for summary judgment
against Torpats. Torpats appealed the decision, and the U.S.
Court of Appeals, in 1962, upheld the lower court's ruling

that Torpats! termination was. legaks--:.2-st en ese ee

9. The Office of Security file of Eduard Oun contained
little information other than interrogation reports dated 1956.
It was not clear from file information whether Oun entered the
United States after the Frankfurt incident. The most recent
document contained in the Oun file was dated 17 September
1956 and noted that Oun had been psychiatrically examined and
found qualified for Agency sponsored immigration to the U.S,
under Public Law 203,. °” .

SECRET


--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

Ts SECRET

10. [t is noted that Office of Security files contained
only fragmentary information in regard to certain areas of the
Torpats' case.. File review indicated, however, the DDO, OGC mo

. and the Inspector General's office will probably have addition- Lo .
al information concerning this matter,

i
i
{
‘
i
!
i
t

Charles W. Kane
Director of Security

i
i
H

‘eee

ue
a

SECRET

SPATE eres te ipp a


--- Page 96 ---
14-0000

oo . TART ; & fre Beyacy |
SECRET ESS
a . : me LE A
L4: Fe ne ee
Sr as4y ;
Review Staff; 75/1008
23 June 1975 :

. MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: .Rockefeller Commission Contact

Mason Cargill told me today that the reference
: in the Commission report to an employee who was fired |
be i . . becausé : e..abuséd.a defector’ came from’. positi
H - -2: Dick-Helms: -Helms could. a
conabiw it fro e"déséription which h )
t it is’clear that. the employee who was fired was John
Torpats. He was discharged by Allen w. Dulles in 1960.

himself a Lithuanian refugee, was working

: Torpats,
in the Defector Reception Center in Prankfort, Germany.

!

|

Poo.

' In the course of interrogating another Lithuanian
'

i

defector, Torpats beat him. After Toxpats was fired, .
sued the Director (then McCone) -.. He lost the case, |- pen an

fm ey tng tne,

ec - DCI

we - IG
cc ~ OGC

i
Hl
i

CB: 007789
E2 IMPDET

Pa Aa at ete eee ete ~-


--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

~ Review Staff: /5,880

SECRET nee Kyo

IISMISTOR Corn

18 June 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General Sc F

Reque t For. Information

-- -The Rockefeller
says the fired
fector. “Can you. uncéov:
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known’ to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of “any piece of paper" sent to the . 5
Commission on the reported incsdent or of any -- oe i
others. He suggests checking Office of Security)

Pa ee yee eteen nd ap ea

cc: DDO . . oe eS a
: John Waller . . . :

IE lhl wes iiy SE/DD«

D2€ STUBS CY LA \ ;

4 Z

:

7 3

tS 3

SECRET ; %

by “ =

&
é



--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

§ Rey . R70 708" oe

take

30 January 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Garrison

SUBJECT “3 Information on Detention of Defector

5-85" ut Se
w ey Com la eS

1. The Deputy General Counsel hae requested documents
bearing on the decision to confine a defector, particularly the
conalderations at the :time such decisions wore mado and
reviewed, as may be reflected in meroranda for the record
“9te jading.to the-initial:confinement.the..
later decistono to continue that confinement, tho decision to
move to 0 new facility in Virginla, and eventually to release

him.

or yee

2. The assumption te that following the initlal decision
thls matter wae reviewed formally from tlrne to time, and that
thoee reviews are roflacted tn some way in the records of the
‘Agency. o. te pes wpe ga Z _ : . .

S. D, Brockinridg

WE nga eet ee SRE erie oe

Addressee
1% §DB Chrono.
- Judy for QA files

arant
obr.t



--- Page 99 ---
14-0000

ing, Nove 2 witht N

from Me

Heel No, ty il Sune Eo (The quality of the tape in very poor.)

Pranstated from ius
(MN. tatks about surveillance af Soviet persounel in the United States.)

Noxcnko: Let me tell you - E(---) Twas atso in the States, although under
another name. Thad a cectain business there wee

oO. This was (7) in Washington (jr
Nonenko: Yes, 1 was there.

Q; On TDY?

Nysenko: 19 days, 19 days only,

Q: Under what name? -

Nosenko: NIKOLAYEV,

Q: NIKOLAYEV?
Nosenko: In Engand I was NIKOLAYEYV and in your country Iwas NIKOLAYEY, -

Q: ---first and middle name?

Nosenko: Yes, Yuriy, Yurly, also Yurly.

: a: And in England you also were for a short time?

\ there was no Minister of Shipbuilding Industry with the name-

Nousenko: In England Iwas for. ten and fifteen ‘days oce:

Note: During the interrogation of Nosenko in 1964, ‘he ‘denied that he ever
said that he was in the United States.

2. You stated previously that while traveling | to England and Cuba, you were un

r
documented as Nikolayev. Under what cover did you travel to those countrice :

What was your Legend- ~Biography?

Note: Any KGB officer going abroad under another name and ander
cover prepares a ‘Legend- Biography to‘cover up his real
identity, If Nosenko travelled as Nikolayev, then his legend
omitted "the fact" that he was a son of a Minister because,

of Nikolayev, eters etc.)

. 3. You stated previously that in “January 1960 you were processed to go to the
US with the Soviet Automotive Delegation. You obtained a passport in your
true name, Nosenko, bit the date was postponed, then cancelled. : Who
selected your candidacy for the trip?. What were you supposed to do in
the USA? Why waa the trip postponed? Why were you processed in your

true name, Nosenko, and not under the name Nikolayev, under which you

Visited Elbert een cate?



--- Page 100 ---
14-0000
a

46 In 1962 you stated that while working with the KGB, you personally

recruited ton Americans. Pleaae tive us their namen and how you

recealted them,
Note: Nosenko’ was asked why he was chosen to go to Geneva in 1962
inutead of an ¢ er from the Departinent (KGB) Delegation.
Anuwering this question he mentioned the recrujtment of ten

Americans, °

Excerpts frou, Meeting No, 2 with Noaenko_

JE June 1962: cat : ; 4
Nosenko: Gribanoy, the chief of the whole counterintelligence, tis name)
Oleg Mikhaylovich Gribanov 2 «+ sa, Olvg Mikha ylovieh Gribanov
decided you 800 that 1 must be here {in Geneva). T said, "Be my
guest, Oleg Mikhaylovich, Tam nat saying NOs + “ So Gribanov
decided "You will so. That's ain ({Nosenko knocked on the desk). . . -

Well, what am 12... Who have I recruitted?.. . . Ten Americans,

no more than that + + {and Gribanov said) "You will go! You must go!"

i I. Sovict visas and other regulations for tourists traveling to the USSR,

Lz 1. Didn't” you know or remember how: Oswald's visa-was Processed and

~ trom what country Oswald entered the USSR? Ia it possible that he.

entered the USSR on a “podvisnaya" visa?

UY 2. You previously said that you saw Oswald's visa application, but you could

not say from | what country Oswald came to the USSR. In your opinion, is

it_possible. that Oswald received his visa ‘application In some other European ~ ae

country, then went to Finland and through Finland entered the USSR without
contacting the Sovict consulate in Helsinki? Did you hear any talk about the

po possibility that is described above?” If so, when did you hear it and from

whom?
: UV 3. On 3 July 1964 you stated that you have seen Oswald's anketa (visa
: application). Do you remember what was in that anketa? Did you read

the anketa? What did yeu.mean that. you saw the anketa? Was it in the

Did you sce the

name Lee Harvey Oswald, or was there another name?

name of the person who signed the anketa?



--- Page 101 ---
14-0000

i

4,0 Be you have any information to the effect that Oawald tight not have

cutne to the Soviet consulate or te the Soviet Finbarnay in Helainkt to

vitzerland or Sweden

oltain his visa’ Could he have QUtained a vina in
a
then nave come to deisinki and, without reporting to the Soviet conaulate
in Helsinki, have taken a train to Leningrad and then to Moscow?-

vs According te your previous information, Many tourist - he buys a tour

to the Soviet Union, makes out the anketa, and then comes to Moscow,"

In what country did Ouwald buy a tour to the USSR? In what country did

Oswald fill in the anketa? If the ankela goes to Moscow, to what office

in Moscow does it go? To MID, KGI8? Is it possible that all the data on
Oswald from his anketa was sent to Moscow by a | cable? “Did you sce and,

read Oswald's anketa ora a tetogzam that ‘Oswald is coming to Moscow?

Tf you did not read the anketa, who arnong the KGB officers of the Second

Chief Directorate or the First Chief Directorate read the anketa or had

access to it? Who would logically have access to tho anketa?

-6. According to your previous information, any person who wants to visit the

USSR has to buy a tour. ina forcign tourist firm in his home country or any

other country, and the touriat firm’ will make | arrangements for hia ‘st cy”

the USSR. It is understood that he must fill in the. anketa, and in addition to.

the general questions, the common tourist should make requests for the

celtics he intends to visit and for the accommodations he wants, The tourist

would know i in advance when he r receives his visa his date of arrival in
n

Moscow, in what hotel -he is going to stay, and what kind of accommodations Be

he would be given. The queation, then, is do you know when Intourist

received Oswald's request’and application and when. it answered him that

his demands are met and that he is welcome in Moscow?

/ 7 From your knowledge, when Oswald arrived in Moscow, was he handled by

the Intourist Agency or by Sputnik, the Youth Tourist Bureau of the USSR,

‘or hy the Central Council for Tourism of the Soviet Trade Unions? °
Note: The Central Council far Tourism of the’ Soviet Trade Unions organizes
exchanges of tourists between trade unions of the USSR and other
j countries. Sputnik was organized in June 1958 for the exchange of.
, of tourists (students and other youths), :



--- Page 102 ---
14-0000
: e

” : .

eX, What is the procedure after a touriat applies fora Soviet vira? Do you
know at what touriat agency or in what forcign country Oswald applied |.
for a visa to the USSR or bought a toue tu the USSIL? Who was the
Sovict Intourist representative in Uhat country who took Oswald's visa
application to the Soviet Embassy?

Y% You stated previously that Oswald wan not considered a defector. If he

was nota defector, then what was he?

Note: If the KGB did not consider Oswald to be a defector, then ft is
. | possible that Oswald was known to the KGB long before his arrival
. in the USSR as a tourist and Oswald was assured that when he
—_ : arrived in the USSR he would be given Soviet citizenship or at...
least a permanent residence permit. Although he would be a defector
anyway, ft could be that Oswald did not like the word defector
‘and the KGB decided not to call him a defector but, let us say, a
volunteer. The Soviet-Constitution states that the USSR grants the
“right of asylum to all foreign citizens "who are persecuted for —
“safeguarding the interests of the working class or who are persecuted
for scientific activities, for national-liberation struggle." (Article
129 of the USSR Constitution of 1936.) .

JY 10, You stated previously that "since about 1960, every Sovict ambassader-----
: . can give a visa in throe to five days. If so, what was so special for the

Soviet government that the ambassador would be personally involved in

issuing a visa to

It is known ‘that in 1957. the Soviet government adopted some measures =,
to irrprove travel for foreign tourists in the USSR, They rnostly ;
concerned currency exchange. The 1957 regulations said nothing
about visas, Nosenko should be questioned about the 1957 decision
of the Soviet government to determine if he {s not mistaking the 1957
decision with that of 1960, .

11. You stated: previously. that since about 1960, every Soviet ambassador © _ oo - _

ean give vieas.in from three to five days, The available information

published by the Soviets unmistakenly states that a visa cannot be obtained *-
in less than'seven days (in some cases it takes five to seven days). Following

. : are excerpts from a book entitled Moscow, A Tourists Companion, published | ORS

in Moscow in 1969, and from the magazine Soviet Life, May 1978, p. 59.

oo ‘
Soviet Life stated that "visas are issued within 10 days of receipt of

application.at a Soviet consulate, "


--- Page 103 ---
i

w
. .
‘
. SAS Ox apenas
. Me taes: FAS! Ov eaprewanys
Agsac™ Sa ane ANT
Vornataies Cae ee ,
et for thaseters
viva y
every country five
St valid for the indies
ait on the
inerary, apply *
tn the serene utcau at yout hotel, It tntouviat 18 able oe provide i
the neeessary accummodal your visa will he altered accord.
ingly, and subsequent alterations in them, ate free af
. Sle change eee . ‘

travel via the USSR. by railway or mo
-you have the pertinent vita of the country neigh
houting on the USSR. You need no‘ Suvict visa if you travet

soot Misae fe tea

Ht insuerd i

> towns for marc than ‘ Hoy
° Intouriet duce not sérvice travellers who Coie on visite te arta.

- towns where Intourist. agencies are unavailable In such cases,
“ *, apply to a Suviet consulate abroad. we
Under seciprocal agreements: between ‘the Saviet Uni
SF game’ wither countries, no visas are necessary for

a these sountrics for travel iti the USSR. and Ne

‘
¥

TAmeti¢an countries,
eatibeate for entey front India anid Eastern Py
Customs, Personal helungingi—parm
sports gear, perfumery and cosmet
sary for the time-of- stayvin-the'S:
tereun, ase duty-free, Besides. travel
7. fper person; two ca one amat

reasonable (non-commerci H) amount of

ing to the Suvict Union on a hun ne

a certificate issued by Intuurist or a for ascl firm confirm.

ing this purpose of their ip) may. brine spot rifles,

To make sure Passage heme w unhind he cegister the:

foreign currency you have hee with the custams,
ich will issue you 4 pertine rt cert >
Wt is prohthited to bring te the US
Roverament bends, annullal s.

. : and applies for sacking the
i flan. recur, ete. pulitually amd eoumanigalls
t the USSR.
. All objects and artictes
be shipped cut of the U . they
have been purchased with Sov teed at the
Vaeshturg Kank of the USSR sssocies of the
State Banh of the USSR iGusbaab ated with
Flos foreign cenveruble curtency. For the pasage of
aoe "such goods make sure you have the aeeeacar bank certificates
. we shop's bells *
. ———

fives in the Soviet Union. Neither dues it offer services in - {



--- Page 104 ---
enalted
anton be hey pe
‘ the Mt

suntes Matiqne-

wate ven eta ae .

De taded
sntaralty

AY. seaports,
tunnel, railway
photography

that when you qi

convent
Th you antend ty ashe a te ' pesca (for
subeeg: oh soe tolew . viel apply to |
Seveyportiiten sAmoky Perculoh, Moscow),

ive colour materials (films,

(tis very unial te toutiats
toon arrival The service Lurcaus
staffed with prey ste speak foreign languages, and you
ve no difficulty --« ating with thei,

theie majut functony ss ne exchange the vouchers issued
mu by your travel agent fur Intourist coupons. and to
provale all other services. . see

we advise sen,

zw : Iatuarist taher care of yun

The seevice bureau is
tickets for you on internal and international railway and air-
Hines. Tt will help vou extend your visa and perform all other
Sp pertinent Torinalitics

. . - The service bureau books tickets to theatres, concerts, cinemas
and sparis comes. Make sure that you book tickets well in
advance, for csury Muscovite is an avid theatre-goer and sports.
far oul tickets ste searee,
T. prive ef a theater

ct ticket is 2 ta 3.50 cubles,

tacuesions yout wish te sd the
Lures will be glad to recommaut

the best sightweing iti
I you need a ¢: + fartcan will beh.

te provide onc. Intuurist cindes speak Enctist.. Rulgatian, Spa
ftafiso, Chinese, Huncerian, Geeman. Poti

ho Swelish and Jap

anc The +

tables, far ©
- You caa hire a cat
environs of onder a
service bureau
Vf you an un
you. As yest haw
of charge.
Appreach your hote!
terest of trouble
we advine you and

a hopeks,
af Moscow and at
call through

oA Sighteecing
vlistance tel

the scevice buseau will suntien a ductor *
ct Union arc +

me

hing that
te glad ee
+ aestance

service buscau with 4
we The secepti
adder off the

Uf You Are Hassing thouugh Me

If you are paving through Moscow and bie ante a day ¢
what we revemmend you tu ace:

Excastion by car or forint ane Nl
will give you a aenecal aden
re frome Motel Nateenal +

7

onl

the beast a

relieve yousof all travel cares and beok’,

t up te $ heurs—s ”

!



--- Page 105 ---
14-0000 o nr

Strat, Nadewise
y At. Gut Macau
kK te the Notional. .
Sqgeare XN vist tw the Keemhas
fore Cakes three hegre
Ww Mereusy, fhe ste vier the Exhede
SR (oe p. 60),
wmuary Soviet life
Went Monroe and the
taka far bean ta
Cretyatar Oot Gathay
en hae ait. The cxcurn
18,

munt of ti
A otennl tee af e
B Hove bee
test af the Suver &

alternoon, pay a
p TS0!. the teaser.

thete Ltkes somcthen
The your best, toa, te see Mencow'e ple
hates,

1 you have a few men days inn Meacuw,
vate ated inclinations,

+ Balthad Theatre

ink tours ta seit your

Continue Your Trip

Mescaw you qin wake a tour of the Soviet Uein—the
‘Mropics uf the Black Sea coat and the Siberian taiga. the
Seainian etcppelinds. the wountainy af the Caucasus, snd the
sccwat twas af Russia and Central Ava.

. is the lt of cities whers Intourist offers ite services:
singrad, qradle of the Russian revelution. 9 city’ of magni-

“at architecture: . :
sok Sea health vont of Batumi, Odessa,. Sochi, Sulhurai and

n and Fur Fasten

dustrial centre -and city uf: science in

heriag town heighbouring on the Reatsk Hydro:
oaithe Angara, whichis one of the “woeld’s

oe © Station
ama : .
‘rkatsh, the city near the legendary Lake. Baikal;
~bihurevsk, a major Soviet Far ‘Eastern city.



--- Page 106 ---
14-0000

*

4S Ve bt hang "yey IMDS

: . Ye MSNT amidwoy saL, fep2z e esogo ‘sould perme,

8] soles soy us “duedwery ssadag Uesnowy sup
“MOLOP RoE OF

OSTE  “ananepy— ueasiag rang
“Cep gf - _snve mry pus

Eby gp
OF ate Ay sinaedap yo b1> qi uo vuipusdsp ape
GENT OF 666 2aud 'prazuues;—eye yy — wuscoly
‘shop o-- paws ay) pue ereeny an iyaniody. (1
juiavd “S)) sufew
Bat fouery ‘aruersur tog
. red YPN
“saonds? poanyns Hurpesg ons “se 4 32. fpeawary
PEMNEY ayy “hariis ary 245 40 dyqndas
‘ oF MOOS UND NOK. -erHE) Ye HN¥ OF peutisop ©
20 pur Cyunes ays jo sats oot epnpouy sauessany
“auisy pus squed umases
Mus] spses Uprs> eylorre one IENOWU] “sumeas .
We Aauaisn snok Ausepsap on pam ase <ainy Rurny J
.  Aauaai Uttaing 218) NEUF) tans © Ie sunnEyddy. - oF
TPP HDT Ya wae p Of Uiqiin. panel aie aeta daneg +
“WOdPLYD 404 Sw Jfam su ‘ednosd juapnis pur yinod *
dup soles Ind pureds ase ssays ‘orl ny os yo yunoy
+ B¥O $8 MOL Se Lynanbosy “esnuy Umeo yo Uo jURONIp . ° oo
© e2ayo Puno wy “essfese6 JO saquinu pus vores ‘20U0) ms
“Op “tnd syd fo Ly pur weys ays cr . .

vINOD [RtadT
4M wetsay vo dn yang 64 aaueys o Sey sapont
*hatunds ay tua ssprogy “hus
Sf ITUWoy sZOnHuEy Uereensy 21

pur sues pesipsus ‘spesus i
pot eney ag
vag LY oy we Pesediee yg ppenepeng *
BNIB Z “VNUs ogy Pavey Yiiess ay ut sede ye
dudIN;EI, JeMpsE paw jess sup aU

“eso pum opuatieay ye
puw uaspyyspompre so)

woos

enpapat to
wu ebeytye OK: ayo mspaewnuy
. BY eH" Pue outer nt ayy) punod
“etuapiis Metens Yate rue ousseY pUP-watiepieg ye ssaqs0m
_ ataog ‘ya Heysaus “wdapmays puR enus op sdeap
“SUOPENIKD BuUrssejyte spripmst Aap e2ajoavay werosog
0h SDuaton pepsnoquy Yitm Lue ors trap yim any
Tpeeee 6d pyre aon porans voupius gt
Tq) PYE OLGE PUP Gt4, U4em12q AajuNeD ano ynt ues
fu 2% IY wieUED yy -voLUL
410] 204 pues peosqe eussyrs oy

j + . . . .
* “CSOT TLE AZIZ) coueytajay
“LUOOE W994 MAN ‘RIO, MON BONS YurEALg Hr
OH “wopwcrEnuy fosery persnoqwy “astyrediry
" rwoyjo gepanoiy sh quien oy sip

tit Spstou uy sorusduray rod
Y QOL Suse Hite eytom 1p housee anwar
APP eTaEs Pare rade aeye 409 SE PIE GL ASN

“. STwvp Osous 205 You? of vey op nod pr Zyyeiuopery (esspuss saya hues pus trypesnyoveny .
: . SHOP GHZ tosuyseg “Josuduy yy tmossuury ‘ryodoouurpy wv,
GE 10) [pertursy puw ny ‘puegseurs “oeDaNy by) 909 teamad eospasan depen
MOT Weeypoy genre yee ny Smoweogg yPunayy s ANOgD apsrew we 990 Of aE PINON TE INOLLS i
‘ =
» -


--- Page 107 ---
14-0000 .
5 ar

12, Some questions about visas could be pat to Nosenke based ‘on inforniation

(A Tourista Mz analy, The

Provided in the book,

» Moscow,

on He

book is published by Foreign languages Putt
Although there is nu date of publication in this book, the information
provided in the book strongly s ctewta that it was published no later
than 1962, The infor mation States that "it should hot take more than
_ aweck to receive one!a visa." The applicant must fill in and sign an
- application form (sample enclosed) and enclose three photographs of
; passport size as well as a copy of the tourist or Intouriat contractor
firm voucher to the’ effect that the applicant has paid the full cost of the
tour. The tourist need not apply to the Sovict consulate in person,

as the tourist firm will take care of the matter,

APPLICATION FORM

bur Persons Who Wish to Obtain an Entry Visa
meee or a Transit’ Visa Through the U.S.S.R.

‘
(Write clearly ia ink or type all answers in full).

QUESTIONS | ANSWERS

1. Surname, name and patronymic | . .
(persona who have more thin one .
surname, or who have pen nanies, |
must fist them in fut marred
women and widuws inust |

their aden name and their hus+
band’s surname)

. 7 acme!
. 7 ;
i
sountry, indicate former a | ;
ship
ace 2 present na, o
ade and: profes « | .

10


--- Page 108 ---
14-0000 +

" rough
te OC wpe bead

7. U0 tninorn wu:
aro accom)
. the surname, name and patronyin- :
tc of cach child :

WG years uf aye . . }
you, indicate i

_ - i
OW Were veo ote USSK,
before, it itahicete when,

where and purpyse uf stay)

. . }
re ~ . i
9. Surnames, names, — patronyznics :
. and addresses uf closo relatives {
in the US S.R. |
10. Your 1=+ , ,
ee . ——
Date |
(day, Tionth, year) s }
a ae
Signature - |

" fp 458

“DOCUMENTS
Visus”
To enter and leave
: the U.S.S.R.. a for.
i . “ eiyn tourist must
aon have a valid national .
: ° Passport and Sovict
entry and exit, visaz.
Tt should not take‘
"More than ft week to secetve one’s
Citizens of fol countries -are : coe :
through Consulat + of the U.S.S.2. in their own coun- , : : : ‘
try. The applican: must fill in and sign an application : : .
form (see sampl:; and enclose three photographs of
Pissport size, ax well as a cop; of the Inteurist or In- . i
‘aurist contractor firay vouchcr-to the effect that the : i
“applicant has paid the full cost of the tour. The tourist ,
need not apply to the Soviet Consulate in person, as the °
tourist fem will take care of the matter. .
Citizens of fh. Hung. the German Dermocrat-- -
ic Republic, the f rate Kejublie of VietNam, the ©
Chinese People's Republic, the Korean Peopic's Demo. = -
cratic Republic, the People's Republic of Mongolia, Poe . ¢ . :
tand, Ramania and the Czéchostovak Republic have the: 7 t
eaght, according, ta a reciprocal agrecment, to enter and ©)” ‘
Inave the Sov! | Union without applying for Susiet visas, : ‘
on the basis o: their national vassports alone. i ‘

i

2 .

i , Vv 6 ca)

: ; Fl . ; 4


--- Page 109 ---
14-0000

cholera. Tourists from other countries do- not neéd ‘to

A persog's ittican th pas sper
the dite of dis departure Coan the

A Sescet lourist Wea be wil tor centr inte

tosak ad during the Cine wd is vetlid
' Shag the cities enuinecated: inte visa, A taurine
ot att fea: 7 SRoowiy through the hag.

aban des Soviet ves
ms change uncapectedly,

ote ida
ad your go
man be re nrene

your visa

allevents, yout “must fhopty ate z
“efow days ahewl.
Visitars visas for visiting: relat ives in the USSR.
ate ptanted thes H
Gouge Visas teas
to Lirge tourist: groupe.
Visas are issued,
border-paints ot et.
. charge.

wraries and
tote altered free of

leanslt Visas .
issued + dys of

os No So-
Neorss ss fat a. ssuns of any nas
ys at the USSR. on
(of no lounger than 2¢
hange) ‘have been

trausit visas
nv by Soviet
Transit visas are
lity flying over the
eondition that all reservations (
vours’ stay in any given point of .

6

made for him along the entire route ‘through the”
U.LS.S.R. and thot the passenger has the right to-enter

the next conUyusus country,

Health Certificates “: a
» Africa, South America and Asia must

Vas ,

“have an International Vaccination Certificate, and tour-

ists froni-India and Eastern Pakistan nust have a certifi-
cate stating that they have been inoculated against

th certificates and there will be no med- *

ical ew However USSR. Public Health
officer. : sae cal proof -of health from
tourists aftieitg ium countries knuwn to have an epl-
demic at the time of arrival.

present any he

i
L

—— oe,



--- Page 110 ---
14-0000
. wot

vy 13, It would be useful to ask Nosents hie comments on the infarnation on
“Passports and Other Formatities” taken fram the book, A Motoriatts
Guide to the Soviet Unioh, by Vittor Lovin and hin wife Jennifer Louin,

The book was published in Maseose in 1957,

\ Mote: Viktor Louis and his wife are “slightly” known to Nosenko.

i : . mo : . gmreten,

j 430 / ; Motorist’s Guide °
' hand-crbroidered shirt or terse (15 roubles upwards); toys; nramophone re
cords (92 in, LP--1 tuuble); tersee (comparatively inexpensive); traditiona:
silver- gilt-and-eramel ware (¢.g- tiny fork for lemon or butterhalls—s rouble

f . ‘child's apoon with animal hart: 3 roubles); wood, alabaster or potters ood
\ i ornaments, od
: ; : Jf you would like to visit the snarkets, you should go as carly as possibh
us in the day. You will be able tv fisid in the market good quality frevh fruit
which is often. Jacking in- the heeels. Also on sale therc are honey, frevh ege>
arid dairy products; there may Le various items of local handwork as well. The
: tnarkets clase at 5-00 p.m. . _ co po
‘ . .
a i PASSPORTS AND OTHER FORMALITIES
o oo . In order to'enter and leave the Soviet Union a foreign tourist must have

are issues
the time -ot

a valid national passport ard a Syviet entry visa. Soviet vir
Sree of charge usually wathie a seven-day period frum

cic indicated in the Soviet visa. Sty
Foreign tourists! arrivals ie the Soviet Union are registered when they fire :
hand over their passports at the first Intourit service point indicated on the visa .
In addition to Soviet visas, # as sequired that the citizens of moat Westert-
‘European countries obtain vises for the Comsnunist countries through which
they will drive on their way tv and from the Soviet Union: East Germaay
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Husgary, Rumania or Bulgaria; Vase German vise” rn
- are obtainable on entry te that e/suntry. - ann aos
oo } Besides an ‘Tatesnation’ Driving Kermit, motorists must being amv inter:
ee | : national automobile regittratien ccstificate of the country af departure,
>
is

pulated in the 1926 Internstieal Automnsbile Traffic Conventfan. Tourist’ - oa
cars can he brought into the 4nict Coin and takes out again without payment °

of duty on condition that the woner gives 2 written guarantee ta take the car

out.of the country upon departiise. This guarantee is wo be handcd-over to the

eustoms authorities at the Sensea border.

a eee

Te is forbidden to bring the bhiemwing 5 into the Soviet Union;
(a) arms and ammunition
{b) printed matter, films, ptesrgraphs, negatives, drawings, vtc.
hostile to the U.S.5.R. 16 prixicul or economic respects
Printed matter, plants (frust, seeds, etc.) and animals are fiatle to » ingpection
by customs authorities, .
It is forbidden to take out 4 the Soviet Union:
(a) arms and ammunition

y

“which art -

13



--- Page 111 ---
14-0000

IV, Belorussian KOE and MVEN
tL. ft would be wsefal to question Norcnke about hia knowledge of the chiefa

vf the KGB and the MVD in the Belorussian Mepublic. A list of names

a

follows:

RGB and MVD Chiefs and Deputy Cl

Lt. General Laveently Fomich Tsanava ~ NKVD, MGI (State Security) 1941-1953,
+~Maj. General Mikhail Ivanovich Baskakov - MVD 1952-1954, ,
Lt. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Perepclitayn - KGS (State Security) 1954-1959,
| wenn e ee neee Aleksandr Nikiforovich Akscnov - MVD 1960-1965,
, bt General Vasiliy Ivanovich Petrov . - KGB (State Security) 1959- 1973,

Lt. General Yakov Prokopyevich Nikulkin - KGB (State Security) 1973-

Deputics
Maj. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Percpclitsyn - MVD 1952-1954

Arkadiy Denisovich Rudak - KGB (State Security) 1959-

Aleksandr Nikiforovich Akscnov - KGB (State Security) 1959-1960.

1962~

Maj. General Stepan Alekseyevich Smorodinskiy - KGB (State Security)

peteebeecdee Ivan Leopoldovich Lysakovskly.- KGB (State Security) 1971-

2.- What do you know about Alcksandr Nikiforovich Aksenev?

i. Note; (a) Aksenov was Deputy Chairman of the KGL of Belorussia

‘ _ from 1959 to 1960, It is assumed that when Oswald arrived

‘in Minsk in January 1960, Aksenov was Deputy Chairman of -

‘of the KGB and would definitely know about the Oswald case.
From 1960 to 1965, Aksenov was MVD Minister of Belorussia, -
Therefore it would be under his direction that Oswald's passport
and the departure of Oswald and Marina from Minsk was
arranged, If Nosenko had access to Oswald's file, he must .
know about Aksenov, From 1965 tu 1971, Aksenov was First
Secretary of the Vitebsk Obkom of CP Belorussia, and since
1971, Aksenov has been Second Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Belorussian CP. He has been a member of
the CC CPSU since 1976, and he is also a deputy to the USSR
Supreme.Soviet. On May 9, 1978, Aksenov arrived in Columbia,
He headed the Soviet delegation on the invitation of the Columbian

Communist Party.

14



--- Page 112 ---
ae

Le oe

V.__Nosenko - Nikolayev

ao

(bh) ALN. Akcenoy is no doubt identical with a Colonel Nikolay
Akrenov with whom, according to -Epstein's book, (page 146)
Marina Oswald had an interview in 1961, Aksenoy is alsa
roentioned in MeMillan's book (pages 132-133). Aksenoy
allegedly said to Marina, “Tell your husband not.to worry. I
believe your request wilBbe granted." Also see page 125 of

the same book,

Did you know or know of Avkadiy Denisovich Rudak?
. pan
Note: Rudak was Deputy Chairman of the KGB during 1959 to 1960 and
might have taken part in the Oswald case while Oswald lived

73.

‘in Minsk,

4. . Did you know or know of Major General Stepan Alekseyevich Smorodinskiy?

Note: Smorodinskiy was Deputy Chairman of the KGB for Helorussia in
~" 1962 and most likely know about the Oswald case, His name
would most likely appear in the Oswald file. :

e. Do ‘you ‘know Lt, General Vasiliy Ivanovich Petrov? -

Note: Petrov was KGB Chairman for Belorussia from 1959 to 1973,
Therefore, it would be his agency, the KGB, which would watch
Oswald in Minsk. It is safe to assume that after the assassination
of President Kennedy in 1963, Petrov, as Chairman of the KGB

‘of Belorussia, would review the Oswald file and eend it ta Moscaw,
He would also have been called to Moscow KGB headquarters to
‘take part in the Preparation of the spravka (summary) of the

Oswald file,

y 6. What do you know about Lt. General Aleksandr Ivanovich Perepelitsyn?

Note: Perepelitayn was Chairman of the KGB of the Beloriissian Republic’. .
from 1954 to 1959, Nosénko should know him or af léaat about him. .
Nosenko should be asked ‘if Perepelitsyn took any part in the
‘investigation of Oswald, (Perepelitsyn was Deputy Chairman of
the KGB of the USSR from 1959 to 1967. He. died in ‘Moscow, )}

y 7. What part, if any, was played by General Sergey Grigor yevich Bannikov

‘in the Oswald case, especially after the assassination of. President Kennedy? |.

Bannikov was mentioned by Nosenko as one of the Deputy Chiefs of
the Second Chief Directorate and later on as one of the Deputy
Chairmen of the KGB of the-USSR, From 1968 to 1978, Bannikoy
was Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Supreme Court.

Note:*

1. Can you explain why you went to England and Cuba under the name Nikolayev
and to Geneva using your true name, Nosenko? What would kave happened
if some Englishman or English intelligence officer had met you in Geneva

in 1962 or in 1964 and grected you in the presence of the other delegates

15



--- Page 113 ---
14-0000

with the words, “Oh, Mr. Nikolayev! Tlow are you?” Cremember you,

You visited England with the team of boxera,"

x

VE _LGRU (Militr ey IeteMiccice) 7

v

From where did you learn that the GRU was not informed about Oswald's
presence in the USSR? Wouldn't the GRU officer in Intourist, whom you

lier, have known about Oswald's presence in the USSR?

mentioned ¢

Did you eve hear that Oswald possibly had contact with the Soviet
intelligence during his service in Japan? .

You stated previously that there was no information that Oswald offered
to give information on the US Marine Corps. You did not read the file,
Then how do you know this to be the case? How do you know that the KGB

and GRU made no attempt to debricf Oswald about his service in the.

US Marine Corps? ,

Previously. you mentioned one Colonel Voloshin as an officer of the
Defense Ministry of the USSR. Can you provide any additional information

on this Voloshin? Could it be possible that he was a KGB officer instead :

'.of-in'the Defense'Ministry?.

bok

Note: (a) Accowding to Epstein's book, one Pavel T, Voloshin was an
administrator at Patrice Lumumba University and was a KGB
officer who accompanied a group of Russian dancers to Los Angeles
in 1959 at just about the same time that Oswald was making
weekend trips there to get his passport and possibly to make other

. arrangements for: his ‘trip to Moscow, A few weeks after Oswald
decided to return to the United States, he received a letter from
Patrice Lumumba University Signed by Voloshin. (page 111) :
{b) -P, D. knew one KGB officer by the name of Voloshin (first
and middle name forgotten) who used to work in SMERSH
(military Cl) and later in the late 1940's and beginning of the
1950's inS & T Department of the KGB, oo

VU, Marina,

From where did you pick up the information that Marina was.a “simple.

Sbyvatel" (a politically unaware Person) and that she was not anti-Soviet

if you did not read the Oswald file?

*

16


--- Page 114 ---
1400000
' *

2. You stated previously that Macina was an obyvatel, Do you have any

comments on the following: "We knew cach time you had a date, We :
knew when you applied for younunarriage license, | We knew the date of
your wedding." These were the words of the Komsomol socrenacy in

Minsk when Marina was expelled from the Komsomol,
~" 3. Do you have any comments on Marina's statement when she said,
"Our government (Soviet) knows every move I make."" She make this
comment shortly after her expulsion from the Komsomol,
~ 4 Did you know that while in Minsk Marina belonged to a group of youths

who gathered together to listen to Voice of America and BBC? Would

that be enough for the KGB to have Marina in its card files? Is it
possible that Marina was the KGB agent reporting on them?
v 5. You stated that if Marina had been recruited by the KGB, you would
know about it and it would be in the file, But you did not read the file.
How then do you know that she was not recruited?
You said that among Marina's relatives there was an officer of the Minsk

Militia, a Lt. Colonel. Do -you have any comments on Marina's

revelation that her: real father Was a traitor and that he was shot? ie’

her father was a traitor and fie | was shot, would his name be in the KGB

card file? Would the name of Marina's mother be in the KGB card file

as the wife of a traitor? Is it then possible that Marina's name also

would be i in the. KGB. card file somewhere?

. . Py

“y 7 You stated préviously that KGB had no interest in Marina prior to her
meeting Oswald and that the KGB investigated her only after Oswald

applied for permission to register marriage with Marina, How do you

know that? Did you read a special file on Marina? Marina revealed

lately that while she was living in Leningrad in 1958 or 1959, she met

a diplomat from Afghanistan who lured her to his hotel room and tried

to make love to her. - Do you think the KGB in Leningrad would know

about this diplomat and whom he lured to hid hotel? Is it possible that
.

17



--- Page 115 ---
14-0000
2 on

Marina was already a RGD agent and she was directed to lure the

In either care, the KGB would definitely know

diplomat ta the hotel?
about Marina and if che was used hy the KGB as a bait for foreigners,
might she have already becn an experienced KGB agent?

You stated previously that you saw Oswald's file only briefly and you

tead only a summary. Then how would you know that Marina Wes novor:

used by.the KGB? Did you personally make a direct check on whether or:

“not Marina was’ a KGB informant?

In your previous testimony, you categorically denied that Marina was a
KGB-MVD agent or informer. Do you have any comments on Marina's

statement to Life Magazino that she was a "Soviet agent"? Is there any

, possibility that the KGB or MVD in Belorussia or in Leningrad, whore

: file, as well as in the | paramary which you: read., La .

8.
© %
’
y 10.
yu.
ye dee
Ja
4

Marina had lived previously, had recruited her as an agent or informor
and she continued to work for the KGB or the MVD until her departuro to
the US? Did you have any fifermation about the possibility that there was
another file in the KGB on Marina, a file for an agent or informer of the

KGB or MVD? If such a file existed, it must be reflected in the Oswald.

Did you hear or + know that white in Leningrad Marina dated one Oleg”

Tarussin, ‘a student who had ambitions to‘enter tho Soviet diplomatic. - :

service and who had. some ‘trouble ‘with the authorities overa minor:

political incident?

Was there any information in Oswald's file to show that after Oswald.
married Marina, Marina was in the hospital for about five days?
What do you know about Marina's vacation in Kharkov shortly after

she married Oswald?

Note: She may have been in Moscow instead of Kharkov.

Did you know that while in Minsk Oswald was in the Fourth Clinical
Hospital for surgery on his adenoids? (Oswald got special attention from

the doctors.) 7

Note: Marina's Aunt Valya, whose husband was an. MVD Colonel, sent
eggs to Oswald while he was-in the hospital.



--- Page 116 ---
Hog

us .
oe 14.0 You previously stated thet the reasen that there were no difticuttien in
in the way of Marinata marriage tea foceiguer and her depactace from.

the Soviet Union wan because Oswatl Was already living and working fn

the Sovict Union. How would the KGB have reacted to Oswald'a tarriage

Qed ae

if they had knows thar O- toa latter te the American Embassy

before his marriage about his desire to retucn to the United States?

15. Did you know that Oswald asked the American Embassy for permisston

to return to the United States before he married Marina?
oo cow, ;

VILL _Nosenko and Oswald care Glo. °

v tl. Describe in detail your personal involvement with Oswald and with the
Oswald cage from the day Oswald arrived in the USSR to the day of his

departure from the USSR, What positions ih the KGB did you personally

hold at that time? i

v 2. Describe in detail your personal involvement with the Oawald case after
the assassination ‘of President Kennedy from 23 November 1963 to-the day
of your defection to the US,

3, In what activities were you involved in connection with the Oswald cage and

the asgassination of President. Kénnedy while you weré in Genova-at:the end. as

of 1963 and the beginning of 1964? Name any Sovict diplomats or officers
of Soviet intelligence (KGB, GRU) with whom you discussed the Oswald
case and the death of the American President in Geneva.

v4. Are you sure that there was no file on Oswald in the KGB before he.
arrived in the USSR? How do you know this? Did you personally check it?

i 5. You previously told American authorities that on the cover .of Oswald's
file "there definitely was a 'klichka', "' But you said you did not remember
the klichka. Do you remember

awhether the klichka was one word or two, As you did not read the file,

is it possible that it was an old file, opened a few years previously by

the First Chief Directorate or by the GRU?

19



--- Page 117 ---
14-0000

w

Pa)

o

20.

Mh,

‘interpre

Describe in detail how you learned about it,

You tated presto aly that nobody frum the KGB had an intere stn Onwatd,

but Onw, ud adantted that he had been interviewed by officials of the MVD

(or KON) at leagt twice on his arrival in the USSR and again before his

XN

departure, What waa said about these interviews in the Onwald file or

in the summary (upravka) of Oswald's file? Do you krow the names of
the people who talked to Oswald?) Was it the KGK, MVP, or both?
What do you know about the “ntourist guide’ Rosa Agafonova who
visited Oawatd in his hotel room shortly after his arrival in Moscow?

Did you personally know Rimma Shirokova, the Intourist guido or

ter?) Was she a KGB officer or KGD agent working for Intourist?
Was there a report in the Oswald file that Rimma Shirokova. sent two
postcards to Oswald in Minsk from « some vacation places in the south

of the USSR? Did you know that Rimma Shirokova visited Oswald in

Minsk? (See Epstein's book, page 124.)

Note: Oswald and Shirokova allegedly talked about the possibility of
Oswald studying at Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow, It
also should be noted that Shirokova visited Minsk shortly after
Oswald and his wife Marina decided to go to the United States,

How did-you know that Officer Krupnov wrote a request and opened a a case
file on Oswald? Did: you ‘seo when Krupnov was s writing it? bia you read”
the request or hear about it from somebody? ie you saw it, who approved’
and sanctioned the request? If the KGB had no Interest in Oswald, then

why was a file opened?

Previously, on many occasions, you stated that the KGB had no interest

in Oswald, that he was not normal, and that he. should leave the country, ;
Who among the KGB junior and senior officers made the decision that the’

KGB had no interest in Oswald and that he should leave the country?

‘from whom, from what

documents, and when,
How did you know that there was no microphone in the Hotel Berlin room

where Oswald stayed? Did you personally check the room before Oswald

arrived? .

20



--- Page 118 ---
1400000
« ”

You stated that ne ROW officer war eveccin contact with Oswalt, How

12

could you make sacha statement &f you did not fad the file? You were

according ty your information, you did not
Ly ote .
visit Minsk to study the Oswatd cure,

not re sponsible f for ity and,

Note: Qawalkt's diary clearly shows that most of the students he met were
most Hkely not students at atl, They were more likely KG officers

under cover as students,
- 13. “You atated previously that it was Officer Krapnov who wrote a requeat :
and opened the vase file on Oswald, which was later sent to Minsk,
Name other officers who participated in making the ‘decision to.open -
the file, who handled the file, and who sent the file to Minsk, What:
part did you personally play in Oswald's case while Oswald was in Moscow?
: 14. You stated previously that the Secand Chier’ Directorate of the KGB was,
not interest in Oswald because it was concerned only with internal .
matters," Isn't it true that the Second Chief Directorate is the internal
countecrintelligence organization and is responsible for foreigners who

iy .
. enter the Sovict Union for any reason? Isn't it true that the tourist

department of the Second Chief Directorate is responsible for foreign:

tourists such as. “Oowata? Then why wasn't: the Second Chiet Directorate :
interested i in Oswald? ‘Do you see any contradictions in your statement?

i v 15. You stated that there was no 0 attempt made to exploit Oswata for

propaganda purposes, such : as Radio, Moscow ‘ broadcasts, TV, lectures,

etc, How do you know this? Do you have any comments on the following:
° "On October 19 (1960), Lee (Oswald). was interviewed in his’ room at the

Hotel Berlin by a correspondent of Radio Moscow, Lev Setyayev, who

was ostensibly seeking his impressions as a tourist to use in propaganda

‘broadcasts overseas," Was there an officer in the KGB by the name of
Setyayev? Was this interview organized by the KGB?
16, .Do you have any information that Oswald might have ‘been met in -

Leningrad by Intourist and then made all the arrangements to go to Moscow? -

21,



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000 . fo

Who tol fsteariat that there was no KGB interent in Oawalt? What

7,
io the name of the officer and hia department who did'ae? While in

Moscow, Oswald was interviewed by at leant three American correapondents,

; . ye lee
In it your opinion that the Second ‘Chief Directorate was not interested to

find out why Onwald talked tu these newepapermen and who they wera?

Isn't that part of the KGi'n responsibilities?
18, According to your statement, Oswald was not connidered normal, Who
determined that he wan nst normal? How many doctors, from what
institutions, concluded that Oswald was not normal? The Second Chief
Directorate and Intourist officers could not conclude that Oswald was
abnormal without medical expertise,

19, If Oswald was abnormal, then why did Sovict authorities, for examplo,

v
the Ministry of Forcign Affairs, not inform the American Embaunsy about
it? ,
Note: In hie previous interrogation, Noscnko hesitated in answering these
questions,
. vv 20. You stated previously that Oswald was in the hoopital,. the hospital said

that Oswald was not normal, and there was no action taken to inform the

. American Embassy. How do you know all of thie without reading the’
Oswald file?

v 21. Why do you think that the American Embassy would not have taken Oswald.
if he had been turned over to them? Do you know that any Sovict ;
government office contacted the American Embassy and informed. them
about Oswald's presence and the suicide attempt in Moscow? ,

v 22, Was the only reason that the Soviet Government did not inform the

American Embassy of Oswald's alleged suicide attempt that it was fearod

that he might try it again? ,
“23, You stated that there was no psychological assessment of Oswald by the
KGB nor by the hospital, and that there was no report of that nature,

You did not read the file. You read only summaries, Then how could

you know that there was no such report? How long was the summary--

100 pages?
22



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000
¢

co

182g

ede

v 26.

Do you know when and by whom a mlatelenn passport was issucd to
Oswald? Where was it issued? Are atatelens pasaporta usually
issued by the MVD on the reequimendation and approval of the KG?

“
What would happen if the MVD issued a statelena passport without
KGB knowledge or if the KGB was apaingt it? ~
You stated previously that the KGB considered Oswald to have retained

his American citizenship while he was in the Soviet Union, Do you have

any comments on the fact that after his arrival in the USSR, and after
having made oral requests for Savict citizenship, he returned to the

American Embassy, denounced his US citizenship and threw. out his “
American passport to the American Coneul at the Embassy, :

Do you think the KGB monitored Oswald's conversations with the .
American Consulate officers ‘or received reports from the American
Embassy (from Soviet employees there or Soviet agents there) about
Oswald's denunciation of US citizenship? Did the KGB instruct Oswald
to denounce his American citizenship at the American Embassy before
he would be permitted to apply for Soviet citizenship?

You stated that the decision to’ give Oswald a stipend. wae mado by the
Red Cross. Explain in detail how the Red Cross learned that Oswald
arrived in the USSR. Who informed the Red Cross that there was an
American who needed help? Why was it decided to give help ‘from the
Red Cross and not from the Trade Union? It is. understandable that
Oswald might not have had enough money to start a new life in the USSR,
but he was not a poor beggar who needed to be turned to the Red Cross
instead of the Trade Union. ‘How did you find out that it was the Red Cross
that made the decision? According to available information, the Red
Cross does not assign money to anybody without the recommendation of
some other Soviet office, Which office was its the KGB, MVD, the

Councit of Ministers, Intourist, or the USSR Supreme Soviet? Who

a

23



--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

27.

y 28,

29.

30,

vy 3h

officers, ‘then this should ke noted in the Oswald file which was sent to

the decision on the amount to pay Oswald?

stacted if first’ Who rate
Why wag it decided to pay hire 790 rubles a month instead of 500 oF
10007 What was your salary agian KGB officer? Approximately

ie :

400 rubles a month, new enunky Tan't it (ruc that Oswald received

more than you did?

If it was decided by the AGH officers and by Soviet doctors that Oswald was

abnormal, then why was he perrnitted to marcy a Sovict citizen?

Note: According to Soviet law, in every union republic, including
Belorussia, the “marriage cannot be permilted between persons
if one of them is proseunced a mental case or imbecile, "

Did you have any information that the Minsk KGB reported to Muscow
headquarters Oswald's intention to marry a Soviet citizen, in this case,

Marina?

You stated previously that Oswald's file wae sent to the Second Directorate

of the Belorussian KGB. Haw do you know that it was sent specifically

to the Second Directorate and not to the KGB chairman or his deputy .

with a special instruction?

What do you mean "to keep an eye on him" (Oswald)? That, according

to your words, was the instraction frorn the Seventh Department of the
Second Chief Directorate to the Belorussian Second Directorate of the KGB,
You stated: that there was no visible surveillance of Oswald, there waé no
microphone in his apartment, Fat you stated his mail was monitered and -
that there were agents around Oswald in places where-he worked and lived.
Explain. how you learned about it. Do you know tha names of any ,
agents who reported on Oswald? If you did not read the file on Oswald,

how could you know about it?

Previously ‘you stated that Oswald was handled no differently than any

other American defector, “. ... The only difference was that he was not:”

to be allowed to stay, and he was considered to be abnormal." If this was .
the only difference, and it is quite a big one, then why was he allowed to

stay in the USSR? If Oswald was “not normal" according to the KGB

24 .


--- Page 122 ---
14,0000

the Belorussian KGB. Therefore, the KGB and MVD in Belorussia knew |
About it, Then how and why was Oswald permitted to have a shotgun
which he kept in his apartnagnt in Minak?
: %

“v2. Do you have an information that while in the USSR, especially ducin

v y Y eu y &
the year 1960-1961, Oswald might have heen visiting Cuba?
Note: Nosenko claimed that during October-November’ 1960, he (Nosenko)

went to Cuba with.a group of STATE PLANNING COMMISSION'S :

META LURGISTS headed. by Ivan Strigen. He stayed in Cuba for
two months, :

£33. Do you have any comments on the statement made by Marina's uncle,
the MVD colonel: "I thought that Alik (Oswald) had not only given up’ '
his American citizenship but had become a citizen of the USSR, "'
Note: The question is that if an MVD colonel thought or could be fooled 4
by the KGB that Oswald was a Soviet citizen, it is possible that .
he really was a citizen or that the KGB spread the rumor that he
was. Loon ,
V34,. What do you know about Oswald's association with the Foreign Language
Institute in Minsk?
35, To your knowledge, what KGB, GRU, and other intelligence schools

or training courses were in Belorussia during your work with the KGB? :

“What do you know about Oswald's application to-attena Patrice Lumumba’.
University in Moscow? Why was Oswald denied entrance to the University?

Note: At that time, Colonel Yerzin, senior KGB officer, was a
deputy director of Patrice Lumumba University. (P.D.)

137. Did you know that Oswald took with him to the American Embassy
ve a letter from his friend Ziger ini ‘Minsk? Oswald left that fetter at the
American Embassy, . :

v.38. What do you know about the fact that Oswald, while in Minsk, received
American magazines and other publications? Do you think the KGB knew “eds
about it? .

39. Did you know that Oswald was helped to ‘study Russian at the Minsk plant
by one of his co-workers and ‘by one of his friends, Erich, and by a girl

at the Forcign Language Institute? Do you know the names of those people?

2

i 25



--- Page 123 ---
1490000

um @

40. What do you know about Oswald's association and friendship with forcipn

students in the USSR in Minsk and Moscow? Do the name

[Pat sonjand Airs. RobertdsCamact} mean anything to you

aets with Cuban | ‘Studentsa in Minsk?
ne

41. What do Oswald's files show ‘about his cont

Note: McMillan's book atated that Oswald began to seek out the Cuban
students in Minsk, of um there were 300 or so, to learn what

he could of Casiro! s lution.” (See page 127.) oa

a2.

hunting trips he did not kill anything. Was this informatiog
you read? Do you have any comments ‘on the fact that according to the \

Warren Commission Report and the records of Oswald's service in the

Marines. that he, Oswald, was a sharp shooter and marksman? Was. \ .
the "fact" that Oswald was a poor shot mentioned | in r the summary? -
43. You stated previously (27 and 29 July 1964) that you. saw the file on

Oswata only briefly and that the file was at the Seventh Department: i \

for only 35-40 minutes. Then how do you know that noWody in the

\
‘ . Soviet Union, including KGB officers, ever sat down with Oswald and

got all. the information ¢ on Oswald? Was everything that you told to.

Us authorities about Oswald. ‘picked up from the summary during those ,

35-40 minutes?

« 44... Describe in detail how you and other officers of the Seventh Department
‘ : , of the Second Chief Directorate worked together on writing the firet : . : a

. Spravka (summary) on Oswald. You also stated that this spravka

(the first one) was prepared in Moscow before the Oswald file fom Minsk’ :
reparing the spravka? '

Was there another file on Oswald in Moscow or was ita ‘control file

‘arrived in Moscow. What material did you use i

(Kontrolnoye delo)?

Note: In important cases the real file is in the place where the subject
lives and works. In this case, the Oswald file was in’ Minsk,
Moscow would have an almost identical file on the subject for
control purpcses and for instructions on how to handle and
develop the case, This headquarters file is called the. Control
File, This file exists on the perdon who is already an agent or
who is under development or training,

: a 26



--- Page 124 ---
14.0900

~

, ome
- ©

4a,

46,

-read-it.

What do > you know about Marina! 8. visit to Moscow. on Joly 10, 19617 ,

You stated that when the file an Oswald arrived from Minsk, you,

together with other officers looked quickly through the file, then senior

officers Fedoseyey anit Matveyev of the First Department of the Second /
‘ Ret ee co . . we

. %
Chief Directorate took the file and you never saw ft again, Recause the

file was in your department only 20-30 niuinutes (in other places Nosenko
said 35-40 minutes), the § pravka could not be written in sucha short

time, and because the file was taken away to the higher authorities of |

the Second Chit Directorate and to the KGB chairman, you had no chance

to sce the second Spravka, Then again the question is which summary

did you read--the second or the firet or both? Describe in detail how _
long the summary was, what was in it, and how. Jong it took for you to

Did. ~you-make any notes-from the-summiary In €ase later on you i _
had to report the "facts" to US intelligence? ,
What do you know about Oswald's visit (from Minsk) to the American
Embassy in Moscow on July 8; 1961?

Note: Oswald flew from Minsk to Moscow allegedly without permission
from the Soviet authority.

. What part dia the KGB play 1 in the arrangements of Marina's visit to

JAD

_ the First Chief Directorate information? Who from the First Chief

without stopping her at the gates, In what hotel in Moscow did Oswald

the American Embassy in Moscow without checking her papers and:

and ‘Marina stay at that time?

You stated previously that the First Chiet Directorate provided no

information about Oswald before Oswald went to Mexico. What . :
information did the First Chief Directorate sive to the Second Chief

Directorate before he went to Mexico? Did you read this information?

If you did not personally read it, then how did you learn the contents of

. talked
Directorate particularlyato the officers of the Second Chief Directorate

and with wham did they talk?

27 a


--- Page 125 ---
14-0900

Lene

>

y

8. How did you Jearn what Oawald said atthe Soviet Euibasay in Mevica City?

Who told you Chat Oavwald waned to cotien te the USSR? Was this written

. s
tn the sununary? °

28 "



--- Page 126 ---
14-0000

CJ UNCLASSIFIED Use OMY (CO CONFIDENTIAL () secaer

SUBIECT, (Oprenell

. / Rodger S. Gabrielson rlali22
- OLC/C&R

COMMENTS (Number each comment to thow from «hom.
» Drew 0 line ocron coluem ater eoch comment)

TO. (Oficer deugnahen, room mveber, ond
buitdng) :

MINDER OTEK Attached is a letter
SA/D0/O_ Tube: x from the House Select
Committee on Assassinations

dated 5 .

Pleaso respond as soon as

possible. cat
Shep: Please have.Cl look
atthis. It's the T.S. materlal
from Deryabin's safe — requested

by Blakey. Thanks, .
Rodge ~

by _ ( = 7 /
Se] a
Ns Soe

rrr lO sre" C] secret =] conripentiac J teomy =O UNCLASSIFIED



--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

TOP SECRET

eee
‘ altaed fe Top Geceet Document—Agte:

Ht

atialty doaniraded ty SLCKLT when

UNULAS EU ation tinge. TU
J fitted un toem ig detas tied fram c cH due ineet
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FO TOP SECRET DOCUMENT BS
“ pOnMENT DEemeTON , ~ ~ erniiay “p
. —_ “| . CIA Control No. ;
SRICTIEG t ; : 5 784 191722, , $
On ha  KAALZ-1I2470 0 7 . . 1 Date Ducument Racelved E
if ; Them .
. oe, Date ZO APR 1968 . 1. Vom ¢
corto F Repro 2 7 : ; toaeed Oy R
; feumber of Pages . ~ es LP E
| . t

ftumber of Altachmente

by the Central tntaligence Agency oF cl
Soanagrades. dovtrayed. oF t

fend tone indiveduale whore offeial dutes relate to the matter Top
ail ign (ha form and wd.cete perind of cusindy in the felt.
and indicate the date of handing in the ry

ATIORTION: Tha form all be
1 Tap Secvet

OF CIA Accoes ta Top Secret motter ie
Secret Control OMicare who se: .
hand columny prov.ded Cach indwiduat who 0

fhe attached Top Secret mate
the top Secret documant a!

“RELEAMED

AESCAREO TO |

ew Boma eted.10 bk MORI AR Fle, wpeces below and tran

When finished whet hese docu
£6 DUOLTSCO an wy

TOP SECRET Sep kves OnLy.

ICE OF DETACHMENT: When this
mutted to Centrat Top Secret Control tor r§

{4 retury

To
tre the
I for these docunents, < re the trol Office
By (Signature) H
SS wend TS* I91722
OFFICE Toare ? TS8 1937224
+

1417226

FORM 26 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS. W91722¢ ; : ao
5 ort - . :
- ya : wevuwna a
S 3 4 Eu =00 CRa Es iP
- = oe 2 aes °5 Cue a?
rm) : zs & d
« > 2 oe og on So ew
ry d : 295 Be a” .FS Ou
~ A ~ ockags “Be ho Oe 27§
BK ned ~ eonele® _ FOsNnce Ob
ae sete ies rte
& 2 2 eo eae ensue ~
< “ 2 Pour wn sae? RD Cw
4 - a 2ecouns et Ow 9 Oo 62
Pn ee ed “ae ane -. oR
tioe panes oe «o
> oy - oO: .
aoa sn Fed 3 gs
* oad = g So



--- Page 128 ---
14-0000

TOP SECRET

UNCLE AS: 0 when Dblan TOP SLCREE when attached to Top Secret Document—Automancaly
filled in form is detached from controlled document: .

CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT

downgraded to

DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION .

° . CAA Controt No.

— ILA A.

Qate Document Received
gb auN

jw Naere

< Laogges Sy

Source

Fiuniber of Pages

Number of Attach:

of and attached to each Top Secret document rei
such time

ce Agency or classi
nemitted outside

ATTENTION
ted Top Sect
of CIA. Accesa to Too Secret om:
+ Secrat Conteot Oficers who M1
hand columns provided. Each inde

op Secret Control personne!
attached Top Secret matersal will e'g0
Top Secret document will cate the date of handing

77 TT"” ReL EASED

REFCRRED

detached trom Top Secret material it shall be completed .n the acoropr.

NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form
mitted to Conteal Tap Secret Controt far record.

” ogstROvEO

‘ay (Signature)

“WITNESSED BY (Signature)

~ | oFrice

FORM 2G USE PREVIOUS COITIONS, TOP SECRET trauoto rom EF
(ort) , a. meas

aAmMBsAmMA TO4


--- Page 129 ---
TARO Dresses

‘TOP SECRET

ed to Top Secret Oxurnent---Autumatically downgraded to SECRET when

UNCLASSIZIED when biank—IOP SECRET when attach
hited in form is detached from controlled document,

CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP

SECRET DOCUMENT

“escmPrion — —" “>
TS#_191722B

“Date Document Received

_XAAL=17:
Ooc. Owte 19 MAY 1966 —
Copy No. OR

latelngence Agency or eta

troved, of transmitted outside

duties retate fo Ine matier. Top

qn thie form and indicate period of custody in the left:
# hending in the tight Nand column:

eng columns . ign and ind:

REFERPEO TO

4 Pat Cabal

= Jn

MOTILE OF DETACHMENT: When this form
tral Top Secret Coatrot f

foau 2 oT : - . shore
On 26 USE PREVIOUS LorTiONS. TOP SECRET tact secu Serseahe pownceabees (aor
ven ARO OG ASSICATION

orn:

AMBAmMA VO4


--- Page 130 ---
14-9000 5.

TOP SECRET

UNCLASSITIED when “TOP SEESTT when attached to Top Secret Ducument-
filled in form is detached from contro-et document. .
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET

Automatically downgraded to SECRET when

DOCUMENT

7 . CIA Control No.

Ts 191722C_.... --.-—-
Dete Qocumgnt Received
Dass

oe. Me. CSCI~3/781,491.
Occ. Date 19 May 1964...
# Repro 2..-_-_}
me

Number of Attachments

ATTENTION: Thi
fred Top Secret within the CIA and wil remas etteched to
of CIA, Access to Top Secret matter oa Lmitet te Top Ss

Secret Control Ofiicers who recewe and/or release the
band columne provided. Each indwiduat woe sees the Top Sect

REFCRREO TO

at ahatt be completed in the appropea

Daf, OF DETACHMENT: Whan this form  ceteched trom Top Secret mat
mitted to Cantral Top Secret Control for recors.

_ ~ pestRovED ~” pispatcneo (oursiOE

"pOWNGRADEO

_ | OY (Signature)

WITNESSED BY (S.gnature?

“pene TT oefice~ ~ eae
. !

ee 26 use Previous eorT10Ns. TOP SECRET “prauoto soa Leash commen
(or ty 1... AMO DEGLASSIFICATION.

AMBAMA VO4


--- Page 131 ---
TAS

DEFECTORS - NOSENKO

THTLE

Report on: Yurtly Ivanovich Nosenko, Soviet

Attacheents:
1. Meco for Record from David E. Murphy, Subject:

Discussion with Deputy Attorney General on
Nosenko Case .

2. Mem for Director of Security from Lawrence R,
Houston, Subject: Parole Status of Defectors

3. Memo, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO

Letter for Mr. Richard Helms from J. Walter
Yeagley, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko

- Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrel] from Richard

Helms, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
(Forms [-125 and ba kground data attached)

Letter for Mr. Louis Wienckowsk{ from Frank. E.
Bartos, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich Nossenko

Letter for Mr. Raymond F. Farrell from Victor R.
White, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSSENKO

Routing Sheet from Chief, SR Division to . wpe

00/08

” DATE
2 Apr 64

2 Apr 64

_ 3 Apr 64

dan 75
20 Oct 69

9 Oct 69

24 July 69

18 Jul 69

“13 Feb 64%

Memo for Mr. McGeorge Bundy from Thomas H. Karamessines,11 Feb 64

Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko

Memo for US Intelligence Board Members from Marshall
S. Carter, Subject: Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko

Newsparer clipping: Nosenko's Account Disputes
Charge by Soviet

Newspaper clipping: U.S. Lets Swiss and Red Envoys
talk to Defector

4. Meco for Acting Chief, Support Branch from Jack
M. Baunan

5. Mero for Special Agent in Charge District Field
Office from Victor &. White, Subject: LESNIK, George
M. (Emergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)

12 Feb 64
15 Feb 64
12 May 64

10 Ju) -64


--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

TAB oo TITLE DATE
"1 gut 64

Memo for Headquarters from John 0. Noble, Jr.,
Subject: LESNIK, George M. (Emergency Invtructions
Regarding Custody Of) with Attachment: Cmergency
Instructions (2) .

6. Memo for the Record from John M. Maury, 5 Aug 69

— Subject: Briefing of Key Congressional Contacts
on the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko Case w/att

4 Feb 64

4 2 _ Nosenko's Request for Political Asylum
21 Apr 69

- 2 : "Secrecy Agreements and Financial Arrangements
Between the CIA and Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko
3 Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckinridge, 31 Dec 74
Subject: Office of Security Reports on PARAGON, :
NOSENKO, AELAOLE, CELOTEX I and II and -MOCKINGBIRD

4 Memo for General Counsel from S. Breckfnridge, 13 Jan 75

Subject: Nosenko

Attachments:

Y 1. Memo for IG from C. W. Kane, Subject: Yurily 9 Jan 75
Ivanovich ‘Nosenko; .

TA. Memo for USIB Members from M. Carter, 12 Feb 64, 12 Feb 64

Subject: Yurily Ivanovich Nosenko

5 " Questions and Answers Concerning the Treatment of Soviet —
‘Defector Nosenko :

+5 Memo for the IG, Subject: The Nosenko Case

67°

Attachment:
1. Summary of 1967 Document Which Outlines the

Nosenko Case :


--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

IDENT EFICATION: NOSENKO, Yurily Ivanovich, a Soviet
: KGB officer who defected -in 1964 and
was subscquently involuntarily con-
fined in the U.S. by the Agency for
a period of approximately three years.

NOSENKO first contacted Agency per-
: sonnel in Switzerland in June 1962
° and subsequently defected in January

1964.  NOSENKO was brought to the .5.
sand after a period of relative freedon.
he was involuntarily confined in

April 1964. From April 1964- to

August 1965, he was confined at an
Agency controlled site in Clinton,
Maryland. From August 1196S to

October 1967, NOSENKO was ‘conf ined

at Camp Peary, Virginia... In October
1967, he was returiicd to the Washington
area, given increasing amounts of
freedom until he was piven total free-
dom in April 1969. NOSENKO became 3
U.S. citizen in April 1974, SOSENKO
was employed by the Agency, as a
consultant in March 1969 and continues
under contract to date. His present
salary is $23,500 per year. :

BACKGROUND:

(1) The legal basis to confine NOSESKO
against his will was discussed by

Mr. Richard Helms, DD/P, and others with
the Deputy Attorney General on 2 April
1964 (Tab 1). On 3 April 1964, the
Agency General Counsel, Mr. Lawrence
Houston, advised the Director of Security
by memorandum that such confinement was
proper (Tab 2).

APPROVAL

(2) There are a series of letters fron
the PPCI, DCI and others to various
agencies, including the Department of
Justice and the White House, covering
the period 1964 to 1969, evidencing
awareness of these agencies of the
NOSENKO affair (Tab 3).

(3) The conditions of NOSENKO's conf ine-
ment were established by the Office of
Security (Tabs 4 @ 5).



--- Page 134 ---
14-0000

RESULTS

TERMINATION

COMMENTS

Ky memorandum dated 2 October 1968,
the Director of Security forwarded
two reports to the DDCI summarizing
the results of the SOSENKO case to
that date. The reports are voluminous.
One was prepared by the Office of
Security and the vther by the FBI...
Both reports conclude that NOSENKO
was a bona fide defector. A draft
memorandum attached to this file,
dated 21 October 1968 and prepared

by the CI Staff, raises question
regarding NOSENKO's bona Cides

und challenges the above two reports.

NOSENKO continues under contract to

the Agency. He is brought to Washington
periodically to consult on matters
germane to his background and experience.
Various reports are available in the
files of the Office of Security which
detail financial aspects of this case.

No final accounting has been made since
the project continues.

(1) While the Office of Security files
do document the rationale for the original
confinement of NOSENKO, they do not

document the rationale for his continued

confinement over so long a period of time.
A memorandum dated S August 1969 states
that various congressional staff officers ~
were briefed on NOSENKO and states that
concern for his safety, as well as con-
cern regarding his bona fides, prompted |
the prolonged confinement. (See Tab 6)

(2) Office of Security files document
a period in 1969 during which a mail
cover was placed on NOSENKO.

(3) During the above period, NOSENKO

wis allowed a pleasure trip to Florida.
During this trip, Agency personnel, with
apparent Headquarters approval, obtained
the services of prostitutes. This
apparently occurred on at least two
occasions.



--- Page 135 ---
14-0000

FILES

oF
ited
Office of Security files on NOSES KO
are maintained in the following
locations:
OS/SSD (Contact - Mr. Charles Phalen)

OS/SAG (Contact - Mr. Bruce Solic)



--- Page 136 ---
14-0000

(2 April 1964. ,

MEMORANDUM FOR: RECORD

SUBJECT: - Discussion with Deputy Attorney
General on Nosenko Case

>, Ne Helms, Nr. Houston and Nr. Murphy mot with
the Deputy Attorney Goneral and nesbers of his staff to
discuss subjoct caso. Present frea Xr. Katzenbach's
staff were Messrs. Foloy, Yeagley and Rois. .

2.. Mr. Holms oxplained the Nosenko case briefly
and indicated that shortly we would be faced with what
we at least considored to be two probleas on which we
would like the advice of the Departaent of Justice.

‘First, wo would sooon feel coapelled to begin hostile

interrogation of Nosenko in order to arrive at the truth
with respect to his mission for the KG3 and wo wondered
what the legal position would be in circusstances in

‘ which we detained Noseako against his will for this pure

pose. Second, wo would have to be ready after detorsin-
ing ‘that we could obtain no additional infornation fros
Nosenko to doport hin... We had thought of taking hin to
Germany and transferring him to Soviet custody in Borlin
where this has beon done a number of tincs in the past.

3. There was soso discussion of. whether deportation i

to another country night be a consideration. Nr. Helms

explained we would probably face publicity probleas in
deporting to a third country of the kind we would en-
counter if he were froo in the U. S. Nr. Helss noted

there were many itons of .inforsation which we and the

FBI realizo are of no significance because of the file
holdingsswe have but which an unscrupulous newspaper nan
could use to create nischiof, This aspect was then dropped
and it was the consensus that 35eriin was probably the best

place.

4. The question of the basis for detention was again
raised and related by Mr. Foloy to the conditions under
which Nosenko is in this country. ife is here as an “oxe-
clusion and parole case" which seans he has not been
adnitted and has been parolod to tha Agsacy which is
Tesponsible for hin while he is in this ccuatry. . This



--- Page 137 ---
14-0000

we gong
a EYES Cy

parole can be interpreted to moan parole to a specific
locale which would provide sone justification for our.
detaining hia for questioning. It was then pointed out,
however, that 1f he said ho wished to loave the country
to return to. the. Soviet Union, technically we would not
bo able to detain hin further. In this event, we would
bo faced with the need to deport him quickly and quiotiy
_ and for this purpose. the inaigration warrant of arrest
“and deportation was probably the bost instrument, —

S. Mr. Katzenbach askod Hr. Foley to check into
this and Mr. Foley will in turn contact Nr. Houston.
Mr. Houston will in turn discuss the problem with CIA
Office of Security officials to get the background of
their liaison with the INS oa these watters,

ae 6. Mr. Helus thanked Mr. “Xatzenbach for his assistance
and wo departed amid some. jovial bantor with respect to
"The Spy Who Case in From the Cold" about what we expected
fe happen to him when he started to clinb aver that “wall”
n Berlin. - . .

: Oavid E. Murphy’
toe : Chief, SX Division



--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

r

fe)
Q
Qa
o
ae
é-
vy
-o
e

3 April 1964 4

MEMORANDUM FOR: : _ Director of Security

SUBJECT: a "Parole Status of Defectors

“7 1, ‘On 2 April 1964 we had a discussion with the Department -
. of Justice om the status of aliens whose inspection by I&NS is deferred
upon arrival at our request and who are then parolad to this Agency, ~
dk was the position of the Department of Justice that we were responsible

. _ for taking any action necessary to carry out the terms of the parole,

- * 2. As you know, a basic parole agreement was executed by the +}
‘Attorney General and the DCI on 10 February 1955, After setting up
- conditions for authorizing parole in any one case, the agreement states: .
. _ "After parole of such aliens, the Central Intelligence Agency will assume * .
1. Fesponsibility for care, supervision and control of a kind and degree it rn)

believes consistent with the internal ‘Security needs of the United States” - woPR
during continuance of their parole status. This means that the .

responsible Agency officials must take the minimum action necessary

sto protect the internal security needs of the United States. The word :
: "minimum" is not necessarily a limitation, It merely means that good “
‘ : judgment must be used as to what kind and degree of action is necessary,”

‘7

3. The agreement further provides that upon completion of the :
Parolee's intelligence or operational purposes in the United States or if , :
internal security reasons so require, the alien will be removed from .
this country through arrangements made by the Agency and, in such’ .
case, the Agency will inform the Service in advance of each proposed

departure, . 4

LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON . . 4 o
Genoral Counsel ° ;

cc: DD/P : :
C/SR a . i
ence

eS ; hae a

we ee . wae ee


--- Page 139 ---
14-0000

\ . “January 1975

“SUBJECT: Yurly tvanovich NOSENKO

1, Information that NOSENKO had defected and was in the United
States in February 1964 was known to.appropriate agencies and articles
had appeared in the public media.

2 _ NOSENKO was in the United States under an 1 I&NS parole as
the responsibility of CLA. The FBI was fully advised of the presence of
NOSENKO in the United States and interviewed NOSENKO on several
occasions in March 1964, The United States Intelligence Board was
also formally advised on 12 February 1964 concerning the defection of.

NOSENKO, On 14 February 1964, NOSENKO was interviewed by Soviet
in the presence, of 14NS and State Department officials

. officials/and NOSENKO reaffirmed his previous request for asylum ia

‘the United States,



--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

/

‘

panesint Arron Greeenn f — MURFT.

ferrepewa, SECLATTe LW tom

whe
=<

Hepartinent of Gustice .
ZMashington 20530 gu)

. oo Cstoseras, 1962 |” ~
Mr. Richard Helms . ;
Director .

Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C. 20505 ; ;

‘Re: Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko

{ER 69-5003/1)
nn +

Reference is made to your letter dated October 9, 1969,"
concerning the above case, in which you urge the concurrence
‘o£ the Attorney General in your proposal to have the above-
named alien admitted for. pormanent residence in the United
States in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 of the
Central Intelligence Act of 1949, as amended.

Dear Mr. Helms:

- The Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization has
informed me that on the basis of the records of his Service
and the information furnished by you, and in the absence of
any othe evidence sdvarss fo the ATiéA, We concurs in your
proposal that the alicn be permitted to enter the United
States for permanent residence under the authority of the

foregoing statute,

Upon the basis of all the evidence received for consid-
eration and your statement of recomnendation and approval
which carries with it your determination that the entry of the
individual concerned is in the interest. of national security
and in thea furtherance of the national intelligence mission,

I concur in your recommendation that the admission for perma-
nent residence of the subject alien be authorized under tha
provisions of Section 7 of the Central Intelligence Agency

Act of 1949, as amended.
Respectfully,

Fer the Attorney General

4 , WY tt. Erde ey. -

4 “YY

4: 4
(Assistant Attofaey Genefal



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

a Washington, De Ge:

i continua to be of value ja the future,

SECRET

, 80h ee - eR 69-5031

. oo oo

- Mr Raymoad F. Farrel”

Commissioner of Immigration

and Naturalization . at.
Department of Justice ag

. Dear Mr. Farr

SUBJECT: Yurly Ivanovich NOSENXO

Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 7 of.
the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, aa amended,
I approve and. recommend for your approval the entrance
of subject into tho United States for permanent resideaca a wo. *
_since his entry Is In the interest of the national security ~ _. _

7 and- essential tothe farthesance.of the national Intelligence: |

mission, In accordance with previous correspondence In .~

" Section 7 cases, it ls underatood that you will present tis a a

matter t to the Attorney General for bis approval.

: Since ‘bis defection in February 1964, the subject bas
‘ provided valuable information to this Agency a and he will

ww tte . .
Subject has been inveat! gated abroad and here overa

‘period of five years and bas submitted to a technical inter=—

rogation. The question of bona fides fs a continuing one and . .
should any. information be developad definitely disproving his - oa
bona fides, it shall be ‘meade avallable to your Service and the

Attorney General. . ae aan .
: : a - =

SECRET



--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

*”
a“ a . .
Pa A ;
cans : ; ; ,
3 ot > . a
’
: on .
. 27 ;
on
tot
‘

Yharo are enclosed Forms 3-123 asd Lachgreasd data,
via dupltcarer ecouceraing ths senisct .

Richard Helms :
Dizector

2 af i, 1 Obera 8 October 1969

Howard J. Otsarm Data oT
ee re

“
*

14 mo fo oe oe be oe pe



--- Page 143 ---
14-0000

a

_- "--Yarly Ivanovich NOSENKO (Aka: Yuri NOSSZNKO) ©

30 October 1927 Nicolayev, Uxraine, USSR
dale Divorced Brown Blue/Gray 5f{t. M inches

Soviet —. Cancasian an

eer ad


--- Page 144 ---
14-0000

=. SeGuii
“ naan DATA

| Yealy tranovteh PUSENKO ot

“Tart ROSSEK0 oo a os os a

“h6 - Darried and divorced Flavia
MOSEMXO (Nee: SUSHCY). :

"1946 » Married Augustine K. OSEARO-
Gta: TZLICL), 1949 © > separated aad)
1951 = divorced. .
23 June 1955 - Married Ledmila Yslacevna |
BOSENLO (Mea KOZHZTHiZC FA), January |
rY 1964 - sepasstes and 3969. - diverced,..: .

Daughters - Cxsna NOSERE £9, bora 2 August —
1934, Mescow; Tamara MO2E740, born. -
AS Saby 1958, 1 Moscow. om Lalug in UazRy

1942-1943 - Atteaded various, USER Raval
‘Sehsols. oat
3949-2955 = Attecded Inctitate a Interaa.
tesal Relations, Moscow. . rae

pared tysteuazeh iga3 ~ - Soviet Naval m0
(Mavel loteligoa¢ays.. *
March 1923.F obrozzy 1944 -  Cittess as KG
(Te Committes for Stats Secarity}s |

a Licsesan a U3SR Mary he ln eehoct and
Sariag Ba service, ‘

“MATIONALITN gosta an oe

2 PRESENT AND PAST "1943-1954 ~ Member Koassicol, 0322
POLITICAL ATFs 19756 «| = Candidata Commactit Party -
TATIONS: . 1957-1964 © Memoer Communist Pestz7, USIR

SECRET



--- Page 145 ---
SP-1687

18 ut 69”

" Mr. Raymond F. Farrell” .
ot Commissioner of Immigration .
te and Naturalization “0°
* Department of Justice

©

SUBJECT: Yu
wha his ce

riy Ivanovich NOSSENKO a
- Reference Is mada to previous correspondence
_ in this case, Soon . ;

|. yo te this Agency.—Therefores if Ts requested subject's
+ +" parele to this Agency be extended for an additiqnal ©
: <5" period of aix (6) months beyond the expiration date of
“ecu. bis stay of 16 August 1969. . :

i ~ _ a / Your cooperation in this matter is very much ap- :
‘ “su . prectated. boot : -

: : " Sincerely, -
. ~ Victor R. White :
- Deputy Director of Security

{ave stigations and Operational Support)
te :
OS/AAS/LW:es 16 July 1969
ACT
ScbaEl .


--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

5
‘ _, SECRET.

Loy ITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUST - Z

. * ..  |MMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE moat woes ane . \

* . Wasnincrom, 0.C, 20836 ; ’

170 wa7Te 10 HE PL

July 2h, 1969 * AL3 72% S17

Deputy Director of Security
(Investigations and Operational support)
Central Intelligence Ageacy .
Washington, D. C.

Attention: Mr. Louis Wieackowskt

Subject: Yurly Ivanovich Nossenko,
Your sP-1687.
Dear Sir:

As you requested in your letter dated July 14, 1969, the
. -gubdject-bsae-been-givea-e-fur ther) period of stay to expire oa
February 15, 1979.
Stocerelyy

Prank E. Bartos
Chief Intelligence Officer :
Field Inspection aod Security Division

on 7
2 Secret



--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

“TPS

my ay . oo oa ’
’ . rtes Oly oa
ue oe _ Lt February 1984
MEMORANDUM FOR: = Mr. MeGoorze Suady oO
SU3JECTs - . Yuri Ivanovich NosgNzo .

1. This monorand=a refers to the State Departaent

‘rolaase of 10 February on subjact caso and provides addi-

tional background as well as inforaation en his current.
status. - LN oe Foe . . _

: 2. As a [G3 staf¢ officer, N
assizaecd to the Countoriatelligonca

to the Disarnazeat Conference 33 part of 2 cover arrange-
Gent which pernitted hiz to carry out intollizencs and.
Security functions in Geneva on behalf of the KGB... .

3. HOSENXO also attended various sessions of the.

" Disaraasont Contersace hold ia Genova in 1962, During -
the course of. theso sessions NOSENKG Souzht? cuatact with

officials of the UL S. Govoraaeat, Inforaed these officials
that-ne was affiliated with the Soviet State Security ap-

“paratus and voluntearad to aid tho U. 5. Governsent in.

detecting Sovict subversive activity directed agalnst the
U. S. Govornnent, During the courss of his contact with
U.S. authorities NOSENXD stated that his cooperation with

the U. S. Covernaent Originated with his distasta and hatred 7 /

for the Soviet ragine in general, with Ais desirs to obtain

revenge for the unjust doath of his father, 2 sonior official —

tact within the Soviet Union. . : oo.
4. In lato January 1964, NOSENKO arrived {n Geneva,

again masquerading as a seaber of the Soviet delegation

to tha Disarzanent Conference, Subject Soctstly aotifiesd
nis CIA contracts in-the United States conoceming his pres-
ence ina Geneva and arranged to aeet with those contacts,
Ouriag a series of soatings NOSENXO provided information
including decusents conceralias Soviet Stata Security acti-
vitlos within the USSR and abroad and a detailad account
of the X53 operaticn against U.S, Professor Barshoora
whick NOSENSD said he had Personally supervised at the
virection of SEMHICUASTNIY, tha Chairaaa ef- the Couaditee
for State Security (X63). .

.



--- Page 148 ---
14-0000

has not bean extensive snd that we will r

| (staff ofZicer of the X63) for this kiad of woyo, |

a for Plans...
CSR/DEM/Ji£ 0 11 Feb 64 . .
Oistribution: a . . -
Orig ~ Adse . .
2 ce - 52/CI/X-Downey : “St
- lice - c/cr st . at
lice - CSR . ; , . "
sc - DD/os ; _ Ts

Tee

5. . Guriag these BOSE Yoccat zsetings AGSENXO annguaced
his desire to laayo the U355a paTaaneatly aad seckx his futura
in the west. file Clained ats now vorz in the G3 (Firse
Deputy Chaise of that donartaonr charged with tho Surveillaace
aad recruitzeat of Anorican visitors to the US3H) was oze
paading and that he would not be aslo to visi: the fese -
with any fraquency, . Accordiagly, ‘ho PTsparad a request for
political asyluz in the Unitod Statas. Ho was taxen to
Frankfurt, Gernany where he is currently undergoing Laterro-

* 6. It should be noted that CIA contact vith Subject,
equire additional

thorough interrogation to estadlish Subfact’s bena fides.

It should also bo noted that NOSENXG!s duties were. not con-

Cerned with substantive aspects of thy Disarmaaentr Conferorce,

aad he therefore ts AOC expacted to be able to shod much, if

any, light of that araa of our interest, wee

(4. Te. The possibilicy chae SOSEHKO's dofection was da-

‘wFock the conrerance Was nost carefully considerod,
pt hia was taken on thd convictioa that

the Soviets would noc. have chosen such 3 vulnerable agent

Theags fi. Karanessines -
« Acting Coputy Director.



--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

- psratus and vo

' for the Soviot regine in general, vith hi

ads
iow

5 eo,
eo ees ‘
‘ RES CRY
: CONTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25 ad

OFFICE OF DEPUTY DIRECTOR CF CINTS4L INTELUCENCE
12 Feoruary 1964

NOEMORANDUM. FOR: , United States Tatollizenca Zoard Menbers

SUBISCT2 ; . Yuri Tvanovich XOSENKO

1. This neworandus roferts to the Stato Departzent
Folsasa of 10 February on subject case and provides addi- -
tional backzround ag wall as infornation on hls current: °

status, note woe

2. As 2 XGB3 seafe offfear, NOSEXKO 43 Togularly. —
assigaed.to the Counterlatelligeacs Directorate of tho
G3 in Moscow but was Anecluded in the Soviot delegation 7
fo thy Disaraanont Confsranca as pars. of a cover arranges

- Sent whieh peraltted hia to carry cut latellisencs and .

Securiey functions {a Gonova on Sehalf of the G3...

3. 'MOSENXO also sttanded various sessions of the

: Disarnazent Conforenes held da Ganava in 19§2, During the
course of thasa sessions, NOSEuxO Sougnet contact with:

oriicials of the U.S, Govoranont, inforaed thoso officials
that he was affiliated with the Sovist State Security ap- -
luateered to aid the U, 3S. Govornaear in :
detecting Sovioe subversive aetivity directed against the.

U. S. Governnent, During the coursa of his contact with :

Ue S. authorities, NOSENKO Stated that his cooperation with a

the U. S. Sovorneant originated witty his distasts and hatrad .

3 desire to obtain
Tovenze for the unjust death of Sis father, 2 sonior official
ia the Soviet Shipbulldiag industry, aad with the general...
adwiration of the Asericans with whea he had coae in con- —
tact within the Sovict Union, wo, Se

+. In lats January 1964, NOSENK arsiyod in Geneva,
again masquerading as a Reabsr cf tha Soviar delayation
to the Oisarnanent Conference. Subject Secratly notified
his CIA contacts in the United Ststes conceradiaz his pros-
encs in Geneva and arrtanzed to seet with thase contacts,
Burins a serlos af mevtines NO 82 provided inforaation
including decusents cancymins 3 et Siste Security actie
vitios within the uss2 aad abroad and @ detalled account .

oo
Fis OALY


--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

vay See:
ty - pte

. Ps. --
aoe

Et pees

of the KG3 operation asainst U. S. Professor Sargaoorn
which NQSENZO sald ho had personally sugervised at the
direction of SEHICWASTULY, the Chairaan of tha Conaittes

for Stata Socurity (X33).
» During theso most recont mootings HOSENXO anaounced

sok Ss
his desire to leave the USS% perszanuntly and seok his futuro

in tho Nest. lie clained his now work in the x63 (Pirse
Deputy Chiof of that departacat charged with the surveillance
and rocruitnent of Aaerican visitors to the US32) was axe

' panding and that be would not be able to visit the Mast

with any froquency. Accordingly, he proparod 3 request for

' political asylum in the United States. Ha was taken to

Frankfurt, Geraany whores ne is currontly undergoiag interro-
gation. Plans aro now belag nude to renova hia to the U. S,

. & It should be noted that CIA contact with Subjoct |

has not beom extensive and that we will require additional .-
thorough Antorrogation to establish Subject’s bona fides,

Tt should also bo noted that NOSENKO's dutles wers not con-
‘corned with substantive aspects of the Disarnazent Conforoaca,
and ho therefore is not oxpected to be adla to shed auch, 1E°

. #ny, light on that area of our interast. .

7. The possibility that NOSENXO’s defection was da- .
signed to wrock the conferonce was nost carefully considered.
The decision to accept hia was taken on the conviction chat.
the Soviets would not have chosea such 2 valnerabla agent |
(staff officor cf the £63) for this kind of sove. ‘ :

. a

Marshall S. Cartor :
Licutenant Goneral, USA
Deputy Oiractor = -



--- Page 151 ---
140000

0. e Iservie ce. Otficints of the- State
fection ‘Preceded Report Depron

to Swiss Police Apparently |i tot hieeace:

aration

_ New Tors Tass
WASHINGTON, Feb. =
. Turt & Nosenko told a Soviet
. Sxatassy official at there can+ Pal
7 freatation bere last Frotay that
wooo + he deed Switrerland on the wy ae
its the Unitet- States 28 hours
{Netore * his “defection: was ‘re [S tora bad! been?
IWited Dy the Kuasians to thelnitted to tu
Swiss authorities: 1 [Mr Novenk ‘
statement.by ‘the isecier *; Lnformation toad Sainte
errr f the Saviet Com-ftoday has . throw: 5 a.
co of. State Security, thelon thadetectloa. +
‘secret police, 3ppeared to amount ¢ The ; Soviet detegati a= in
if9 a Genial of the Soviet charse Geneva, It .was fepare
the Swiss police z at 4
3S that Mr. Ni 7
- fing. But Bfr,
Se Nosenxo, Sang quit asa Fients. in: the: presence cf the tals cant:
tember vf the Soviet detegation|Yoviet Exnbdasvy official are sald’ Piatnts abv:
: to Ge Geneva disarmament con-|to have. showa that bis acttllaiter M,
fereace Fed 4. was allownl tofdefectior. tonic Tacerat 1PM
tA TaSoviet. diplomat} the preceding da; y
‘Gaites 2The>-Soviee del zation,

e told
tomate cura + thelr

-the time that: the} -The + meeting . betved
-- . conireatation was taking place/Nosenkd aad’. the “Saviet’:Em
ia Wasturgtom at the request off bassy official. took place in the!
[ss Se Soviet. Embassy, but nu) beadquarters of the Wasniag-
piiher Cetuls.were made public.fton feld= rottica ot. the. im

‘The departcient said that a migration : an

is

a aturalizatio

te


--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

iD Datos ee: tae

Dy -
AO Hathegh ames oe erenene ln he tee nee

Soviet secret - police “dee
fectoc. Yuri 1. Nosenko fs
in the United States where
he was interviewed: yester:
day by officials of both the- ae
Russian and- Swiss -Em= -
bassies. -
. The .State_D
each Iatervisw Ta

30 hour and that a Vepastmect 7" |.
_,olticial was presezt each the: ve
:Nosenko reafi fremced bis earlier

request. for an79z1- fa, th
[United States and wt t
haere

‘out . thls latormati in, declined
to say where the. interviews
Iroote” place of to give any det
‘tails. Earller be bad said ff
twas, possible’ that . newsme!
there “will be allowed ea

: “These devetopmenti came =” :

tay the Soviet Union kicked up -. | °
_a diplomatic fuz3 over the Cis--
“appearance of Nosenko <
reb. 4, from Geneva, “whe
ne had heen asrgsed as 22
expert" in the Soviet deleqy {
tion at the lTeation disarma 4
‘meat conference. Phillaos H
said he was “oa temporary |
y from KG (secret po t
y headquarcers In Mot !
a." : {
oD to yesterday Moseo# |
ad been carectng its pubic {
fomatic wrath at the
sSeaiss, Charging them )
loose Secu!
“far a Swiss 413 omat to in

i
“The Swiss alrescy had
strony sy resected the Soviet

See DEFECTOR, ‘AS, cal. 1


--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

_ ported. jelterday > “So
Embassy messenger brougnt a
message. lo the State Depart the |
*ment‘ asking foc information| pers
was, to the imanner in: which! He Yovped

view; with: s{meriean:
present... and: said
alsotwas.c agreeable."
about*tha detection alo Mastinc us
= given to the Soviet Embassy.
SAlso.on Wednesday, in. Gen- privately
eva; Soviet disarmament dete-
gate: Semyon, K>- Tsarapxin 1
gave-newamen anfangry states! Mose
ment=aiined at the Swiss and
charging *:"provocative activi:
ty’aby sunspecified ¥ Western
agcots..Up-to then: Tsarapkin} ©
“ bad-been saying. both private
ly and* publicly, that" the No-
senkos defection would. not af
ectithe disarmament talks.
1, Yesterday the Soviets stapped|
ip. thelr protest in two places, anythin
Mt-some-
pp Moscowe: Soviet" Foreign, dates
i myk <i Parent!
linet t

Su fac unsp
enka, who-- ma com
d

thathe. was,a-pdrtcularly | biz
fishothat:be kn Yt;
"thie 4; a

scanner cperating,
tasvis "the Soviet: practi
.a- uight¥compartaent:
Would? rh

but Probably. not.

he earvid Nosenko is a gen:
“wine det:

oc though tke po
of bis being a cou

stronger

, precedea ed,” was gra

fa {Une + Suvie
“that press.-th
eat be. would” haze |reports -had- spread: through
rusefuk.ahd* “perhaps: ir partaatitne capital’. ; .
iknowled za of part.of the KGB) It was felt hece that Mascow
tmighe have.
fprotest (alter- Tsarapxin had
ublicly downgraded the case

Geneva. At any rate U.S.
isarmament pexouiator Wii I

sae leat Committee has been}

adio. orvin th
rd. of mou

steoped . uo. its

siness session

nt-has rot been overtoo%-iin Geneva yeste:day at wnich
. Ut alsa Is. felt here thatithey said the caie was not dis
the Soviet protest” was co! icussed_..
im. could ‘te ex-| [t also was noted here thatg

fur ansthe Soviet Communist al



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

ae

12 May 1964

MEMORANDUM FOR: "Acting Chief, Support Branch yet

FROM H Chiefy Operational Support Division

‘AEFOXTROT
* 262 622 -

7 1, This merhorandum is primarily for the record and will
record the essenco of a meating held on the morning of 12-May,
1964,. at which the “following were present: Messrs, Charles Kane,
Jack Bauman, 0S; Dr. Charles Bohrer, Medical Staff; Messrs. .
Bagley, y+ Karifovich fet), “McMahon and David Murphy, SR Division,

: 2. The essence of this ‘meeting « was furnished to the Acting
_ Chief, Support Br hon 12 May 1964, ; as follows: :

“Effective immediately or as soon as practicable, the following. :
procedures will apply with regard, to the handling of the © ,

‘portions,’ He is to have no dessert or "trimming:
but may have the necessary silverware with which to
eat properly. (CAUTION--Extreme care should be
exercised with regard to controlling the silverware,
and it wis suggested that at-least two of the guards
be required to count the silverware in and out; that
the silverware be placed on the tray in a manner
where it could be observed before the guards enter
the room, etc.) -

Arrangements are to be made for the installation of
adequate air-conditioning equipment to insure that a
comfortable temperature is maintained. (It is under-
stood that there is quite a bit of equipment available
through Logistics channels.)

Subject is to receive a bath;. change of underwear; .”
change of uniform; and a change of linen for his bed.

crArey
NETH GhET.



--- Page 155 ---
14-0000

C

©) Subject i is to receive a haircut,’ the shorter the better,

. ) Subject is tor receive one * cigarette on 12 May 1964,"

: (NOTE--Thebe changes with . regard to the bath, haircut, -
>: . cigarette are not to be considered as something to‘be
done on a regular: schedule.’ We will await specific
instructions from SR Divisiop as to when these items
r to b mpi hed in the future.) :

(6) Effective imme tely, Dr. Bohrer will visit the
Subject only on Tuesday each week.

In a ‘on to the above, it mfyst be emphasized that ~
our attitude toward the Subject will remain precisely ”
the same, and our security procedures, including
searches, wilt continue to be at- maximum control,

“a-_Tt'was further ascartsined that. we will have custody of
“the Subject until at least July, It was suggested that perhaps we may
wish to explore some modifications in the assignment of personnel
or schedule of assignments, In addition, the Acting Chief, Support
Branch has suggested that immediate consideration be given to
devising necessary procedures to be followed in the event of an
emergency involving loss of control of the Subject. This should
be discussed immediately with the responsible DFO supervi:
and specific’ procedures ‘devised, and all guards properly informe:
as to their responsi ilities in this matter, .

— Gol Ly eZ S54 NN
Jack M. Bauman
Bauman/ewd(5-12-64)



--- Page 156 ---
14-0000

aes Z

~

Ne

aan a 20 JUL Bt

3 EORANDUM FOR " Gestal Agent in Charge . .

eo , . District Field Office

Po) ser = t. IESEIX, Goarge

fo ot ESTE ign tence
geo ‘ #262 622 ¢ ~ BD/1

”

‘ oe : oa o . . . .
: _ 1. Reference is rede to the outline of encrgency tnstraction -
subaitted y you on 1 July 1964 for Headquarters opprovsl. :

: Sig Fist te outhtoed $e apzroved end should be teptonated _
tencdiately. wet

WP MERE Re ene ge,

MN ag

ae ’
| | assevr0s|
Tero |
| fevess. |
[ peroso_|

|
| Tesssp
| [eves



--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

_Attachnent:

; ™% er ore. TOP va snenne
. bo bitnrs od i wilecce Cr

1 July 1964

MEMORANDUM FOR: Headquarters
SUBJECT : | LESUIN, George M. .
(Erergency Instructions Regarding Custody of)
#262 €22 oC SD/L ;

1. Attached are instructions and procedures to be follovea fo”

the event of emergency situations affecting the SUBJECT‘’z health,
safety and custody, as well as the security of the safehouse where

SUBJECT is currently teing held.

‘

2. This 1s to formalize instructions, which, for the most part,
are already in effect and bave been briefed to the personnel of the
Dlotrict -Prent OFlIve ae are COMET WIth this case. :

3. Disseminat{on of copies of these instructions to renbers of
the. Special Security Ietail will be made upon notification of Headquarters

approval.

Emergency Instruct 1ozs (2)



--- Page 158 ---
14-0000

SVERGHICY INSTRUCTIONS:

| ‘Instructions and procedures are cet forth below for the handling
of emergency situations such as fire, the escape or attexpted escape
of SUBJECT, and the suiten {llness or serious injury to the SUBJECT: oy
Should such situations arise, 1t might be necessary to call on the
Police, the Fire Departsent, er outside medical facilities for assistance.
Tt 10 possitle that-in such an event reprosontatives of the press or .
curlosity-seekera in the local community might be attracted to the site,
thereby creating security problems with reupect to the custedy and.
protection of the SUSINT fron a publicity standpoint. . .

In view of the adove, it is therefore imperative that these in<
structions be thoroughly understood and momorized by all personnel
assigned to the Special Security Detail on this case.

pees

' FIRE.
(Fain House)

1. In case of fire tn the Main House, the person discovering the

fire should apply the nearest fire extinguisher, unless, in his Judgment,

the fire has reached such proportions where available equincent would be
C}

useless. Similtaneously, he should 4&tspatch another member. 2
Uetail to alert the Senior Security Agent (S3A) and the other occupants
te . ‘ of the house.. If no one is available in the immediate vicinity, the
wo ferson discovering the fire should alert others in the house by shouting

a fire, the SSA shall be responsible for

fire, protecting classified an sensitive
dccuments acd equipment on the Prenises, calling the local re Department
1f circumstances warrant, and evacuating personnel. Also, at the first
available opportunity, the SSA should call the SAC or ASAS, or if they
“cannct be reached, a senior 270 Agent, umd furnish hin with Nal particulars
concerning the s{tuation and the acticn.being taken.

2. Upon being notizted of
directing the fighting of the

ing a fire,

3. In utilizing nenbers of the Security Detail ta No
it should te borne in mint that two guards must te raintains.
third floor at all tines. so long as the SUBJECT remains con
his quarters. If it shouts becone neceszary to remove the 273
his quarters during an emergency, a minizun. four guards: s*
present unless circunstasces are such as t ke this infeas:



--- Page 159 ---
14-0000

: restraining devices deemed necessary in order to maintain projer custody

- of available perecenel and fire extinguishers to corbat th

EMERGENCY INSTRUCTIONS
(Continued) / .

any event, every possible security precaution should be taxen*during
the movement of SUZJECT, including the. use of handcuffs or ary other .-

and control over the SUBJECT and prevent hia escape.

&. If, in the. judgment of the SSA, a fire has reached, or is lizely
to reach proportions that it could not be controlled by firefignting
equipment on the premises, it shall be his responsibility to notify the
Clinton Fire Deyartzent. In this event, the Security Detail should
move with dispatch to remove the SUBJECT from the premises prior to
arrival of the Pire Department. ‘The SUBJECT should be placed is an
automobile, accoxpanied by four nenbers of the Security Detail, end
driven avay fromthe prenises. At appropriate intervals, teleznone -
calls should te made to the safehouse. If no anower 15 received, tha
cognizant DEO cfticinl ahold he coatacted.for instructions as to whether
to return to the safehouse or proceed to an alternate site.

(Tenant House)

l. In case of fire in the Tenant House, the occupants thereof
should be instructed to inmediately notify the Main House. and.
any available meens to combat the fire until assistance arrive
the fire is out of contral, in which case all efforts shculd te directed
tovards the evacuation of the occupants of the premises. It ergild te
clearly understcoa that in no case should any of the occuseste of the
Tenant Nouse call the Fire Department. ‘This decision 13 the zole respon-
sibility of the £354. .

2. ‘Upon netification of a fire in the Tenant House, the ssrsoa .
notified should immediately inforn the SSA an¢ assist in tie dispetching

in the judgment c? the SSA, the Tire has reached, or -is
prorortions that it could not te controlled by the avalia:
equipment, it sre) be his responsibility to notify the
Department and to necessary precautionary measures 7O
ovservation of the SUBJECT by firemen or other unauthorized perscas who
might be attracted to the scene.



--- Page 160 ---
14 DOWD.

EMERCENCY LiSTRUCTIONS
(Continued)

3. At the first available eppestucity, the CZA should ¢:
SAC or ASAC, or if they cannot be reached, a senior DFO Agent, and
furnish him with full particulars xccermming the situation and the
action being taken. . .

ESCAPE OR ADISXS7S) ESCAPE

Ll. Strict vigilance and security should te raintained ons |
2h hour basis in accordance with established provedures in order to
discourage and prevent the SUNEC's escape. If GiZIECT should make
an attempt to escape, sufficiect fosve should be used as is necessary
under the circumstances in order to subdue the EJEJECT and maixztsin
custody and control over hin. Ecveres, unnecessary brutality and the

: indiscriminate use of force vill met t condoned.

2. ALL personnel assigned to tt2 Srectal fecurity Detail om duty
at the site shall be alerted by means ef the emergency alarm and/or
other appropriate means, aad brousnt isto play on any escape attexpt.
Should. the SUBJECT succeed in escsyité from the house proper, the SSA.
ohall be respcnsible for coordinating and directing a hot pursuit of

the SUBVECT by all means availatis.

‘3... The ‘use of ‘firearms shouls te scrupulously avoided excest in
extreme circumstances of self-defense. However, the SSA under circu
stances that indicate there are ezher means of preventing SASCT's

* total escape, may direct a qualicias SSrearms-trained agent to Nre .
shots over SUBJECT's head follewed ty verbal warning to halt. Is no
event, except in self-defense as stated above, will an agent stxot

directly at the SUBJECT. -

eac/DFO, or ia his
ally advised of ail
t In no case shall
by the Sac or ASAC.

4, - At the first available
absence, one of the ASACs, show
the circumstances surrounding an 25
the Folice be netiried unless sutoNt grad

—

7 as injury to the SRT,
sistas desigdated by hin in-the event soe



--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

EVERGHNCY LISTAUCTIONS :
(Continued) ; :

of his absence, should be immediately notified and advice obtained as
to any emergency action which snould be taken pending hio arrival.
Likevise, the CAC or ASAC/L¥D snould be notified immediately after
talking to the doctor in order trat he might be apprised of the situat
and any instructions or trestsent prescribed by the doctor. Regardless:
ef any instructions given ty +he doctor, no action shall be i
remove the SUBJECT from the zremises or to communicate with any hospital:
or ambulance service witheut +re prior authorization of the SAC or ASAC..

2. Should 1t become hecezsary to remove the SUBJECT toa hospital
or other location away fra tzs Premises, every possible precaution
6hould be taken to maintain ciose custody and control over hin, aad to
prevent disclosure of his tris iseutity and status to unauthorized

yeroons.

aaa
mo " GEVERAL TNSTAUCTIONS AND INFORMATION

1. Two men on duty on tiir4 floor who will keep SUBJECT undsr
constant observation twenty-fo:r hours a day.

2. Four men in attendance whenever SUBJECT Leaves cell while.
confined to third floor. .

3.. Six men in attendance whenever SUBJECT 18 takzen to interrogation
rocm on-aecond floor, all te remain available in adjoining room for
removal signal from visitors. Tr et
4. Coveralls taken fro S-ZJECT at 2200 hours and returned the
following morning at 0700 hours ¢ally, leaving SUBJECT {in snorts and
undershirt overnight.

5. Wiiitary appearance ext Prompt shitt schedules zaintained at
411 times vhen in presence cl ScRJ=ECT.

iuding clothes ani bunk, to te centucted

6. Careful room search, tf
every tine SUBJECT leaves celi.

7. SUBJECT must stand in west corner of cell facing well whenever

enyone but Dr. BOXRER enters cell. .

ak.



--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

"or nex

EG@?axicy INSTRU CTIONS
(Cont iaued)

: cond ecg

2. Windows {n cell to remain blacked out and doors to other rooms

on 3rd floor to be closed and locked when SUBJECT leaves cell, in ofder
to prevent his decoming oriented to surroundings. ee

shall be conducted with GIBJECT or
of last names be made within SIBSECT 's -

9. No unnecessary conversation
amcrz agents, nor shall any mention
hearing. 1

19. SUBJECT 1s not to have access to newspapers and cagazines, nor
permitted to hear radio or’ television, nor shall there be any discussion
of revs events within his hearing. He may de provided selacted reading
material upon authorization of Headquarters personnel concernad with the
case. :

1 Recording devices to be promptly. activated in order to pick up
any coczents by SUBJECT or conversation between him and the doctor or

ether operational personnel.

12. Any unusual or significant comments, movements or activities
of GZJECT to be promptly brought to the attention of the SSA.

12. Telephone numbers of key Security and Operational personnel,
4g e112 as photographs and physical description of SUBJECT to ‘be? maintained

in a gecure place for ready reference by the SSA.

1k. Should it become necessary to answer questions ty the Police
or Fire Department regarding the site, Personnel at the site, or with
Specific reference to the SUBJECT, such inquiries should be hehdled *
by the SSA with the senior Police or Fire Departrent official on the
scene. The SSA should converse in private with such offictal, and
Ideatify hirself by utilizing his DODD credential. He should explain
briefiy, and only to the extent necessary, that the property is leased
and that it {5 used occastonally for training purposes. All
concerning the SURJECT should be parried, if possible. However, if
necessary, it may be explained that the SUBJECT has a mental d‘sorder
which conetines requires Special treatment. He should not be identified
under his alias or othervise. The SSA should tactfully bet firmly request
trat his om identity, plus his DOD arriliation, be held in stric: confidence,
especialiy with regard to the press. irfes by members of tre press

3 ef the civilian population should de answered by stating that -.

rivate group who meet periodically. -2cr recreation.

Sat

the site ts rented by a pr



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000

EMERGENCY INSTHJCTIons . en
(Continued)

GPECIAL COMTACTS

1. George PANDGAULIS, Chief of Felice, Prince Georges County.
, (Personally know to SHODDY uster GOLIATH) _

. 2. Lieutenant MOON, Commanding Oticer, Barracks H, Waldorf,
i Marylani, Maryland State Police. (Personally know to PEPPALL
under COLIZTH) :

3. Emergency Astmlance - Greenteit Volunteer Fire Department.
(Can te cutained through SHODDY)

Above not to te contacted unless acthorized by SAC or ASAC.

>


--- Page 164 ---
14-0000

MEMORANDUM FOR TL RECOND

~SISLET: ExioGag of by Cengren fozal Covacts oa the
s z 7 4

dees -
Yuriy Ivacovich Nuscako Case

ving anproved tua arycoaal in my draft reemo
ched) re,ascing tha be cfing of key soagrensioaal ~
atotus of the Vusly Ivanovich Neseuno case, f
stefé offlesrs of Anaacy cons teasiaaal Subconie
Opoged on tie dates indicated: :

Fraak Slztinskek, Asatstant Chie? Counsel, Tlouge
_— Armed Sarvicas Comriutee -- 23 July 1989
Vitliam Woodruld, Agsistant Cuies Clerk, Seaate
Approoriations Coumiltaa -. 24 July 1969

Soe Edward Sraswell, Chief of Sialf, Seaate Armed
Services Committees -- 24 July 1949

. Robert Michacls, Siaff Aaasistant, lieuse Appcopriations:
Corernittee 2 2) July 1959 .

“2. I suggeated to each that they mention the mattoe to the resn j
chairmen whea and if thay thoucht 4; O° « None of tha ataif o !
registered particular concera or eucicszity o the case and I thial: 7 -
that all of our chasrmon hay
va adequately covered the n:a i
further at this tima. {

|
!

Leva iafermed. Neveriheleza, I
7 acd see no need to pursue It

Wee
G

. 2 ay |
ive Couasal
op
7
= i
: U- Chief, Cl Sissy . !
. ft, SE Livtston™ =~ i
!



--- Page 165 ---
14-0000

| DRAET:JMM =~ 19 June 1969

SUBJECT: Briefing of Xey Congressional Contacte on the Nosenkxo.Case

‘The “following paragraphs are proposed as guidance for briefing key

congressional contacts on the history and statue of the Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko ~
. case. They are based primarily on material provided by SB Division, and have
'_ been cleared by SB, cr Staff and the Office of Security. Te is proposed that
. the Chairmen and/or senior otatf ofticera of each of the Agency Subcommittoes

“be briefed along the lines indicated,

an . lL This | case goes back sometime into history and you may recall

having heard of. it several years ago. From time to time it haa received | :

. press play, both when it first broke in early 1964 and occasionally, eine”,
2. Yuriy Ivanovich Nosenko, a Staff Oificer of the Committee for
oa State Security (KGB) of the USSR, and son of a ‘former Minister of. Saip- 2 ; .
buiiding in the USSR, ‘defected to the Agency in Geneva, Switzerland, on " ‘

4 February 1964, He waa then brougat to the United States where ne has

since been in the custody of the Agency undergoing extensive dobriedings

ay officers of the Ageacy and tae FBI,



--- Page 166 ---
14-0000

3. Nosenko had buen a KGB officer for approximately ten years

+. atthe time of his defection. Nosenko has provided a large quantity of

counter-intelligence data and a Limited amount of positive intelligence.

| For exampie, one of his reporte played a part in the negation of a major

hostile penetration in Groat Britain. Whero appropriate, ‘his information: |

‘uas been shared with the FBI, other U.S. Government agencies and .
. :
fordign Laison services. This has resulted in extensive and continuing

investigative activity. In addition, Noseako identified many hundreds of

Soviet Intelligence Officers and provided a considerable quantity of useful”

information on the organization of tae KGB, ite operational doctrine and

“its techniques and methods.

beg. In debriefing him it became apparent that Nosenko tho privileged

_ waa a particularly complex persénality, one given to exaggeration of h
importance. In this regard, certain aspects of hie life history, when |

weighed against other information already in our possession, raised some

doubts concerning hia veracity. To permit extensive and prolonged debriefing,

arrangements were made to accommodate Nosenko under highly secure

conditions, These arrangements were dictated, during the initial phases
at least, by the additional need to provide Noseako with continuing personal

protection since there was the distinct possibility that, as a XGB officer, ~~~



--- Page 167 ---
14-0000

3 Py

he would be targetted for “executive action" if the Soviets should discover

.

hio whoreabduts: VWiik bie Pascage of time, thin latter facto? is considored
to be sufficiently diminished to justify a phased normalization of Nosenko's

situation--this despite the fact that-some points remaia unresolved concorniag

hie bona fides.

5. The Agency, with the assistance of the FBI, is continuing to.
. ,
look into those questionable aspects of the case, while remaining alert to

the possibility of hostile interest, However, during the full period of his .

vatay in the United States Noserko has cooperated with hia interrogators and

with the other. officara responsible for his asfety and welfare, anc, our

: ‘current efforte are being directed toward his gradual adjustment to a normal, .

independent otatus. As a step in this direction, he is now living in his own

‘private apartmont, subject to some protective surveillance.

i 6. This action is being taken in full recognition of the normal
problems of readjustment experienced by many defectors as well as the
fact that Nosenko ie a potentially greater problem than most. He ia an
individual whose actions during resettlement may not always be predictable
or wise from the point of view of his own security. We are hopetul that
Nosanko ia eensidle enouga to realize that undue publicity caused by any rasa
action on hia. part could lead to unpleasant, perhaps even dangerous consequences,

particularly for himself. We therefore believe it appropriate to taxe this

calculated ziek in an attempt to steer him toward a reasonabiy normal Lite.



--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

NOSENKO

Question #l - Conditions under which Nosenko was held while at.
Clinton? Locked in? Let outside for entertainment?

Prisoner? Treatment?

Answer:

. During the period of 4 April 1964-13 August 1965, Nosenko
was held in strict confinement under the following conditions: |

a. Confinement in single room except for
periods of interrogation.

b. Constantly under guard and subject to 24 hour
visual observation with regular room search.

c. Dress was coveralls and food was of sufficient
quantity but limited in variety.

d. No unnecessary conversation was permitted, radio
and television were not allowed, newspapers or
any information concerning current events were
forbidden and reading material was extremely
limited.

Question @2 - Conditions at ISOLATION. | Same as above.

Answer:

. During the period of 13 August 1965 to 25 October 1967,
conditons cited above were basically maintained with th
following additons or changes:

a. From February 1966 to May 1967, Nosenko was’ °* _ !
furnished no reading material. . \

b. After May 1967, Nosenko was periodically given
: a different volume of the Encyclopacdia
Britannica to read.

-c¢. From February 1966 to October 1967, Nosenko
was mot permitted cigarettes.

d. Subject was permitted daily exercise in a small
confined area outside the building when weather

permitted.

eur.



--- Page 169 ---
14-0000

Question 43 - nid McCone or Raborn have any information on this:
What?

Answer:

Office of Security records contain only limited information
in regard to this question. The SE Division (then SR) was the
responsible office for the confinement of Nosenko until late
October 1967 when total responsibility was transferred to the
Office of Security by the DCI. It is presumed that the DCI was
at leust generally aware of the confinement of Noscnko and the

'- conditions of confinement, but any definite statement must be

based on SE records.

Question #4 - Where is Nosenko working now?

- Answer:

Nosenko is currently employed at his personally owned
residence in North Carolina. He is cngaged in research and
analytical work based on his previous knowledge of the KGB
and other Soviet matters. He is in the Washington, D. C. area
for several days approximately every six weeks for direct
interviews by the FBI.and Office of Security personnel.

Question #5 - Is he working for CIA?

Answer:

Nosenko has been employed by the Agency on a full-time
contractual basis since 1 March 1969. The original contract
has been periodically amended to reflect additional remuneration
primarily to compensate for cost of living increases. ...In,.late
1973, Nosenko was compensated by mutual agreement for salary
not received during the 1 April 1964 to 1 Murch 1969. In addition, :
on'12 July 1973 Nosenko signed an acknowledgement and release :
of the United States Government and the Central Intelligence
Agency from any claims prior to that date.

Question #6 - What is his legal status?

Answer:

Nosenko was naturalized as a United States citizen in
April 1974.

EYES co”
Store



--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

SECREL.

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Inspector General

SUBJECT : The Nosenko Case

Attached please find a summary of a document written in
1967 to:the General Counsel outlining the hosenko case and
explaining to him actions- which had been taken with regard to...
Nosenko. As noted in the first paragraph, in October 1967
‘Nosenko took up residence ‘in the Washington area and was
advised that, should he wish to leave the apartment for any
location whatsoever, he was free to so do. In other words,
‘om that date, Nosenko was essentially a totally free man.
hat he chose not to flee in any way may be indicative of his
attitude toward the manner in which he was handled prior to
October 1967.

While one can criticize the fact that Nosenko was kept
incommunicado for approximately three years, and therefore
presumably denied full civil rights, the attached document
does indicate, we believe, that the Agency was on the horns
of a dilemna in this regard. There were lcgitimate doubts
about. Nosenko's bona fides and concern that he was a Soviet
plant. There. was no Country to which he could be deported
save the Soviet Union, and Nosenko himself refused to return
there. Yet, in the United States, save when isolated from
society, he was considered to be a continuing threat -to cs
national security.’ . : mo, :

Recognizing that only legal experts can judge defini-
. tively the merits of the case, it seems to the writer that
‘the Agency had no choice but to hold ‘Nosenko, incommunicado
pending resolution of his bona fides. He was admitted to
the United States under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (§)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act, namely as a parolee
to the Agency. As a parolee, Nosenko de facto from the date
of his entry to the United States did not enjoy the full civil
rights of the normal citizen. He was a ward of the Agency, in
a sense, and the Agency was ultimately responsible for his

£2 IMPDET
CL BY 018307

~ SECRET



--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

- abrogation by the Agency of its leg

TS SEGRET

4

conduct. There were at the time very legitimate reasons .to
believe that full ‘and total release of Nosenko would be an
al responsibility. To

Rainsay that decision in retrospect is, we believe, an crror.

.In sum, the act of defection places the.defector at the mercy

of the laws of the country to which he defects. It is, th
obligation of the accepting country to see to it that +t!
laws are followed. In the Nosenko cause, it seems to us thit
the Agency acted in a fully responsible manner to ensure that’
its responsibility for the defector was met. While it was
unfortunate that it taok so long to resolve the matter, we
can find no fault with the fact that the Agency met its
responsibility to both the United States and to Nosenko

himself,

Attachment: A/S

SECRET



--- Page 172 ---
14-0000

‘provided a summary of the Nosenko case.

‘SECRET

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Yuriy Svanovich NOSENKO

In early or mid-1967, the Agency General Counsel was

The nenorandum

cr

sought an advisory opinion from the General Counsel on the

Agency's legal basis for its handling of Nosenko through

that date and on the legal aspects on the eventual disposi-

tion of Nosenko. Shortly subsequent to this sexorandum to

the General Counsel, Nosenko took up residence in October 1967
in an apartment in the Washington area and was reminded that
should he wish, he could travel freely anywhere at anytime.

He gradually created a new life for himself in the United

States and has indicated on several occasions that he holds

no ill feeling about his handling by the Agency at anytime.

Background

Nosenko voluntarily established contact with CIA repre-

sentatives in Geneva in 1962. He identified hinself as a

staff officer of the KGB's internal security directorate and
offered to sell counterintelligence information. This offer

was accepted and he was recruited as an agent in place and

SECRET



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000

“SRE

debricfed on counterintelligence matters during five meetings -

in Geneva. He then returned to the USSR. He came‘ to Geneva

again in January 1964 as the security officer for the Soviet

disarmament delegation. After a number of mectings wien his
CIA handlers he defected on 4 February 1964 and was secretly
taken to Frankfurt, Germany, Crossing the Swiss-German border™~
on the night of 4/5 February with alias U.S. Army identity

documents. In Gx 1..and again upon arrival in Frankfurt,

Nosenko wrote out’ an asylum request, requesting political
asylum from the U.S. Government. ,

Because serious doubts about Nosenko's bona fides had
arisen on the basis of the information he had provided both
in 1962 and in the meetings in Geneva in 1964, it was orig-
inally planned to do a detailed bona fides debricfing and
assessment in Germany before making any decision about moving -

Nosenko to the United States. However, unprecedented action

by the Soviet Government in respect to the defection of one

of its citizens forced a change of plan's. On 9 February,

unidentified Soviet sources in Geneva leaked the news to the
Press that Nosenko, described as an “expert attached to the
Soviet Delegation to the Disarmament Conference" had dis-

appeared, and that it was presumed that he had defected.

.

SECRET

y

ast


--- Page 174 ---
14-0000

° SECRET

H
Because of mounting pressure” fron the press, which included
much speculation that Hosenko was a high level scientist or

disarmament expert, it was decided that the State Department

would make a brief announcement acknowledging Nosenko's
request for asylum in. the U.S. and identifying him as a

member of the KGB. This was done on 10 February. On 11 Feb-

ruary, the Sovict Government delivered a note to.the American

Embassy in Moscow usking how Nosenko left Switzerland and
requesting an immediate interview with him and his release.
On 12 February, Soviet Ambassador to the Disarmament Confer-
ence TSARAPKIN held a press conference in Geneva in which he
accused the Swiss Government of failure to cooperate in
locating Nosenko, Although the Swiss categorically rejected
these charges, the American Ambassador to Switzerland recom-
mended that Swiss authorities be allowed to interview Nosenko.::
to convince themselves that Nosenko had left Switzerland of
his own free will. ; ,
On 12 February 1964, on the instructions of the Director)
Nosenko was brought to the United States. He travelled by
commercial air, again using alias U.S. Army identification,
and was admitted to the country. at New York City (in true

name) on parole under the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5)

of the Immigration and Nationality Act.

SEGHET



--- Page 175 ---
14-0000

SECSET -

On 13 February, representatives of the Swiss and Soviet
Embassies in Washington advised the State Departifent that
they desired interviews with Nosenko. Gn 14. February, ‘in
Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GROMYKO called in Ambassador

KOHLER and protested “impermissable activities" on the part

of the U.S. in Nosenko's case, Soviet press spokesmen took
an even harder line to Western correspondents, and accused
the U.S. of kidnapping Nosenko. On the afternoon of 14 Sep-
tember, at two separate interviews, he spoke first to Swiss
Embassy and then to Soviet Embassy representatives. At

these interviews, which were also attended by State Department
and INS officials, Nosenko confirmed that he left Switzerland
of his own free will to seek asylum in the U.S. In addition,

he replied to questions of the Sovict Embassy representative

to the effect that he was renouncing his Soviet citizenship

On the evening of 14 February, the U.S. State Department made

a brief formal reply to the Soviet protest, then issued a
brief statement to the press noting that the interviews had
been held and that Nosenko had confirmed his desire to remain
in this country.

From the time of his arrival to 4 April 1964, Nosenko
was housed in the Washington. area, During this period, reg-

ular systematic debriefing was commenced, and Nosenko was

SECRET ©



--- Page 176 ---
SECRET

made available to representatives of the FBT for debricfing

on matters affecting their responsibilities. Although allowed

out for evening and week-end excursions, Nosenko was at all

times accompanied by 0/S personnel. In addition, he took.
two-week vacation to Hawaii, again accompanied by cuse offi-

cers and security guards. Evidence continued to moiint that

he was a KGB plant, and at the same time it became obvious”
that it would be impossible to proceed _further to. resolve

the many suspicious points and contradictions that had arisen
without changing the conditions in which he was’ being held.
Nosenko was growing increasingly uncooperative, especially

when sensitive areas were touched upon, and constantly pressed”
for the legalization of his status in the U.S. and the issuance

of an alien registration card, At the same time, Nosenko's

heavy drinking and other unruly personal habits were causing -

increasing difficulties to the security personnel charged

keeping him under control and out of trouble at all times in

accordance with Agency local responsibility. It was clear

that it was only a matter of time b before he created a public

scandal. More importantly, he was in a position. to communi-

cate with the KGB since physical control could nut be absolute.
On 4 April 1964, Nosenko voluntarily underwent a polygraph

examination. The results of this examination indicated deception

5 “te

SECRET

"nee



--- Page 177 ---
14-0000

\

. SECRET : 4

en a number of critical points indicating that he was sent

‘by the KGB to perform one or more missions which also involved

his penetration of the Agency and its operations. It was
decided, therefore, that the physical circumstances of Nosenko's
stay in this country would have to be drastically changed if
the Agency were to carry out its counterinte! Ligence responsi-
bilities and adhere to the terms of the parole agreement. As
a result, he was moved to quarters where his.movements could
be more casily controlled, and his outing privileges were
suspended pending resolution of bona fides.

It is worth noting that had we not taken the above action
but accepted Nosenko at face value, it is quite possible that
we would have proceeded with a series of operational actions

en the basis of his information. The results of some of these

actions could have been very embarrassing to the U.S. Govérnnient:

politically and damaging to U.S. national security. For exam-

ple, his chief operational proposal at the time, and one that.

he was most insistent that we should proceed with immediately,

iavolved the compromise of a very senior Soviet official.
Beginning in April 1964, hundreds of hours were devoted

to Interrogations of Nosenko (in which he willingly cooperated)

aad a yreat deal of time was spent on exhaustive collateral

6

SECRET



--- Page 178 ---
a |

"examinations,

a court of law,

SECRET

investigations. We concluded that it had been established
beyond reasonable doubt that Nosenko was a KGB agent who

established contact with CIA, subsequently defected on KGB

instructions, and that he came to the United States“on'a
The implications of this mission had a -

Although

deception mission,
grave und direct bearing on U.S. national security.
our findings were supported by the results of two polygraph
the nature ‘of the evidence was inadmissable in

In any case, it is clear that Nosenko had

not been in a position to perform any overt act of transgres-

sion of U.S. espionage laws since 4 April 1964 when he was

Placed in-a restricted area and deprived of any conceivable
means of communication with the KGB.

Nosenko did not admit that he defected on KGR orders
d

itted;:.

or that he came to the U.S. on a KGB mission. He. has

however, that he made numerous lies about- his personal history

and. about the details of his KGB service to U.S. officials,

both before and after arriving in tke United States.”

Coordination with Other U.S, Government Agencies
EET Ns COVE FNMENE Agencies

USIB Members. In accordance with the DDCI's ruling

relating to a defector who has been a member cf a hostile
intelligence sérvice, Nosenko's status and handling was dis-

cussed at an executive session of USIB and decided on. an

7 © nee oe _

SECRET



--- Page 179 ---
14-0000

SECRET

ad hoc basis. Nosenko defected va 4 February 1964, and the

Secretary of State, the Attorney General, the Special Assis-

tant to the President on National Security Affairs, McGeorge
Bundy, General Carroll, Director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the FBI were all notified immediately. On § Febru-
ary 1903, General Carter reported the defection to an executive

session of USTB and followed this up with formal statements to

USIB members on 11 and 19 February 1964, which stated that

Nosenko's bona fides had not yet been established. It was

agreed that no DS number would be issued to Nosenko, and that
he would be handled on @ special basis by this Agency. In
fact, normal USIB interest in Nasenko as a defector dropped
off drastically as it became quickly apparent that he had no
positive intelligence interest of value to any part of the
community. |
The President was informed of the full extent of our

suspicions ‘about Nosenko!’ s bona fides by the then Director,

Mr. Mecone, on 11 February 1964, Nr. Patrick Coyne, Executive
Secretary of the PFIAB, was givea a similar briefing by
Mr. Helis on 19 February 1964.

Generals Carroll and Fitch of DIA were also subsequently

informed of the problems about Nosenko's bona fides.

8

SECRET



--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

SECEET

The Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson, and other:
senior officials in the Department of State were informed of
our reservations about Nosenko's bona fides and our feurs that
he might be a dispatched KGB agent. In discussions about the

possibility of Nosenko's eventual deportation, the Secretary

of State expressed serious concern about the adverse reaction:
that such a move might have on other potential defectors.

The Director of Security, State Department, was informed:
of the bona fides problem at an.carly date. We have worked
closely with this office since then on the problem of eval-
wating the significance of Nosenko's information as it aftects
the security interests of the State Department.

Because so much of Nosenko's information affected U.S,

internal security matters for which the FBI bears primary

responsibility, and because the possibility that Nosenko was.

a KGB plant had a direct bearing on the validity of certain
FZ! operations, the FBI was kept fully informed on our views
about Nosenko's bona fides and ‘our progress in interrogating
and investigating him from the moment of his defection. The
FEI liaison officer was told of our reservations on Nosenko's
bona fides as carly as $ February 1964. The Director of the
F321 and his deputy for Internal Security, William Sullivan,

were kept completely up to date, and we coordinated all major

9 on

SECRET

|



--- Page 181 ---
14-0000

SECKET

aspects of our handling Nosenko with them. After a long
meeting with Sullivan and other FRI representatives to review
Nosewco's case on 1 April 1964, the FRI interposed no objec-

tions to our proposal to restrict Nosenko's mavements.and

commence hostile interrogation. Subsequently, the. FBI for- _
mally agreed with our findings on Nosenko, at least to the
extent that "On considering carefully the results of your
interrczations of Yuriy Nosenko and your analysis of his
Statements and activities, it does appear he is not what he
purports to be. While this Bureau is not in 4 position to
draw any conclusion’ in this case, we do recognize it is

Je that Nosenko could be a Soviet plant or agent pro-

possi?

vocateur,“
The then Acting Attorney General Mr. Sicholus Katzenbach

(and several members of his staff) were apprised of our res-

ervations about Nosenko on 2 April 1964 and an opinion was?
sougit from him both as to interpretation of the exclusion
and perole agreement, and as to how we should proceed in the
event that it proved necessary to deport Nosenko from this
country.

Eftorts to Keep the KGR from Learning of Our Awareness of

s True Status

From the time we learned that Nosenko had been sent to

this country on a KGB mission it was obvious that if we were

10 %

SEOPET



--- Page 182 ---
14-0000

SECAET -

to have the time to analyze and resolve this case, and to.
plan and execute appropriate countermeasures, it'was essential
that we attempt to keep the KGB from learning of our awareness

of Nosenko's true status. Consequently, detailed knowledge

of the depth and scope of our suspicions about Nosenko, and

the implications thercof, was restricted tu a very few people
in the Agency and the. intelligence community. Nonetheless,

we did advise key policy echelons. and principals in the intel-

- ligence community, even though this carried the inevitable

risk of leakage.

Sovict Inspired Inquiries

In 1966 there were several indications that the, Soviets
were making a serious effort to find out what happened to
Nosenko and to force him to the surface. The most blatant
and unusual of these was the .approach by a Soviet journalist,
Yuriy KOROLEV (a known KGB agent), to the French magazine
Paris Match with an offer ‘to provide photographs and materials
for an exclusive story of Nosenko and his family. According
to Korolev, Nosenko's wife was considering an approach to an
international juridicial organization in an effort to obtain
compensation from Nosenko for damages caused by his abandon-
ment of her and her children. In responding to this approach

we quoted a statement, purporting to be from Nosenko himself,

“al

SECRET



--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

SECRET

to the effect that Nosenko considers this approach to repre-
sent blatant and cruel manipulation of his family by the KGB-
and that he will not lend himself to the scheme by agreeing

to an interview or in any other way.

Nosenko's Status

To recapitulate, Nosenko entered the United States on

12 February 1964 on parole to the Agency under the provisions |

of Section 212 (d) (5) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act. Parole responsibility is delegated to the Agency by
the Attorney Gencral under the terms of an agreement executed
by the Attorney General and the E71 on 10 February 1955,
which states: 7
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intel-
ligence Agency will assume responsibility for
‘care, supervison and control of a kind and
degree it believes consistent with the internal.”
security needs of the United States during con-
“tinuance of their parole status."
In accordance with our understanding of this agreenent, and
because we had reason to believe that Nosenko was a conscious
and willing agent of a hostile intelligence service, we
ensured that he was under our direct observation and control

at all times from the moment of his arrival in the United

12

SECRET

—


--- Page 184 ---
14-0000

- SECRET

From 12 February to 4 April 1964 it was possible to

States.

keep Nosenko ata location where he could enjoy a certain
amount of movement and ‘of contact with the outside world.
After 4 April 1964, for reasons explained above, it was.
necessary to keep him incommunicado at.a location which is
known to no one outside of the Agency {and to very few within
it). Authorization for Nosenko to remain in this country
under the Special Agreement Procedures was periodically
extended by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Although his freedom of movement had been severely
restricted, Nosenko was not maltreated and he made no com-

plaint about his treatment. On the contrary, we had several

written statements from him in which he stated that our
handling of him was justified and even beneficial.

Disposal : :

From the time that Nosenko was brought to this country

: we thought about the possibility of his eventual deportation

‘ as a contingency measure. In carly 1964, we thought that it

might be possible to mitigate the political and propaganda
drawbacks of a forced deportation by announcing that Nosenko
has confessed his true KGB role. With the passage of time,
however, and in view of our much firmer conclusions about his

real role and mission and our clearer understanding of what

13 : wee

SECRET



--- Page 185 ---
14-0000

SEGHET

this implied, it was apparent that great practical problems
stood in the way of his deportation to cither the USSR or a
third country.

USSR: Nosenko has categorically stated on numerous. -; :.
occasions that he will never contemplate return to the USSR,
and, although we suspect that he might secretly welcome such
a move, we would expect him to act out his part to the end
with loud protests that he wus being shipped to his death,

etc. When the possibility of expulsion was discussed with

Department of State officials in 1964, both the Secretary of
State and Ambassador Thompson expressed their concern for

the adverse effect this might have on other potential defec-
tors. Forcible repatriation of political refugees is against
long established U.S. policy, and would be certain to arouse

violent reaction from ethnic minority groups in the United

States. Under these circumstances an alleged "confession
by Nos enka would have come under very close scrutiny, and
might have backfired very badly. Another point that had ‘to
be considered was the possibility that the Soviets, again
playing their part, might have refused to accept Noscnko on
the grounds that he has renounced his Sovict citizenship.
Third Country: Although we believed’ it likely that

Nosenko would accede to deportation to a third country,

14

SECHET



--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

SECRE

4

there is certainly no country in the free world on which we

could conceivably have unloaded Nosenko without first inform-

ing them of his true status. Even if we considered this a

desirable objective, it seemed certain that the Department |
of State would veto such a piece “of intergovernmental ‘duplic-

ity on the basis of the political risks involved.

1s .

sense



--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

ape oe
CU eee ¢
Die eb De

Yurily Ivanovich NOSENKO

s a Sovict intclligence officer who defected
in Switzerland jn 1964. He was subsequently brought to the
U.s., and after 4 short period of relative freedom, he was
confined under strict and relatively austere conditions
for a period of approximately three years. Commencing in -
1967, he was wiven increasing amounts of freedom until he
was allowed teval freedom in 1969. He subsequently married
a U.S. citizen, settled in the Southeastern United States
and became a U.S. ‘itizen in 1974. Ile 1s presently under
contract to the Agenl¥: providing consultative services
and information on sub,'ects germane to his background.

when as a result of his debricfing
substantive questions were © -ised concerning his bona fides,
and his general behavior raised: further concert about his
emotional health and generai satet,¥* NOSENKO'S debriefing
and confinement were ended when it weS concluded that he
was not a threat to national security. Te advice of ne .
Justice Department was obtained at the tire Oras conten
ment, and the Fel participated in his subsequent debrac ing.
NOSENKO's initial entry into the U.S, was coordinated wits.
the Department of State, and they were periodically advised
of his status during his confinement up to the time of his

final scttlenent.

NOSENKO i

NOSENKO was confined

ditions of NOSENKO's confinement were

The strict con
£ his position

intended to convey to him the seriousness 0
as a suspected disinformation agent and to ma
his free settlement in the U.S. was precluded as long as

this issue was unresolved. It was understood, however,

that at any time he could have elected to end his cenfine-
ment and return to the Soviet Union. OS files do not document...
that this latter condition was explicitly conveyed to

NOSENKO, however, it is the recollection of senior staff
and further

officers (ADD/O and p/OS) that such was the case,
that it was a condition routinely applied to other defectors

whose bona fides were in doubt.

ke clear to him that



--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

We have-

taste it
pe 075
MEMORANDUM FCF: General Counsel
SUBJECT 1 Novenko i
i
wey
i
|

ness of other Federal, authorities (USIB, State, FBI, and 1ENS),
been adviged by APD/O that Nosenko at all times wae adviaed that he could

elect to leave the U. S., but that he could not be ensured of Immediate

under

Uberty If he elected to stay; In a sense, we are told, he elected to stay

the conditions then prevailing. We do not yet have documentation on this

latter point, other than as shown In the attachment.

‘
{
{
t

Ss. D. Breckinridge

Attachment: a/s

1
t
co .
: Attached ts a report from the Office of Security concerning the awaree
|
|
|
t



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

lla

_ ‘ fo) uit oo, 4
wet CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY ~ wat iP
cn . pe

.

WASHINGTON 23,0. c

“OFFICE oF o&eury DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELUGENCE .

12 February 1264

ay This nenorandua - refers to ‘the Strate Departsent
Faloase of 10 February oa. subject case and provides addi
tional background as well a3 iafornation oa Roa eurcrant ;

ae ter

» As a KGB S state afflesr, } NOSENKO ts rosulatly So,
 asalgned to the Counteriatalligence Directorate of tho | -
XCa in Moscow but was included ia the Soviet delegation = |.
to the Disarmament Conference as part of a cover ge
gent whieh peraittod hia to carry out jatalligeace and -
security. funct ions in Go: in Gonova oa behalf of the G2. -

vate Semen.

SST SEs Neselons of the
7 Disaraazent Conforence hold in Genova in 1962. Guring the
Oo course of thase sessions, NOSENKI souzhe contact with
 offietals of the Us 5. Goverzzont, informed these officials -
‘ that he was affilfatod witha the Sovioz State Security ap-
_ paratus and voluateered to 2id thea U. 3. Governseat in...’ .:-
so detecting Soviet subversive ectivity disscted against the. -
-.. U.S. Governaent,: During tie course of his conzact with,
‘ UY &,. sntborities, MOSENKS stated that his cooperation with
‘the U..S. Governnent originazed with his distasta°aod harrad = -:
for the Soviet regize in general, with hls desiro t9 odtaia:
vevengo for tho unjust deata of his fathar, 2 senior effici
ia the Soviet shipbuilding industry, aod with tho genarat®
adsziratioa of tho Azoric2a3 with whoa he kad coe in con-
tact within the Soviet Unica. - 4 .

4. In late “January 1944, AOSENZO arrived, in Genera,
again swasquerading as a acntar af tha Soviart dJelez2sion
t2 the Oisamasent Conforsacc. Subject secratly notified
ois CLA contacts in thse Gaited | States concerning bis prase-

r2 IMPDET. 27
CL BY 063344 *

HR 10-23°
9 January 1975



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

_ SECPET

of the X63 operation against U. S.-?Professor Sarghoora
which NOSENXS said he had personally sugzervised 3t the
direction of SEHICHASTNIY, the Chairaan of the Coasittes

2 : ‘for State Security (kGB).° oo. _
ae a Se ‘During these. Bost “recent meetings NOSENKO annsctaced -
we : his desire to leave the USS2 ‘peraaaently and seek his future

4 An tho Mest. -tio claimed his news work in the £63 (Firse .
+ Deputy Chief of that departaont charged with the survelAdance. -.-
oan aad rocruitaant of Aacrican visitors to the USS2) was axe
panding and that be would not be able to visit the Nost
with any frequency. Accordingly, he prepared 3 request for
political asylum in the United States. fla was taken to
Frankfurt, Germany where he is currently undergoing interro-
gation. Plans aro now being nade to renove hia to the U.S.

yee 6. .It ‘should be noted that CIA contact with Subjoct
a .. . has not boon oxtansive and that we will require additional
thorough interrogation to establish Subject’s bona fides.
" [& shouid also bo notod that NOSENKO's duties were not con-
cerned with substantive aspects of the Oisaruanent Conferenca,
(or weg indi he ow relore—fe aot exhetted- tobe abla ta shed much, if-...
_"wgny, light on ‘that area of our interast. so :

“7, The possibility that NOSENKO’s defection was da-
. + Signed to wreek the conference was nost carofully considered,
. Tae decision to accept bia was takea on the conviction that.
the Soviets would not have chosea such a vulner2ole agent .
‘(staff officer of the kG3) for this kind of nove, Te

:

Marshal! S, Cartor _
Lloutenant Ceneral, USA
Deputy Director



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

5 soa -
A et, po “Go yort
. : . ten ey J td oo
. Bs or : .

TI rn mene eee 31 December 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
“ae

SUBJECT =. _¢ Office of Security reports on PARAGON;
NOSENKO, AELADLE, CELOTEX I and It:

a . and MOCKINGBIRD :

1 Forwarded herewith is a 31 December 1974 memorandum
from the Acting Director of Security on subject activities. The
material represents responses to questions posed by your office,
Obviously, the next phase of the investigation will require more
detailed reviews of each activity,

7. oe .
2. Questions that occur to us in reading the attached, are:

PARAGON an

We should spell out what is meant by the +
statement that the FBI "deferred further coveragé
to the Office of Security, ' how it was expressed and
what form it took.

any

The taping of two conversations does not seem
to constitute “electronic surveillance" in the usual
sense, It certainly is not trespatory surveillance,
A little more detail on the equipment will be wanted, a -

NOSENKO

We will go to the DDO for any record of DCI
knowledge, and report such information as we get.

AELADLE .

We will want to verify DDCI's approval of entry,

ome.

sity [*



--- Page 192 ---
chente

- CELOTEX I

—— We will want more detail on the actual
surveillance, ‘including possible higher approval,

i This is responsive to the DCI's request for
newspaper articles that led to the surveillance.

CELOTEX Il

i 7 Questions similar to CELOTEX L

We may want actual copies of newspaper.
stories for display, in addition to memos, should
DCI wish to use it. :

! MOCKINGBIRD

: . No recorded {in CIA) formal approval by ,
‘ ; Attorney General. It may be that Justice will
have a copy. :

Does this raise a question of surveillance”
of congressmen if one is contacted by.someone "
under surveillance?

: 3. Security experts to have reports on Maheu, SIESTA,
REDFMEI, surveillance trucks, and Israeli COMINT, by COB

Tharsday. :

°

. S. D. Breckinridge

Attachments a/s



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

SUBJECT . : PARAGON

—

GEE

UL

EYES C7LY

\
31 DEC 1974

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
VIA : Deputy Director for Administration

‘NOSENKO
AELADLE
CELOTEX I

CELOTEX If
MOCKINGBIRD

1. Attached is a report concerning Subject topics
which was requested by Mr. Scott Breckenridge of your office.
As you will note, the report is ina question and answer
format with attachments.

2. This Office is still gathering material in 1 regard
to the SIESTA Project and°REDFACE I. In addition, other
files arc being culled to provide more details, if they exist,

on the above mentioned projects.

f Sidney
Acting Di

embridge
tor of Security

’

Atts

Distribution:
Original - Adse
1 - DDA

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 010249



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

{, Yurly Ivanovich Nosenko, request the Covers:
the United States of Ancrica ty prank ne political asylun
in the United States of Aucrica. This decision has Leen

taken by ne as the result of considerdag this question

over tho course of several yours vithout any pressure on
the pire of anyone whosoever. Ll absolutely do not beiiave
in the truth vf the Sucialist systen., sucking in the KGB8
and knowing more than the ordinary Soviet cithzen about
the jaternal situation, the dod of the people and the
policies of tha Seviet Governacat, { becane convinced that
in the USSR there Is not and never will bo truth and real

Creedoa as lony as the country is soverned by the Communist

Party. Travelling on official trips abroad to the countries

of the vest, I was able correctly to understand aad becore

ws aware of the existence of a real and actutl free world.

The events in un,ary and East Serlin and tic split of the

Covaunist sovenent are for ac vivid exaaples and contiraas
tion of tho correctness of ay own decision tu break forevor
with the Soviet Unton, I want to assure the Covornnent ot
the United States of Anerica that [ will cevete all ay
strength and knowledne te the Gevermrent and people of the

United States of Anecrica.

{sf Yuriy Ivanovich Nagenna . +
4 Febraury 1964

Aotie Te) fae



--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

st).

—
-
fc St “ee Ge

Mee?

Ao a4 Tie Taec.
mas BUYERS

0 OP the SP ERTL, er

6

Bod bof teal
it
de

de
Deo, re OOS LE
(cee kate Oysyce ar

wat oe
10% LORS oct cof Arey aia Letes ete e.e
Lo Usargnn ee ke

Me CTY

HELE “ye

2p
ad bs lewele

te NA ye,
@.



--- Page 196 ---
14-0000

LOPLIGATIONS AND SER

REGS

sinents beans: made by tha CENTRAL
NCY for my future employment and welfare, freely
fine claime of, any inst the
Ch AG EP furs chnoveled
ve on the part of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
arising out of any of my prior

Ny understand that the current orrange-
TRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENC
all oblinations df ny nature whatsoever
TELLIGENCE AGENCY,

ene onte

THAD, INTE
are ne cominitment
AGERCY which reinain ur
fiona with the Apency.
tween mynelf end the €
J to completely encomp.
2 tome by the CENTRAL ID

: l acknowledye my desire to serve the interests of the United States
: by fulfilling the obligations which I have accepted in the current

! arranyements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, I assert

' under vath, as indicated by my eignature below, that I have comipletcly,

, totally and permanently severed any and all relationships with any other

if government, its agencies, organs or functionaries including 4he Communist
‘ Party; that I will not in the future advocate, teach, or become.a. member

, of or become affiliated with any organization which advocates or teaches

= opposition to all organized government; that Lwill not in the future become
a member of or become affiliated with the Conmunint Party or any other
© totalitarian party; and that I do nat now nor will I in the future advocate
the economic, international, and governmental doctrines of world

communism,

{ understand fully the need for secrecy reparding my past,

Present and future relationships with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
, AGENCY and I agree to keep forever secret these relationships and
. my arrangements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY including
all information which I may obtain by reason of any associations. with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, with full knowledge that
i violation of such secrecy may subject me to criminal prosecution under
i the espionage laws (18 U.S.C. 793, 794) and other applicable laws and
f regulations, I understand that thie is a solenin and permanent undertaking
* which I must observe even after terminztion of any contracts or other
f arranvements with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, In addition,

T understand that I may not diacuss with or disclose to any person not
j, authorized to hear it any information concerning the CENTRAL
>: INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, its activities, or intelligence mate ia] under
i, the control of the Agency, J underetand that the burden is upon me to
" ascertain from the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY whether or not
information is claseified and if so, who is authorized to receive it.

: i take the obligations set forth above freely, without any mental
reservations or purpose of evasion,



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

|
|
| , i WITT. SAE REOE, ia ered setoney hand and saat

LPaR

fs} IDEN 1
Ve a

Subscribed and sworn to before me this 2/21 day uf Clan i. .
1969, , : : ‘
/s/ WEN 7

hoe ; ;
es cet  @ Notary‘Public oy

(SEAL,

Hy
i
ed
hoe
‘
wom ee ee



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

JEM 1

Dear IDEM OL

T, as represented hy the

the ULITED STATES GOVERH!
CENTRAL iNTELLIGENCE AGENCY, hereby contracts with you under
the folluwing terra and conditions:

1, STATUS. Your legal status under this contract is that of an

independent contractor or consultant. You are not considerad an”

employee of the UISITED STATES COVERNMENT by virtue of this
contract. You will be required to hold yourself available at all times

to fullili requests rade of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
or to respond to tauks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY, You will refrain from engaging in other gainful eiiplayment
or occupation until epproval has been received from the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, Instructions furnished to you pursuant to

this contract and within the terms hereof shall be as binding upon-you... .

as it included in the written terms hereof.

2. COMMUNICATION, In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, tasks and relevant
instructions from an individual hereinafter referred to as the
"Authorized Government Representative." He will be full authorized se
to discuss matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this

i

contrect including, Lut not limited to, cover arrangements, place of

ther matters relating to your
relationship with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,

3. COVER AND SECURITY, In the performance of your

ae

responsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangemests witl be made.

ons. You may be required

S fediral security con

repardiny

|
|
|
|
|
|

i
i

i


--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

to execute certain documents ia the course of establishing cover

. * \
arranneiments but itis te be expressly understood that such se ane nt

are solely for the purpese of cover and sceurity and confer ag additional

legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and oblivations with
1
. \

respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY derive solely from

this agreement, In connection with cover and security you will be

provided from time to time specific instructions by the Authorized

Government Representative and you will be required to adhere precisely

to such instructions, H

r 4. COMPENSATION. You will be compensated by the CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCIS AGENCY at the rate of Sixteen Thousand Five Hundred

Dollars ($16, 500, 00) per year, Payment of this compensation rhall be

monthly in accordance with arrangements acceptable to the Authorized

Governnient Representative,

taxes and to such income tax laws a8 are applicable to your Place pf

this compensation is subject to FICA taxes,

j

!

|

!

|

This sum is subject to Federal income

1

!

reeidence, Additionally, H

The current rates and method of Payment will be in accordance with

i
i

applicable laws and the security inetructions issued by the Authorized

Government Representative. To assist you in establishing yourself, the

a CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will assist you in procuriig’an

aulomobile and necessary household furnishings, providing funds therefor,

up to a maximum of Eight Thousand Dollars ($8, 000. 00). Payment of all

taxes and preparation of necessary tax returns are your Personal

obligation ‘and responsibility but in accord with appropriate security

instructions which will be furnished by the Authorized Government

Representative,



--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

fn the intercets of Security, you will

Nesen

be reeuired to five iv such State, areca, and house or @partivent as is

NCE AGENCY after

fpecifically approved by the CENTRAL INTELLIG
mutual discuszion and due consideration of all circumstances, All of
the expenses of such leased house of apartment will be borne hy you and

the CENTRAL ETE LLIGENCE AGENCY will not be obligated to pay any

such expenses,

2 6, ALLOWANCES, TRAVEL AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the
: I

course of fulfilling your responsibilitics under this agreement, monetary

allowances would be payable under gencral UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary

allowances in substantial accordance with those laws and regulations.

If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are

authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expenses will

be made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial

: ‘accordance with applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
«regulations, /

7, HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL CARE. The CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will.provide you with reasonable insurance

covering medica] care and hospitalization equivalent to that which could

be obtained through etandard insurance policies; or, the CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY may provide directly such medical care and

hospitalization.
8. SECRECY OBLIGATION. You will be required to keep forever

secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason

hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledre that violtat ‘of such

|
H
i
f.
i


--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

nies ouniler the eeuionace laws.

secrecy my subi ct yoy lo.
@¥ amended, and other applicabl: laws and reculations, Your relationship
with the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and this contract must be

kept secret and you may not discuss any aspect of this relationship and

contract with any person other thin the Authorized Government

Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve.

9. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS, No promises or

commitments pertaining to rights, privileges, or benefits other than those

ent thereto

Eugen,

expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any amendm
shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. :
10. TERM, This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1969

and shall be for a term of one (1) year. At the end of that period this

contract shall be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of

termination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance of the

elapse of one (1) year. Thereafter the contract will be renewed aulomaticaily’

on similar terms and conditions. This contract may be terminated at any
time by either party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice. Upon
termination of this contract or: renewals thereof, including amendments,
ifany, the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake to assist
you in obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensation,
to assure you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of

ent upon your fulfilling the terms of

living. This undertaking is cont

this contract and the continuing compliance with the secrecy obligations

i
i

i
f


--- Page 202 ---
1400000

raph Sef this east

imposed on you by pera
i i

any secrecy agreement which you-have Signed w
& y :

INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, _

: : UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
eer as Repres *

a by the
CENTRAL iD LLIGENCE AGENCY
By:

Contracting Ofticer
Date:

| ACCEPTED:

Dt Marl (4 Date:__ fst IDEN 1 “sp ‘ :
a ae cece eeeneee te

WITNESS:

A Ligt hl /96F Date: /s/ WWEN7
age (FOF _ - a

“5s



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

Dear IDEN t

Reve Sto your coctee
GOVERNS Dhyodl
ved

eit ctine ba vite tive

coh iy

trties thereto, snd in dieu thereof

the following acreenent é

ted ty the

8 Yepres

The UNITED &*
NGY, hereby contracts with you under

LINTELLICEN
tlertus and conditions:

CENTR
the follov

is 1. STATUS, Your legal status under this contract is thet of an

t independent contractor or consultant, You are not considered en employee

: of the UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT by virtue of this contrzct. You

will be required to hold yourself available at all times to fulfill requests

, Made of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY or t9 respon to
"tasks requested of you by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. You :
WH) refrain from engaging in other gainful employment or occupation until
approval haus been received from the CENTRAL INTELLIGE SCE AGENCY,
Instructions furnished to you pursuant to this contract and within th 7
upon you as if included in the writtea terran. *

hereof shall be as binding.
hereof, :

.2, COMMUNICATION, In all relationships with the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY you will accept requests, taykas and relevant
instructions from an individual hercinufter referred-tu as ihe ulberized
Government Representztive.' He will be fully authorized to-diccuss
matters with you relating to your responsibilities under this contract
;; including, but not limited to, cover arrangements, place of aveizgnment,

i: conditions of work or any cther matters relating to your relationship with
the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,

'

t

| 3, COVER AND SECURITY. In the performance of your

ji reeponsibilities hereunder, appropriate arrangements will be rnade

u regarding cover and general security conditions. You mzy be required
I to execute certain documents in the course of establishing cover

arrangements but it is to be expressly understood that such docements are
! solely for the purpose of cover and security and confcr no additicnal

. legal rights or obligations and that all of your rights and obligations with

I: respect to the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY Jerive solely from-this
agreement, In connection with cover and security you will be provided
from time to time specific inetructions by the Authorized Government
Representative and you will he required to adhere precisely to such

instructions,



--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

Vou will be carne

rate Gh Bayhtes
aye
ments

outa.

Noaincaane tan law
at

Mieable laws and

milly, this comp
bomethod of pay
ecurity ivetpuction

3 all taxe
3 fom and res

twill be in accurdence wat
ued by the Authorized Gov
sary CAN re
ibility but in accord wit
rnished by the Authorised ¢

tent Representati
Ss are your
tepriate security
wiverninent

hich will bo tu

entative,

: 5S. ALLOWANCES, TR AND OTHER EXPENSES. If, in the

‘ course of fulfilling your respons es under this agreement, monetary

allowances would be payable under general UNITED STATES

f GOVERNMENT rules and regulations, you will be paid such monetary

|, allowances in substantial accordance with thoue laws and regulations,

; If, in the course of this contract, you are directed to travel or are
authorized to incur other expenses, reimbursement for expen will be

; made by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY in substantial a¢cordance

; With applicable CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY regulations,

6, NEGOTIATED BENEFITS,

a. You presently have a private health insurance plan for
yourself and your wife paid until late December 1970, Prior to
the expiration date of the current policy the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY has the uption of paying premiums:
on the current policy until | March 1972 or enrolling you ina
health insurance program for selected contract individuals
of the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY subject to |
all the terms and conditions of that Program, The CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will pay the premiums on cither .
insurance coverage until 1 March 1972. However, any new
contract will include an appropriate clause providing that this
organization will bear a vortion of the total Premin cost of
any health insurance and you will bear the remainder.

b. The CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will endeavor
to arrange for you to secure a term life insurance policy wi
a face value of $15,000.00, This policy contains ne addi
accidental death benefits, The premiuma for the policy will
be your personal responsibility. The current premium charge
is $12.00 per month, :



--- Page 205 ---
14-0000

wt not Co exteed a tote of thirteen (13) work

re he pein

pay per

approved

wuthwra; enty

sendres ! year to

in wdivance by the Authorice rovernment Peprercentatis
Varcaats eraable sed wilh oot te carriedover

frome y ation tine will

Vidar gn ret.

if fop unused va

way

ore

net be euthorized,

- (2) [fincapacitated for work due tu ness, injury
and (he Tike, your compensation may be continued for periods
faye per contract
of three (4) consecutive
ate.” Like vacation time,

year. Periods of absence in es

days will require a doctor's certifie
ij this benefit is not accruabse and will not be carricd over from
iM year to year, Cash payment in licu of this Dencfit will not be
| authorized,
| 7. SECRECY OBLIGATION, You will be required to keep forever

‘secret this agreement and all information which you may obtain by reason
‘hereof (unless released in writing by the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY from such obligation), with full knowledge that violation of such
i secrecy may subject you to criminal prosecution under the espionage Jawn,
fas amended, and other applicable Jawa and regulations. Your relationship
ijwith the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY and thin contract must be
kept secret and you may not discunn any aspect of this relationship and
jlcontract with any person other than the Authorized Government
Representative or such other person as he may specifically approve,

i

i 8. UNAUTHORIZED COMMITMENTS, No promises or
commitments pe ng to rights, privileges, or bencfitu other than those
‘expressly stipulated in writing in this agreement or any am.ndment thereto
‘shall be binding on the CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY, .

: 9. TERM, This agreement is effective as of 1 March 1970 and
yjthall be for a term of two (2) years. At the end: of that period this contract
[jehatt be deemed to be renewed for another year unless notice of
jtermination has been furnished to you thirty (30) days in advance.
‘Thereafter the contract will be renewed automatically on similar terms
Wand conditions. This contract may be terrninated at any time by cither
Party upon furnishing thirty (30) days advance notice, Upon termination
jot this contract or renewals thereof, including amendments, if any, the
WCENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY will undertake tu assist you in
obtaining gainful employment or to provide continuing compensatic af
jiassurc you that you will be able to maintain a reasonable standard of
living. This undertaking is contingent upon vour fulfilling the terms of

to

SECRET.



--- Page 206 ---
14-0000

ce with the secrecy obligstions :

penoraet and (he arevssiens of any i

which you have signed with the CENTRAL 1

. : :
\
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT i

As Represented by the '

CENTRAL INTC LLIGENCH AGENCY co
By: 7 :

{
s a IDEN 6 {
{ . : Contracting Officer * |

1, ACCEPTED: =

I - |
i /s/ IDEN 4 ee hart, iA , li fp |
|

at Date:
+f nn

i, . 4

i WITNESS:

i

n

j OS

if vy o . 1

4 {sf IDEN 2 Date: O GYinreh (970 :
ee . He sere CE ee
{ : :

if .

iv

|
|
|

i
i

|

: |



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000

25 Ontobur 1972

Received this date from an Authorized Covernment Repre-
“sentative three Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on the following banks:
HAL 25-349 Schroder Trust Curnpany 315,000.00
HEE 54779 Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. 19,000. 00 vn
 $A593613 Harris Trust & Savings Bank 19,000. 00
This {3 an advance against a back salary payment covering
the period April 1964 to March 1969 which was approved on 18 October
1972. Tunderatand that this advance, £35, 069. 090, will be deducted
from the total back salary payment covering the specified period when

the finalization of this Payment is made in the near futuce,

/s/ IDEN 1
Cc fa) IDEN 5 , ~ :
Witness _. , s Date: Cat Lr 22h 449A

, J \o ° es



--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

16 Wey jazo

Received this date from-an Authorized Government Repre-

sentative four Bank Cashiers Checks drawn on.the following banks:.--..
#155784 ‘Riggs National Bank $15, 000. 00

#01-028564 Union Trust Company 15,000, 00

#0661511 American Security & Trust 15,000. 00

#2-442275 The National Bank of Washington 7,052.00
The above aniount, $52,052.00, together with the $35, 000. 00
advance received on 25 October 1972, constitutes full payment for back

salary covering the period April 1964 to March 1969.

/s/ IDEN 1
Co : 4 .
/s/ IDEN § hairy L Eye
Witness: . , Date: toren, bo. /é, 0i7 i,

J~™


--- Page 209 ---
14-0000

ore) :
ROM
SUSJECT:

wee

Qo LESTE ©) SRUNMENT.
LAemorandum
pate: 13 July 1973

Files

IDEN 2

IDEN 1

1. On 12-July 1973, the attached Acknowledgement and
Release which was prepared by the General Counsel was signed by
the Subject in the presence of IDEN 5 and witnessed by the
undersigned, There were no problems involved in obtaining the
signature of the Subject who had previously voluntarily stated he
would sign such « document if he would receive the $15, 000, 00 which
Subject considered was the fulfillment of an Agency promise in 1964 ;
before his defection, ; . :

2. Subject understood that the attached did not affect the
existing conteactual agreement with Subject and that all stipulations
in that contract were valid and continuing,

3, Also attached is a copy of the $13, 000. 00 Cashier's
Check given to Subject on 12 July 1973 which completed the agreed
sum of $15, 000, G0, the Subject having previously received $2,000. 00
which was a part of the agreed sum. .

*/a/ IDEN 2-----

Bug U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Paral! Saxir



--- Page 210 ---
14-0000

‘TAND RELEASE,

ACKNO

“LEDCES

WHERLAS, , IDEN 1 1 a former citizen of the Union

of Soviet Socialist Repablics and an employee of the Committee for State

curity (KGB), first cooperated with Officers of the United States Govern-

neat and then, subsequertly, defected to the United States; and,
WHEREAS, IDEN} +Was promised certain sums of money for
his cooperation and defection, only part of which have previously been

paid to him; and,.

WHEREAS, there remains a certain balance of money agreed upon by

IDEN 1 and Officers of the Ceatral Intelligence Ageacy;

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the sum of FIFTEEN THOUSAND

and 00/100 Dollars ($15, 000.90) the reccipt of which is hereby acknowledged,
* IDEN I for himself and for his heirs, executors, admini-
strators and assigns, hereby releases and forever discharges the United
States Government and the Central Intelligence Agency and all of its
employees and representatives from any claim for money promised to him
for, and/or at the time of his defection, and from any and all other claims

demands and Habilities in any form whatsoever arising out of or in any way

* ment and the Central Intelligence Agency prior to the date of this document,

12 July 1973,

WITNESS THE FOLLOWING SIGNATURE AND SEAL:

! /
J ‘ .. /s//) IDEN1 , 4SEAL)
: . ; ae ae
IDEN 1

*) WITNESS;
On Behalf of the United States Government

/s/ IDEN 2 .

connected with his cooperation and association 1 with the United Sta tes Govern. j

f
H
j
i
i
i
i
t
{
j
!
H
i
i
i


--- Page 211 ---
14-0000

Q IDEN 1

“Dear IDEN 1
. ” Reference is made to your contract with the United Stutes Government,
vas represented by the Central Intelligence Agency, effective | March L970.

Effective 1 March 1974, said Contract is amended by revising the first

"sentence of paragraph four (4) entitled "Compensation" to read as follows:

"You will be compensated by the Central Intelligence Agency :

at the rate of Twenty-Three Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars i
: : i

/

($23, 750) per year."

'
‘ ‘ACCEPTED:

i ;
: " All other terms and conditions of said contract remain in full force and |
: [ieffect. : !
' I! : . :
: a Please acknowledge by signing in the space provided below. ;
ko, CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY !
AN — :
& !
a By /s/ IDEN3) -
i - Spesfat Contracting Officer :
i oy : .

i . A / j
yj r- !

/s/ IDEN 1 . : heap 3S 977 :
George Martin Rosnek _ . ‘Date 4

. !

f :
_ WITNESS: H
'

H

fs/ IDEN 2 Foray lFI H

ee a Se Ses :
: Date . a

APPROVED:

/s/ IDEN 4 . 172, Wo :
. rr Date” :

E2IMPDET
CL by: 063837.



--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

TAB

CU Att: Memorandum of Agreene:

oD. Preckinridze, Suis

Memo for Mr. Garrisc ss
ef Defector

Tnformation on Petentic

Memo for [G from Jerrold R. Brown, Subd: Request for
Information (reg Report that NCI fired an enployee
for abusing a defector)

MFR from Walter Elder, S:t/3 Rockefeller Cum: ieeton
Contact (re: Report that ICT fired an employee for
abusing a defector) i

Memo for-IG from C, Wy Na
Activities (Unidentitied’s : ce of
Defector) . ~

from F, Bucel
tween the At
ef the United States and the central Intell
for the Entry of ALiens of Interest ta tne
Intelligence Agency under Specific circumsta

“eno for Inspector General from Jerrold 9.2rcwn, dated
18 June 1975, Subjects Request for Information
(ros DCI firing an erpleyee for abusing a defector) _

Routing: Slip to S. breekinrid,

ey General
ce Agency

DATE

30 Jan 75

18 Jun 75 «
23 Jun 75°

27 Jun 75

22 Jan 79

10 Feb 55
18 Juno 1975


--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

: . palit :
Review Staff: 75/880

SECRET Dien ya

Romsey

sk.

~ , AS- 22.0%,

18 June 1975.

MEMORANDUM FOR: | Inspector General

“ SUBJECT : Request For Information

The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector, Can you uncover the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known’ to us? ‘(John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of "any piece of Paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Office of Security.)

J ? &. . Brown

cc: PDO

John Waller

SECRET


--- Page 214 ---
14-0000

S-E-C-R.-E-

NSRAL OF THE UNITED STATES
TRY CF ALIENS OF INTEREST To

MENCRANDUM OF AGREESENT BETWEEN THE ATTORNEY
AND THE G2NTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY FOR THE
EEN E! GE. INTER $s

The Central Intelligence Agency has frequent neo for the covert
fenmociry entry of aliens into the United States for intolligence and
Sperational purposes within its Jurisdiction, : :

To effectuate entry in such casey, the Ceutral Intel) igence Agency
wil) submit each Such alien's case in writing to the Comastsioner of
Immigration and Naturalization with tho requust to defor inspection of
the subject upon arrival and mrole to the Central Tnteligonce Agency
under the authority of Section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality

Act,

In ordor that the intell teenee tenofits tobe derived from such

entrivs not be outwoirhed by the dangers, If any, to the Intorml security
of tho United States by the prusunee of such wltens, Lhe Central Tatelligenco
Acuncy agroes that tt will take all necessary steps to establish the bona
Sides of each prospective entrant prior to subaittal to the Inntgration and
Naturalization Service. It further agrees: (a) That this mathod of entry
will only be utilized where -1t 49 strictly in the national interest; (b) That

security and admissibility under the immigration laws, as well as the results
of acurrent chuck of the FBI flle; and (e) That the pluce, time and manner
of arrlval will be Coordinated with the Sortoe in advaree thereof, .

Fach.alfen whose entry ts authorized by the Comndssioner under the
foreg-ing procedure will be prroled for Such period cf time as may be agreed
cn by the Central Intelligence Agoney and tho Service, in no tritance to
exeesd one year. Further extensions of parole, Sintlarly limited, may be
authorize: thereafter on a Writton statement of need, which include the
results of a current Svcurity choche :

Upen arrival each alten will execute an agreenent acknowlodging
Parole status ina forn satisfactory to the Central Intelligence Agency and

the Service,

After parole of sech aliens, Lhe Centrist Ttellipence Agency wid
assumo responsibility fer Cure, Scpurvisten and coatsol of @ kind aniazree
it believes consistent with the teterpal curity of the United States
during continuance of their parole. « further, tn thease or any alien
whose physical custody is net to ba Maintained or is tone terminated, the
Central Intellirence Agency will arrange for <n of each alten for
Yeyistration pursuant to law ata time and place sati ctory to the Service,

SEC okt



--- Page 215 ---
14-0000

ee es ee ee

v

rc

S.B-CH ea

\

‘Upon complntion ef their intolligence or operational Purposes in
the United States, or 4f internal security reasons sorwquire, these aliens

‘Will be removed therefrom through tho arrangements and at the expense of

the Central Intelligence Aguncy, oxcopt in those’ cases in which other dis=
position 1s made of a nature satisfactory to the Service. Also, the Cuntrel
Intelliponce Agency w11l inform tho Service sufficiontly in advance of each
Proposed departure a9 to permit vorification thereof Lf tho Service so olects.

wrvico will apprise the FBI of.

In accordance with past practice, tho S
of these alions.

the entry and departure or other disposition
The Service will maintain separate and secure files under this
agreomente .

Sf

7 Hervert Brownell, Jre
Attorney General

7 wT FAlien We Dilins
Director of Central Intelligence
(Feb 19 1955)

-~2-

S-E.C..R-E.T



--- Page 216 ---
14-0000

- —s on

w) UNCLASSIFIED (bs RNAL [] CONF... NTIAL C] secner

USE ONLY
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

7
a 7
SUBIECT. (esphonett Alleped Mlepal Activities ;

(Unidentified Sub ject--Alleped Abuse of Defector)
from cect tee penneene Dwg TT sere ee eee een
Chartes W. Kane

Director of Security po ee
27 JUN 1975

; -

j CHHCERS | COMMENTS {Number aoch comment to thow from whom

INITIALS | te whom. Diaw o I:ne ores tulumn alter each comment)

TO: (Gftcer denynation, room umber, ond
buildings

1.
—.. PDA

Inspector General
At Mr. Ainslie. ee be

3-5: Attached was prepared in
response to un 18 June
request from Jerry Brown,
Per 23 Jun, MER by Walt
Elder, source of the story
is a deposition by Mr. Iicims

Dr. Chamberlain

“aot [] SECRET CJ] CONFIDENTIAL. (J IMIFRMAL OT xceasstrien

sr «610


--- Page 217 ---
14-0000

7 : SECRET

INSPECTOR GEtlepay

Tre,

oS

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General

ATTENTION : Mr. Neil Ainslie
VIA 2 Deputy Director for Administration
SUBJECT : Alleged Illegal Activities

(Unidentified Subject--Alleged Abuse
of Defector) .

1. Reference is made to Mr. Ainslie's verbal request
for a review of Office of Security files in an effort to
provide information pertinent to a case mentioned on page
170 of the Report to the President by the Commission on CIA
activities within the United States.

2. The case in question from page 170 of the Commission
Report is quoted as follows: "In one other case, a defector
was physically abused, although not seriously injured, The
Director of Central Intelligence discharged the employee in-

volved," -

3. A search of Office of Security file resources has
reflected ‘information pertinent to a case in which a defector
was physically abused at an overseas location, and the Agency
employee was later terminated by the DCI. It is not known
whether the following case is identical to the referenced
case on page 170 of the Commission Report, but the facts

appear to be quite similar,

4, Information developed by this Office of possible in-
terest to the Inspector General, pertains to one John Torpats,
an ¢x-CIA employee, and one Eduard Oun, an Estonian defector.

S. Torpats was born in 1898 in Estonia, and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1926, Torpats was employed by
CIA in February 1949 and was terminated 30 January 1961. | The
file. information reflected that in July 1956, Torpats was found
guilty of mistreatment of an alien by a Special Inquiry Board

E2 IMPDET
CL BY 011018

SECRET ws Ssyue


--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

SECRET

in Frankfurt, West Germany. The alien involved was Eduard
Oun, an Estonian who defected from Estonia through Sweden
in 1955.

6. The incident in Frankfurt involved fistreatment of

‘Oun during interrogations directed by Torpats. The charges

of physical abuse included the striking of Oun with the fist;
application of turpentine and ointments to various parts of
the body, the scrubbing of Oun's body with a brush, and forc-
ing Oun to stand in the nude as long as eight days during
interrogations with only very brief rest periods,

7. Torpats was returned to Headquarters and was brought
before an Employment Revicw Board for consideration of separa-
tion from the Agency. The Board's recommendations initially
were that Torpats be "transferred to an area outside the
Clandestine Services." Torpats appealed the decision, and a
later recommendation included reduction in grade from GS-14
to GS-13, Torpats later received unsatisfactory fitness re-
Ports and engeged in various "in house" battles with Agency
officials concerning his employment. :

8. Torpats was later terminated in accordince with the
authority granted the DCI under Section WO2(Cy of the National
Security Act of 1947, as ammended, effective 30 January 1961,
Later in 1961, Torpats filed suit against the DCI contesting
his dismissal, and the U.S. District Court for the District of
Columbia granted the government's motion for summary judgment
against Torpats. Torpats appealed the decision, and the U.S.
Court of Appeals, in 1962, upheld the lower court's ruling
that Torpats' termination was legal.

9. The Office of Security file of Eduard Oun contained
little information other than interrogation reports dated 1956.
It was not clear from file information whether Oun entered the
United States after the Frankfurt incident. The most recent
document contained in the Oun file was dated 17 September
1956 and noted that Oun had been psychiatrically examined and
found qualified for Agency sponsored immigration to the U.S.

under Public Law 203.

2

SECRET



--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

SECRET

10. It is noted that Office of Security files contained
only fragmentary information in Tegard to certain areas of the
Torpats' case. File review indicated, however, the DDO, OGC
and the Inspector General's office will probably have addition-
al information concerning this matter.

; me
Mb brace:
‘Charles W. Kane
Director of Security

SECAET


--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

SECRET ae

Losssay 4]

Review Staff: 75/1008
23 June 1975 .

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Rockefeller Commission ‘Contact

Mason Cargill told me today that the reference
in the Commission report to an employee who was fired
because he abused a defector came from a deposition by
Dick Helms: Helms could not remember an exact name,
but from the description which he gave on his deposition,
it is clear that the employee who was fired was John -.
Torpats. He was discharged by Allen W. Dulles in 1960.

Torpats, himself a Lithuanian refugee, was working
in the Defector Reception Center in Frankfort, Germany,
In the course of interrogating another Lithuanian - -
defector, Torpats beat him. After Torpats was fired,
he sued the Director (then NcCone). He lost the case.

Wet der,

Walter Elder

ec - DCL

we ~ IG

cc - OGC

CB: 007789
E2 IMPDET



--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

_ Review Staff: 7457880
SECRET . .
—-__ : Nee. kaye

isn icTGn

AWS 2.910

18 June 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Inspector General
SUBJECT : Request For Information

The Rockefeller Commission Report (Pg. 170)
says the DCI fired an employee for abusing a de-
fector. Can you uncover ‘the details on this in-
cident? Is it the only such domestic incident
known to us? (John Waller says the DDO has no
knowledge of “any piece of paper" sent to the
Commission on the reported incident or of any
others. He suggests checking Uffice of Security)

Ae - Brown

AOE [teroftwosyiyg CE) DPe
Dire STFS CLE

cc: DDO
John Waller

SECRET : .



--- Page 222 ---
PHD

antt
foik

cn
7
“tf
a
“I
.
~d
'
A

30 January 1975

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Garrison

SUBJECT s Information on Detention of Defector

1. The Deputy General Counsel has requested documents
bearing on the decision to confine a defector, particularly the
considerations at the time such decisions were mado and
reviewed, as may be reflected in memoranda for the record,
staff studies, etc., leading to the Initial confinement, the
later decisions to continue that confinement, the decision to
move to a new facility In Virginla, and eventually to release

him.
2. The assumptton (a that following the initlal decision

this matter was reviewed formally from tline to time, and that
those reviews are reflacted in somo way in the recorda of the

Agency.

Wf 5.

S. D. Breckinridge

Original - Addressee
~ $DB Chrono
- Judy for QA files

ereey
eee etal


