
--- Page 1 ---
oa 10308- 10208 2025 RELEASE UNDER ie amare JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 19
gst. ! L. ONLY Ly] Suni wrat

- ROUTING AND RECORD SHES:-

SECRET

SUBJECT: {Optional}

TO: | (Officer designation, roam number, and E : :
| building) OFFICER'S | COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
, : INITIALS to whom. Drew a line across column after each comment.)

voee se 610 “tomene’* (-] SECRET [[] CONFIDENTIAL (yeRN AL = ]UUNCLASSIFIED

U.S, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1958 © = 476731

zit


--- Page 2 ---
13-00000

MOUM FOR: Directer of Cantral Intelligence

VIAL _ . Deputy Director (Plans)

\SUBJCCT: | Operational Exploitation of Khr ashchey Visit to Cuba

tl. This memorandum is for the Virector's information only and does
not cequire action.

; 2. An invitation by the Government af Cuba to Khrushchev to visit
‘that country hae been officially accepted, but as yet no definite time has
been set. There has been speculation that Khrushchev would arrive In
Habana for the 26th of July celebrations, while a press report, confirming
a statement of the Soviet Ambassador in Mexice, predicts the arrival for
August. Earlier reports had suggested December 1660 or January 1/41
as Fossible: dates.

3, Rois felt that a successful visit by Shrushcheyv te Cuba would assist
further in the establishment af a solid Soviet understanding with that country,
with distarbing overtones on the possible establishment of claser Soviet
relationships in other parte of Latin America, For this reason it ie
desirable to prevent the visit er te counteract it by a show of massive

| ppeattion by the Cuban people.

4, On 21 Sane the Habana Station was asked far its views on possiiic

plans. in the exchange of cables that has followed, the Station and Headquarter:

are now In agreement that the best course of action lies in two operations.
Flest, a massive church manifestation or rally to be called for some othe:
purposs would afford the people of Cuba an obvious way to exprese their
protest. Second, the instigation of rarncrs that Khrushchev's life will be

\is danger while in Guba from a well-planned assassination attempt wonld
be progagated from other Latin American countries. ,

5S. Because of the need of avelding action in Cuba iin this eratter ths
would imperil Station assets, 1 has been determined that such asaets
be used only ag a sceans of iustigating the church to hold the sally.

6. The latest report from Habana indicaics that plens are going
‘satisiactorily. (Bishop Boza Maavidad)i ts described as enthused about the

ab

“ip


--- Page 3 ---
13-00000

Ls Bogots)fo have the
-- Wel p

ode

oth Goze Lavasitda) @ praminant lay leader, he is now visiting
ay te eolicit the suaport of the local Blehop. _Lavastidd vill evek

fyport in Saatingo, DLentative plans cali fora cengeent or rally
16 July.

+. Tha dtation hag asked that the entire effort begin with Guha, .
without inittel outaide aupport trem Cuban exile groups or the soontore of
the anti-Castro programs on Station WRUL. <A cable has been cant(to Gn.
Esun spark aimilar rallies throughent Latin America.

ge ageets will be calied upan to aupport these and the Cuban ageats
when plans are firmer.
: 24

8. ThefArgentine Unison nervice)will be asked to send one of its
contzets in thedield of journalism to Habana to contact officials and to
visit the offfees of the New Chinn News Agency. He will be instructed to
ask Conmunist stall members there what substance there might be ta
yumers be has heard that an assassination attempt on Khrughchev will tace
place, The same terhnique is being veed through three Gubang living in
iiamwi whe are in consiant contact with Cuba. Speculation om auch attest
wilt be surfaced on the (YSU, prograc: and in certain cuntrohe:
presse media,

5. &. Eing
Chie!
Western Hemisphere Clvision

ENHinklg:irh
5 July"15$0

Distribution:

Original and 1 - Addressee
1-DDCI
1-5DP
1-C/WHD
1-C/WH/4
I - Originator
1 - WH/4/Crono


--- Page 4 ---
13-00000



--- Page 5 ---
2 July 1960

TO 3 CA/4
Subject: Khrushchev Visit to Cuba

“1. B&ekground. An invitation to visit Cuba has been extended
to Khrushchev by the Governnent of Cuba, The invitation has been

' accepted, but do definite time has been set. There has been sons

speculation that Khrushchev would arrive in Havana in time for the
celebrations of the 26th of July. The press has reported that he
will arrive in August (a date confirmed by a statement of the Soviet
‘Ambassador in Mexico), Other reports say the visit will not teke
place for several months, probably in December or January. In any
event we must plan for the possibility of the July visit.

It has been stated from several sanguine quarters that we
should "do the same thing to Khrushchev. thut the Japs did to Eisen-
‘hower", This is a completely unrealistic drean,

It is true that s successful Khrushchev visit to Cuba
would be the final stoxs in the construction of a solid Soviet
base in Cuba, with disturbing overtones for the pessible construction
for more Soviet ideoligical bases in all.of Latin America, For that
reason we are trying to do what we can to prevent the visit, or at
least to show a massive sk opposition to it. -

2. Exploitati@nPlang. On 21 dune Hqs sent a cable to Havana
‘asking for views on possibility of a major effort to force cancellation
of the vielt. A resulting series of cables shows thst the station and
headquarters are now in agreement that our best hope lies in

a. A massive Church manifestation or rally, which
though called for some other purpose, would be to the pecple
of Cuba an obvious way to express their protest. And

b. from outside Cuba, instigating of rwaors that
Khrushchev’s life will be in danger £2" from a well-plenned
assassination attenpt.

.3. Mr. Helms has tcld k us that he wants CIA to undertake no
action that will imperil Station essets, This injunction was placed
on us while we were exchanging cables with Havana. The result is that
station agsets are actively instigatirg the church to hold the rally.
A BREEZESSE cable from Headquarters has instructed the station to
continue this course of action as long as there is “safety in numbers",
i.e., as long as it is a church action rather that an AMPALM one.


--- Page 6 ---
13-00000

7

OE  €

6
4. The latest cable from the field (IN 18883) “reports that

. that plans are going ne Aden, wth ishop Boze_Masvi is Hx

gn "enthused" about the idea, With(Jose Lavas stiddl, de pa prominent
lay leader, he is now visiting Camaqtisy to solicit the support of
‘the local 2=&8 Bishop. ose. Lavastiday“a promient lay leader, is
in Santiago to seek the~help k of the Sant&éago Bishop. Tentative

’ plans call for a congress or rally on Assumption Day, 15 July.

. The station has asked that the entire effort at least
-begin within Cuba, without ouside support from FRD or we

5. Hemisphere Plans. A cable has gone out to CELA (in (g-"l
Bogota asking this Church organization to spark similar rallies —

“thr out Latin America. JMRAKE assets will be called upon to

support these and the Cuban neeting vhen BS plans ere fprner

19h the assassination emark angle: (t1osenisis) a
controlled égeht (in B.A), is soon to visit high officials in
Havana. He.has ben inetructed to ask these leaders what sub- _
stance there might be to the rumore he has heard that an attempt
will take place.....Rivas, a friend of Rudy Gomez, is using the
same Lee towextiex technique through three Cubans living in Miami
who are constant contact with Cuba.

Speculation on the assassination sttempts will be surfaced
on the WRUL program, in AMPACA'S paper, etc.

David A, Phillips

