
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10095-10276] = | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)
. + roa bad

re SE-CeR-ELT

L 20 September 1980

MEMORANDUM FOR: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIG

ae eee of STESCALADE = Anais

oy In May 1959, the New Chine: Ne 73 Agency iNcMA) opened
an office in Hayana in the E} Medico Building which is occupied -
_ partly by business concerns and partly, used. for residential apart
“ments, Shortly thereafter, the Havana Station obtained the con
currence of Ambassador Bonsal and Miss Carolyn O, Stacey, an
Embassy employee, to mount an audio operaticn against NCNA through ~~
the wall of the adjacent apartment in which Miss Stecey lived.. no
November 1959, the FE Division sent one case officer and ene TSD
technician to Havana, ‘and the installation of az microphone and tape
recorder was completed in Miss Stacey's apartment on 29 November |
1959. :

«

By By Jane: 1960, it had becom rae Svident that two ot har 3 zooms-
oceupiea by NCNA possibly- houzed communication equipment and ob
were used for conferences, At that time Bryan , FE Division
case officar, went to Havana and explored the poss st Ma of improyin
the operation, He managed to lease an getty over the .
NGNA office, and arranged for a s stay-behind 3 ag ent to oecuRy this space, :

3, In August "1960, a steam of three. TSD technicians “who were.

in Havana on a separate SR Division operation agreed to install the. ©) 7A.
additional equipment required for the NGNA operation. A second FE
‘Division case officer, Robert Neet, came down to Havana; and he,
together with the technicians, installed a probe microphone and tape <9 |
recorder in the apartment obtained by Milla over the NCNA office, si-
About this time the equipment was removed fromm Miss Stacey's

apartment, with the exceotion of the plastic probe which was lefe - -°

in the wall and plastered over. oO



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

|“ §.E-C-R-E-T

4, As an additional security precaution to provide o safe © 2
haven, and after consultation with the Acting Chief of Station, akey.
to an apartment in the same building leased by Mrs. Marjorie yr
Lennox, an Embassy secretary, Was cptained. Mrs, Lennox was
told that access to her apartment was needed fox photographic °
surveillance purposes. 9.22 ; : =

ee Ls
“S88 the Station
end security would work against
the apartment. over -NCNA since: rs.
- cancelling. sub-lessors' contracts ‘an
therefore, decided to install transmitters ant
* permit entinued monitoring of the target fom a distant
post, = Another three-man team.of TSD techni lane. .cons
- David L, Christ {alias Carswell), Walter E.- Szuminski (alias --
Taransky) and Thornton J. Anderson {alias Danbrunt} documented = =
as tourists had been sent to Havana to install audio equipment inthe: “  ~ 7
Chinese Nationalist Bmbassy before it was due to be turned over to.
the Chinese Coramunits.. This operation aborted, This team was ©: -..=
_ then sent to work on the instatiation of the transmitters in the apartt-
ment over the NCNA office, 6° Sones ” °

- 6, At 2400 hours on 14 September,’ Christ, who withthe -
other technicians was working in the taz get apartment, failed to keep!
2 scheduled appointment with Meet. At 0100 hours on the 15th of © -
September, the apartmeat of Mrs, Lennox was. entered into and. -
searched by Cuban authorities,. ‘and she was teken into ‘custody. AE!
1540: hours’ on 15 September,’ Neet, the stay-behind agent and his: wife

: th “Cuban authorities and detained. oye

7... As of today the agent.remains in the custody of the Cuban
. authorities. His wife has been released and is still in Havana, Neet -.
was released.1715 hours 16 Septermbez and has sudsequently returned. mee
to Washington where be is being debriefed....Mrs. Lennox was o-oo
subsequently released and has also returned to Washington where she -_
ig being debriefed, The three TSD technicians remain in confinement.”
Thsy have beea 52eD in confinement but not contacted by an Embassy
oificer when he first attempted to secure the release of Mrs, Lennox ~
’ Christ was lest seen by Nest whez they were joiatly interrogated

_ ithe moraing of 15 September. At that time Christ did not appear :

-2-—

we ey ee _B-E-C-R-E-T re


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

. Was unsuccessful.. He was not permitted to se2 them but was told

; company consists of a telephone answering service and a name on the

. leaving: ‘Cuba as tourists since the filling out of the landing card +

to have been maitres ated,

8, Accor ding to articles in the Guban papers the three —
technicians were arrested while in the apartment over the NCNA
ofiice and completing the installation of the equipment. The .
press article adds that the key to Mrs. Lennox's apartment was
found on one of the technicians who identified the apartment. to --5

which it belonged, All Cuban press releases have ref ferred to the =
men by alias and. have not.identified them as Government or Agenc
mployees.. ‘itis unclear at praesent wnat story had been-agreed”
upow by the technicians and station pey sonnel’ to be used in ‘the éyent
they were caught, (While being interrogated with Neet, Christ
indicated that Neet was his boss, and Neet con sistently denied any
knowledge as-to why -he was being held.) “The: sub-lease ‘forthe

. apartment i in which the men were caught is in the name cf the stay- 9:2...
peaind agent with the original lease being in the name. of Mills, the.

= Division Case Officer. JL 2 ee

9. Initial informetion indicated that. the th 2e technicians would

be charged with espionage "against the people ef China’, . Subsequent
o > >

press releases have been unclear on this point,- An atternpt by Consul
Hugh Kessler to contact the three men at 1730 hours on 17 September

they were in custody, .-- -/-

10, The three technicians travelled to Ce ba as tourists under
very light commercial cover, two.of them working fc> a. company | in’ 0s
New York and the third, one in Baltimore, In each case the cove a

door; Telephone messages. and mail are picked + periodically by 2 2a
Agency. contract employes. The mien were provided with this cover ©

as well as unbackstopped home addresses for use when entering or.

requires this information. Subsequent to their detention the home ~~.
addresses have been partialiy backstopped so-that inguiries will = cu. 0° 7
indicate that someone with this alias name had lived inthe apartment ~~
house in question. Imsoiar as the cover companies are concerned, ...
aiforts are being made to provide a backstop to withstand inguiries

from the press should the Cubans reveal this information. In view |


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000 Pa

S-E-C-R-E-T

ef the thinness of the cover, it is ancertein whether this will ‘Succeed, as
11, A cleared and ¥ tting law firm in New York has been briefed.
H by Mr, L. Houston on the situation with the though st that inguiries .
received by the cover company could be referred to the firm of ©
lawyers from whom no comment would be obtained by the press or _
yom other ingquirers.. The law firm has been briefed on the entire situa- —
tion so that they may be in a position to sct if any action by them |
appears desirable or feasible’ It would not appear that much support
of any kind can be obtained from the law firm or the inw ti rms in-
Cuba which are associated with’ them. — :

en -. 22, Insofar as ‘the families are concerned, one of the technicians

- —_ is a bachelor presently on home leave between twotours in Japan. 7 o.
: His father, a cook in a diner in the Boston area, has been conta acted . 7
by the Cffice of Security, and he will get in touch with Security if

he zteceives any inquiries on this matter, Secur by the sarme -_
token, will keep in touch with him as the Cubans reveal their i inten-
tions and course of action, =«_ Te oe

i re

; 13, The wives of the cther two technicians have beentold what _
kas Happened and are being contacted at least once daily by TSD i
staifers and their wives who have been briefed on the situation, A.
conference with the two wives was held in TSD'en 19 September te go
over the whole situation and determine if '@ Ware any j at,
problems on which the Agency ‘could
the wives are telling their nei aS bo.
trip, This story will be adiu sted dsven , what co rr
the Cuban Government takes, whether the aliases remain unbroken
and whether recognizable photographs of the individuals are r
to the press, ‘The two: wives 50 fhe hay takea the pad news e
well. : Y oe . - ae

a

RUDOLPH E, GOMEZ’

Q
oO
‘gy
177)
‘

i
i
{
i

e worn cette ere cnr eee ienanene nn eee,

~ SAT an men, ot em ge Ane e



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

AS,

. COG -

RELESSS CONT INGE

‘CHART. OR MAF RE REFLREXGE:
Seetioral vorozautical ubasts:

TASK OSGANTZ ATIC:

bet. oe 1OWSth Operational Eye.as

Bally By Cary vel, Sora cemder.

1. SETUATICH:

Daniel L. Cersvell (M4us), B.

Re Teransky (ates) ave ee) diay he

eeBe Bforts are being, nsite to a2
may cosur witheut advenue novite 2
Minaal, Mexico Civy, Svitessloird, 5

contingency plen be Porcsabotad to
)

emplcyzes.

The vortrelitag fants:
thit there: enphoye?s were in Uuos
pericd gninee their eapane thei:
pave Crna xcintat ued,
8 vntgl suth %!
then have paese

for plouning purposes the ©
Cisy or “other sreas”.

dep2eding on

hy reqaatc2.

2
‘Ww
A

Teegaing Gaiwp. Major

2

why

eibevnt (Aides) end Biwrrd
#28 he were Forged by

oe ry
ke

3 preveéare Ls
urd myg ta2 entire
BY syperentoy



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

ds _ ( Ci (.* oo -G- C ( nC

3. n&juest for biask transport ghd ineiade:
i. Request that RELIASG SONTENCENCY OvLad E242 de impleuented.
2. Port of entry. : - ae
3. Data, Local time, ara egxGicld desizel for pie up.
hh. Dosixed destinetion.

' g. Other reguirenents, de, ptretehers oF bunks in the event
exubdjests are hospital cases. : : _

6. Name, organization ond selephons mucber of rsqueating party.

Te Hane ond telephone mebor of KUBARK qantasts et loading
ard off-loeding points. - ;

oc. Tae Pollowing personnel sre knowledguavle end eharsed with the
responsibility of 4yating this pler: am
j. Major Richard I. Skinrer, 20/AsD/DB/?

Organization: Air Gupport Divisset, D/P

Home Phone: JE 3-1h05 ; a a ,
Office Phone: Sterile Merbers. pe 8.5285, BK 9-855

; - Rxtensione 6862,7654, 7307 7
Rol Line 1058 . or

2. Mr. Roberb Merrexo - . .
Organization: Air Sugport Division, Db/E
Bone Phone: JA 43555
Offiee Fhene: Same 65 ls.

3. Major Billy Be Cambell, Ceormonder, Tat. 1. .
Organization: Dat. 1, Ih5th Operstional Braluavion and
Training Croup, ¥elin Air Force Bane, Florida.
Howe Phone: 66273T _ oo
. Office Phone: Eglin Air Fores Resa, Florida 631590 ©

_ ih, Major Kenseth R. Burtea, C28 officer, Net. Re. . :
Organization: Bat. 1, aohoch Cper2tiens) Brelnation end
a ; ‘eainizcg Creup, Eglin Mir Yeeee Base, Florida.
Rome Phona: 662564
Offtee Fasne: Eglin Auer Foree Rese, Fierida €31215

» HeEeieRe8-T


--- Page 7 ---
‘
1

14.00000 - ‘ 7 oe .
: . a oe oo = “ss

B-B-C-ReE-T
~3-

D. Det. 3. furnish 1 C-54 ond crew an stenudby capacity until
further notice. StanIby capaclty is heroin defined as espability to
pooition the eirereft at any port of entry in cast, south er smithyest-
U. S. from Eoston to Los Angeles within 15 henrs.

BE. Aserrring the subjects will be released in Havena er Mexico

City, bet. 1 will preyere mission folders fer Flights from most
provable porte of cntvy to Isolation end Andrews Air Feree Base.

" RECHARD I. SKINNER

Distetoution:
Grig, & 1 - CI Stet?
3-6
3-@
3 Ore
(3-6
3 - c/Tsp
3 ~ CoG
3 - Ty .
3 - Cf .
3 - DrD/opr


