
--- Page 1 ---
sutea dt SS ete hagas

14-9000

SULT AMaibUs
Prieing in,

. AL

_.. Governigent coderente:
* § cetover. Lid4, lasting

- Colonel Peralta) Ot Gover niiont Colynel.
“106 (and dageiltyence Chief Coldnel Dorres atte’
malars) (raul wed and Aody a? logere

presen 03, 03, 16-2"

2. at the request of thelc
prefaced the operational brienmng with pried ‘deveription
of how the Us. Intelligence co: nbunlty operates, | vi the
role or CLA, of the need for cocpart-rentation aud security,
and s pecittedil, of how the foreguing concise erations

an it imperative ror tne Guateralaag ts fidep ne curit, pr
cautions vhich vill ensure that the iatorr nition we pravide
vey and the Byiat oSdrations) ve undertitas | are Cupar trented zy

within tke Guatenalan gover
“: os) by-the Guatemalan yovern::é1 ,
preseatatives in the field). 74

4. cOllowing tha tute uductory rears vuthined
above, I brief. the group snthe Tuilstructure, tae LCL
operational techniques jyand Spectfidaly, [) pct ainis amt
operations infGuatemala, ‘The vresidentlen se attention
throushout the Inieting and gnatiined.the, exluiits ‘close!
including the UL intelligence: requirements for Guatemala 2y
“and the jalvadoran “Caso Zapote" tile} wo,

’

4. After the foregoing espusifiun, Fexpluned.-
our alas in exploits the tilerg gagtivn with revard ¢2 the

7A Peet uit... sent}aspe ct, (he Ca alas and t e} uutrol on Gua- 2
versiuit) io this connection £ assed tur [ilusé eooperation ¢ UY
and courdination of activitieaf promising lal we shat
du vas duliaust ami avasdig reterence ty sarttracet lists 2b
and watci Uet.] .

py


--- Page 2 ---
as SNR
SAREE

LE

Thus, was ne
ivadog}s hich incladed ee chtef 27
ei the President!s inte

. SWERA-or Calanel : wiitin
fansferred,) une of vur B
in Guaterals }

tate 1 cvaltag itde a rather
cre covered the tolluwin, ooints:

“6. The tk lei of
in paselonal speech tn wi

, . ‘hits own long a.perience inthe GAL,-in Cuba
: - ‘and fa Cesteal Acaarica;

bh, sile euriy sarnings avout Castr. Jeo wnich |
soe. were diigre,yarded;
24

2 The extext to vosten Wuatensa lia has tived- tun :

t ta) in the DACY}te winch it fae

24 Covoperated)ia HortsGa,aiast Caetrod) ay and to ‘
which it has loused tuward U.é. -leace sup,

fatlure of the U.c, to tace igrennive: '

yainst Cuba and the need tor. taking a .
“hard Hne, . unciudiing the use of force in support a '

: military activity dy the-free Cubans ‘and the other :

+ Atnerican countries; 70 : . ae a

‘ea. vids anereciation that the Soviets will not be
willing to risa a nuclear war over Cuba, ~

ceo oo ( Condeianation of Mesico for her dealings with
. . : " Cuta, for failure to abide by her odlf<ations in on
ie : - the DAS, and for perialttin, the Cast roites. to
_ . - operate ‘out uf Siextco against uther AL rerican oy
countries; -

‘ yg. The need for action asainst sicrico; :

t6/pl


--- Page 3 ---
aA
. Uverrillas(in Guate vinta
ws : te “meet violence: saath v

 Cetunnition uf the bnportance f:
aa covercdin the irtelin,, and ul its aap:

xeferency to the case of the Geox

j.

. 10g
7. In roplring to tae remaresbr © tone! reraltd]

Isaid that se appreciate the cooperation{uf Guateni hay fhe cae
7...) OAghnd that se shall bo mutt interested in theeple
of the pousittlities la the present case. [added tast the matter
of usin, force avainst Qula-is a policy matter ou wnten Iwas |
aut competent to coment but that the decisions made by tho
’ United ‘tates Governnient-are tased on careful study of
detailed inforniation Includin, information oa Soviet intenttons
and Capat. ilites, _ wt wae

PTE REMI etude tmteae »

bray

d. At the conclusivn of the meetin (Berata)

. assed for a cou, of tha L Ul re juirements (which he already
* had ,one over closely) and toon the copy wath titin: tor tidy”
further, . ,

harold b, cwenson
Chief, ¥ as ALCL

“CeeRET

pl

