
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000,

EASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
+ -

| 2025 REL
e

“

- ~ \ _ ,
. . 1
3 July 1962
: : \
. Doe i
TO: WKH LY 7
FM: AMS . p if 4

i vi

dl

: 1. Per our discussion of 2 July 1962, Ieexpect that we
shatl proceed to transfer QJWEN to Baden-Baden per the proposal
in QLLA=1463 dated 2 February 1962, LUXEZ0489 dated 19 June
1962 stated that CoS would have the full details of the
capital outlay required by 23 June; however, the Information
has not -been received as of 3 July, The last cable to the

Station, DIR 18391 told COS to contact you directly on his
arrival on 16 July. :

2. With regard to candidates spotted by QJWIN, the
two whom he spotted in Italy a year and @ quarter ago can
probably be used if needed, if we can accept the assessments
of them by the Trieste Base contract agent, Magonetti,
Magonetti's assessment is contained in OTRAZ27542 dated
10 May 1961, The names of the two French candidates are con-
tained in QLILA.1226 dated 15 December 1961. No action has
been taken on7’these names regarding tracing or anything else.
My handwritten notes attached to that dispatch contain
fuller descriptions of the two people than appear in the

dispatch,
Pp ‘ oY

3. -The other spotting effort that can be made is
through {Hank Manfredil (TN) in Rome, {Nank)was well briefed
on the qualifications desired and the security precautions
to be observed in the spotting activity, COS Rome has a
copy of the qualifications and restrictions in his safe;
however, if Manfredi\ is told to proceed with his contact in
Florence, I Suggest that he be re-briefed in detail,

. oO

RE: ZRRIFLE

’

4. Frankly. all the rest of the paper in the file is
Crud except for the pay receipt which are assembled in one
envelope, J have already givend te ZRRIFLE authorization
paper signed by Helms and Skip has been given the QJWIN con-
tract, including the extension to 1 March 1963,

5.° The details which have yet to be worked out are
a, The precise method of contact with QIWIN
b. The system of drawing funds for Payments to him

mergen conta or him is u . cA

probsbly we coset yee tact for him (th should ETURNTO > only
Rl nd USE oe

_ Baktiot Hert

3/58



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

6. Despite COS LUXE*s viewpoint, I happen to know that

QJWIN can do more Spotting in Corsican circles whenever we
want him to, . .

oa :

AMS



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

_.:+., +The candidate: -no mame used: cirea 43-45, 1.75-1,78, strongly
aa “built, broad Shoutders, circa &5 kilos, slightly oval full
-. face, blond hair combed: Straight back thinning in corners,

“1. '‘thianing on top, rosa complexion, no eye color noticed, workers

- Lo hands, - nose ‘thin and curved outward a little, thin lips;
Sloe chin full but not fat, makes impression of a handwerker; has

‘a been in prison Sante twice (burglary) - name does not begin .
. . a . with A,B,C,D --otherwise would have gone to Fresne prison; not
knowa whether convicted; has own car; free to travel; 5 years
POW in Germany: M. impression: good nerves; composed; can

Open usual safe; would work with Someone previously unknown

to him; M. would use him: willing to use gun; did not ask
money; Hugo wants his cut, Lives 250-300 km from Paris;

legal occupation unknown, Contact thru Mugo: can cut Mugo

out with money, This candidate ready any time. Has no
Passport, but can get one. Can also get passport under

Phoney name, M. Likes this one as candidate

~ Saw G and G's candidate 28 Aprilwith lokal in Paris; G
contacted this candidate directly; candidate Nenri H
description: circa 25 - 48, 1.75 = 1.78; dark brown hair;

‘full, deep on forehead: shiny and combed back; half part on
right; brown complexion; not quite Square face; brown eyes;
heavy eyebrows dark brown w/verbindung between eyebrows; bridge
.of nose depressed, nose somewhat small; normal ears; mouth
‘Schrag when he speaks; small scars on left cheek and smali
‘Scar running from middle of nose on left Side; brown
‘hair on hands, no oe: well dressed; thands welt kept;
fingertips (ou ae 3 smokes (Pienek JO Ami cigarettes;
not a drinker: lives Paris; frequents Bar Le Corsaire, 110
Ave de Suffren; can be found there every day from 4:30 PM;
specialist in safes - own tools; also holdups; in Sante
Prison; belonged after war to Lyon St. Etienne underworld:
gave some facts of this which M knows to be true; wanted to
know if should be armed for job - ready to go to the end;
has a colleague with whom wants to work; not behing iron
¢urtain and not in France; would be expensive: has expired
Passport, but no sweat in renewing it: 4 impression ~ would
follow orders; better action man than Hugo's candidate, but
‘wot sure whether has safecraching experience to extent

Hugo's man has: Was car - Dauphine, beige (2) F2461HS75
(Paris #); not married, W can contact him at tel SUF 46-99-.
-this is the bar, M told him two weeks to three months (also
told Hugo's man the sane’ but Gaillord's candidate wants

. . to know in few weeks whether still hope. Could bring both
Candidates together into a teum,



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

wo 2 heng: . ‘ oot, 1
ae ay Ladle toulf ’ est ‘bets Le ts Contig. Nene _ \
. _ Neat: 4 th, [go r. AA fDbrb: sey 4
| HY optic? - faith in VoD In tebe,

_% fearstd le - .
Sestl on fib a, Ler, “model te #3
7 beth. aon Navoed" _ Menetarr Ay Aitisiedtly :

ned Liddrt~ cddpuom ban hiteh, Tenge CEP PEL y
hia bout Aslhvpa, Aa carey aa heey geal,
ped Onvotibiny som Oprritem eadenist orn,
Warde. « Lt 1-172, athe, Latf, ae
pea fe cf , Mick, pa ribo boeim pol hea,
Lomb. tneglodin fhtoat heb ah Ay Tenn Lape,
wattle Wyatt oes Yate lotrenn,
fw ¢d~ s, pyro fre itKa fer geste, hay
VOv8 fee AF. Ybor. - a ye fied, va :
Ss yo LOR Lathe fw cauk thle 2 A
[eye avn sci bar agen on ¥f
A”  s5heh five Mlkeye Carbignas C),
jofesidfacsle, Crue, _ bed take,
?
Aen bgt who nts aunt Ls plese
Aud Aoldie . ia OE! be they , fei tile



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

WE pte tetova
SN rapert td (fobal) — Fione palit
 Feplled, 1 Kucds thermoset, PooKy

PA ROR OCT) net Boge 39 orf cally
Lis hem inaly Bet. of ailreHe resol
ty Chapt * J Ions wiht age ¢ Zhe
(anbifite tfy- thy hare 5 repo

14 lik Te Co Ki oan «nef Cd. 2-45
ar 118, ate ugh ob feet ff Load ‘olla,
Ce £0 bile, atayh tt, geet fol four, dled
Asie igubel bbve ht fae hd Marr

An Corrit, Alacer An OG ane

eto y Arkye est: was Auphoery’
Asad, gee han y ted gay havnt
Att, 726, dif 5 chordal fut sent
Vil Bip veh: oxdosis a

Arabs vrbrg ; eich fe tee hétn:

Erin

a pestan
Cate Extee-e w feta hae igh Le pire
Z * Set “rool Ah ED = Absa all base gp

Jp Vertsue, freer: rust Bret, anlte,



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

dea

~ -

“est faporere) Lae Te wel». Sto.
Aw An Maes yj MW f. aiilfprtoaicing Pca of
neyo: compoutd, an Open acangl cafe ) acol

oo poset uf Rowmstart prevetanels pneafpng en ye

: bain, m. ttt pie bade s wll, Bose gey,

il. west t eoh rmety j i ese eenle
Aka ate Kite 199-300 bn i from
fives) heal beep LG, ‘slong
utuct Ta (is aye van buf eye
bet 9 # a [nevuts, yaa (aubitile
peels Any thie ; Yao ity r pare, lak
(om goto. Cron, ale pk pepentpe?
funder poy Mae. YW. Ashes Hs ;
rut na wands la. |

[s) Aveta cerhiLeBe 1h pr HE.

Libel opi; car: feted Mes
dombel He beer yy] mens Lex ; becer
ca eS 48, ATS 178 5 hehe. Loan hes
tat Usp on forbaeh gheus 2 ude Earl,

aT lan wae ober com, ters

fate Whaedt Ax; peo “4 Fa tare Cycles
owt Agron nerfed barony ML wht. Lyelyrted



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000

. -| i
dated [eB bs peor ) teeee. nowethat
aelads, sake de pechag’ ae _

wy cheeh. yt pel Bear iit,
fetmn putlle d neget on Lftecte ;
hesan Mito Aah, 209- Aeepyy,
atl brirred ~ A Avda antl hep
a fone lin iscebes voter
( 4 der thei Uy lO fiz oo a brihiy ;
Tym) | Ask, fre forge fa- Le
— Lpreacee. , io hut de faoflyn ;
oe Can be fost Phage ting tas fom
gstofm,
apedhalict wn Piha — porwr techs :
pler hg 4} ™ antl porter;
Alsped fe sate LP fyh a
ia waihegertss a. re seul dspace
perl th 5 wAcd, hy pases
tp he bree 3 want Te Anger
fatal ‘Le trwssl fy beh: >
nid, i (poy eB med, 4ash



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

4 _

| ela wrk of sash , wad .
Mb, Ayes cy OU he rence; -
ye ope’ 1 nate Liza.

fr Zopert, Ldhao emstn,
fegsa) “Y prtntusisey uae prin | saul ;

fine goboe AME, bet TeR, Rede
Lan Supile laudisbote bet. LeePods tk
ey hate fae capt ora ‘pereacr
pig asa He ele Ba, Lap ‘
La Paupluae, Aecgel 3) (2), 7], on woh wi a
[fra 5 a Frio , Mii. Cay
crest lain, let Li 1 SUR ly - -Jb —_
Ake Ao Lhe bac i LY ben .
3 alia AP Saupe (ter bill
Nuge ' fe (Wilda Hhe Cau 2) tet
Aubidl 1 aupihi{he urns hele “a0
hege An fur Hike hea dt fe Wea
AU bape be sted Ass A

Cau LNT - SS: ectP a

fhey
ee

oy
ee


