
--- Page 1 ---
14-p0000 a
4 2. | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

104-10232-10019
a 2
‘

hay be.

AA ABNICATION

SECRET PROCESSING

BARRED HCl INA Jie
NO UMOLING RETPIAD
ONLY QUALITAD

MEADQUARTORS to tw
Can uted Inst,

FRO

Chief, WH Division
““"“JMZIP/Operational - Contact with Dr, MIRO Cardona

ACTION RQURED REFERENCES,

For your information, transmitted herewith is a report of contact with
subject written by Theodore F, PASSAVOY, and a memoof WH/4 comments.

{END OF DISPATCH)

Gpy Anas LL
‘ eae

GATE TPL

19 Oct 61

SISPATOH SYMBOL AND NUMDER

UFGW-606

Attachment - 1

( choss 3 ReFtRtn 1 ~~ TO

‘
‘
,

‘ HEADQUARTERS PLE MUMBER

CLASSINICATION

SECRET -

19-124-25



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

et
om
Ham

10 Cetodor 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Mesting with Dr. 3:IRO Cardona on 6 Cctober

1, Dr, M4IRG arrived sbout 9:50 a,m, for the meeting we had
set at 19:60; ayain ho waa driven by his secrotary whom ho introduced.
As during tha {irat meeting, cha remained outside in the car, Cur

° meeting lasted until 12: 09 noon.

2. Fizet, be, MIAO handed me a note in longhand Heting the
topics diecuased with mo on 5 Cctober, These points ara:

a. Groupe conducting propaganda, ete. with Apency support
abould racsive their support and be courdinated through the Council.

b. A propayanda campaizn should be waged by the Council
almed at:

(1). Cuba, via a long wave radio station in Kay Weet,
(2) Cubans fa Miami and other U, 5, areas by:

(a) Subsidizing Diario de las Americas.

tb) Contracting for time on radio stations.

(3) Latin America, with a plan auch as the Cperacian
Grieta,"'

c, Underground Activities.

(1) Provision of monthly funda to Counctl for precuring
Cuban pesos to ond to the seven-odd resistance
groups in Cuba through rellable thanaels (such as

_previously sent through the Ualian imbasey),



--- Page 3 ---
tpeooo00

(2) Commando action as outlined in plan presented
to ine on 6 Cetober,

3. Commando Plan

Thon Dr, MIRO handed me a plan (in English) for clandestine
action prepared by hia military collaborators, whom he named ag
Colonel Manue! VARELA Castro, an officer of the Academy, Captain
Enrique DES PAIGNE, and Colonel (inu) MMONTEAGUDO, He stated
that they were of the BARQUIN group and had been prisoners.

With reepect to the pian for clandestine operations in Cuba,
ho stated that 300 men could be counted upon for coramando action, part
of thom here, part in Guba, Ho reiterated that a commande operation
was essential to boleter morale arnung the anti-Castro elements in Cuba
and in exilo ag well as to conduct sabotage that would further weaken
Cuban economy and the Communist regime, He aaid that for thie operation
U. 5. help would be neceasary in providing weapons, ammo, demolitiona,
equipment, and funds, He proposed that if this plan was considered to
have merit, that [arrange to have somaone meoct with hio military ren .
to work out tho detaile. After all proparations had been made and
material provided, etc, the operation would be purely a Cuban affair,
(NOTE: Plan turned over to Thompaon at our ue cting at 15:39 on
6 Cctober for transmission, )

4. Request for Arima, ctc. to send to Eacambray

Dr.MIRO remarked that over a rnonth ago he had made a requost
to Clark for arms for the anti-Caotro inaurgents in the Escarnbray, but

to date had heard nothing rolative ty the request, He commented wryly,
“Jack but never hear an answer." He said that the fighters there should
be oupported, Dr. MIKO stated that he had a boat (provided by us) and
@ means for delivery of the arms, Csvaldo RAMIREZ is chief of the

Eecambray group. :
COMMENT: Has anything been done about thie request?

$. Information on Arms Received by Castro Repime

Dr. MIRO handed me a long report which he aaid was brought
to him by the Argentine Au:baseador to Cuba when the latter came to the
U. S. at the tima of Fresident FRONDIZI'9 visit.* He said the Ambassador
would not divulge the sourca of the information but commented, “You will
know, ''
* Report turned over to Thompson on 6 October.

2


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

Dr, MIRO sald there wag no way to determine the accuracy
of the {gurea given of planes, guns, etc. received {rem the Soviot bloe
(ond Italy and Canada) but even if.the figuros were exaggerated 100 por
Cont, they would. still ba impressive, ,

He added that Castro is dally bocoming stronger militarily
with weapons and with a largo militia of close to 300, 060 being trained
to use them while the econumy coutinues to deteriorate. Perhaps only
half the militia would be effective. But that is siseable. Thus, he said,
the langer the delay in positive military action to overthrow Castro, the
greater will be the task, “We muet act soon, vigorously and effectively,
to luguro victory. Another defeat would be dieagtroua and would make
Cubans, Latin Americana and others bollave Castro to be Invincible,
Thea would come accommodstiona and even worse, tho implaating of
Castro-backed raytines in the hemisphere. And the U, S. would suffer
worst of all, being discredited for defeat and “guilt of interference, "
"In tha UN no nation would stand beside the U. 6"

&. Proposal! that Council ¢o to Cuba with Commando Group and
Establish a Government on Cuvan Soil :

Dr. MIRO then doclared that he was convinced that Castro
wouid never be ‘overthrown by all the Propagands, the sabota,s, commaada
valde, guerrilla activities, rupture of diplomatic relations and deteriorating
Sconomy, and that it was inconceivable to establish 3 Rove rnme at-ire exile
for nothing would c: me of it, that the only solution for defeating the

. Castro regime waa fer the Revolutionary Council to go to Cuba and estab-

Heb a government ca Cuban soll, aak recognition by all iriendly countties
aad military aagistance of its priipal ally, the U. 5., and that the UL8,
be veady to intervene immediately with ita Forces, ‘This would all have
to take place in a cauiter of 48 huurs, otherwise ft would fall, 1 recognise
that this ia a bold plan, but boldness ts necessary, Thare will be many
Fioke, many may be killed. As for myself, i don't care if die. [have
loat all my personal possessions and my Sen is & prisoner,’ He reiterated
that all must be well prepared in advanca, there must be no vacillation,
overything muat proceed rapidly, First, a commando raid in force to
celine a piece of Cuban territory, preferably noar Guantanamo, and immee
diately the members of the Counct! go ashore, proclalin a provisional
government, broadcast by radio to all natiana an appeal for recognition
{and cables prepared in advance wrald alge be sent out), request U, 3,
aselstance, and tho U. 3, should furnish ouch assistance at ones in ade-

quato atrength to ensure victory.



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

Before such an action {a undertaken, tae enemy must be
acftened by propaganda, sabotage, raids, underground action, and the
mass uf the people of Cuba must be prepared to accept the provisional
government through-propayanda, increased knowledge of the Council
and ite unifying efforts.

Dv, 1/URO asked ae what I thought of this project; did I think
that Castro could be overthrown in any uther way. ladmitted that
strong inilitary action appeared nocessary. I stated further that
of course hia plan would have to be studied at the highest povernment
levela, He preposed that he inicht elaborate a pian with hia militar y
collaborators, and I suzy ested that he do thiz 30 that it might be examined

and considerad,

Dr, MIAO declared that he was conviaced that this Counmuntat
dagzor in the side of the Statea could only be eradicated by such action,
that the U.s, ig and will be blamed for al! anti-Castro propa;anda,
sabotage, ete. and that enemy states will dencaace It for intervention
in Cuba, but that if the U. 5. yoee to the ald af a friendly revolutionary
regirae established in the cauntry and helza it defeat the Soviet-backed
Communist regime, ail friendly governments will applaud,

“Ebave no personal political arnbitions, ” declared MiIRC,
“Druerely am trying to chair the Council, whose cisston is to unify the
anti-Cagtro elements inside and gutaide of Cuba, Lf the team isn't cone
sidored effective, then chango the pitcher, But | believe the Counc!l must
eatablish itself an Cuban evil, and soon. Tine is acainst us.""'Ths unta
del Este agreeinont will backfire ayninat the U, 3. if Castro is allowed
to remain fn Cuba. ina year, after the politicos of tho countries ro+
coiving U. 3. sid have gotten their hands on U. &. ald, they will say,
‘Tharke to Castro, we got this,' And they will spead it as in the past
with s0 benefita to the sucia) and economic welfare of the paople.”

2. Views about the Judges and Lawyers

T queried Dr. MIRC ae to his views relative to the judges and
lawyers and their future status. He said he hoved that they could all
reunite and that they could be given ascsietance a5 in the past. He de-
clared that Dr, ALABAU was not qualified to be a justice and that he was
folug nothing but meking politics and trying to discredit the Council
and MIRC an'l VARGNA. Dr, MIRO declared that he, ag Prime Minister
in the early daye of the Castro geverument, had named -LABAU to the



--- Page 6 ---
44-00000

Schull

Supreme Court, but that now he considered ALABAU unfit to hold any

judicial position,

8. Membera of the Revolutionary Council

Dr. MIRO remarked that he had a meeting of the Council oa

10 October. I asked what elements now composed it and what he pro-
posed to add, He named the following as presently in the Consejo:

Rescate

30 de Noviembre

MRR

Accion Democratica

20 de Mayo .

AAA Independiente

MDC

Montecristi

He gaid ho had invited te Join:

MRP
Unidad Revolucionaria

and awaited their reply.

Ho would also like to have the Workers, Students, and the
Professionals (Doctors, Lawyers, otc.) come into the Council. He be-
lieves Batistianos and Comunistas and elements unwilling to cooperate
should be excluded, but that all other groups should be brought together

wndor the Council.

He contends that all anti-Castro activities, except clandestine
and military, should be coordinated by members of the Council, but that
the excepted activities should be known only to him (MRO),

9. Probabic Argentine Rupture of Relations with Cubs

Dr. MIRO dectared taat he believed imminent the Argentine
rupture of relations with Cuba. He said the Argentine Ambassador to
Cuba (Julio AMGEDU) was ordered to return to Havana jhe had beon
vacationing in the U. S, after FRONDIZI's visit); that VILLANUEVA, 8
Secretary of the Argentine Embassy in Cuba was coming to see MIRO
today; and further that he {MIRO) had received a phone call last night

en



--- Page 7 ---
oa

ig a”
Wake be

from a Spaniard (Nicanor FERNANDEZ) in Buenos Airea, urging MIRO
to go to Buenos Aireo to arouse anti-Caatro sontiment of the poople,
inasmuch as somé Argentine action againot Cuba appeared tmminont.
(FERNANDEZ said he had alroady written MIRC a letter.) MIRO oays,
“Gf course, I cannot go. Ihave the Consejo meeting on the 10th,
Furthemmore, Iam going to Now York on October 11th or 12th for the
SIP (Socieded Interamericana de Prensa) meeting and have been allotted
12 minutos to addrésa the mooting. " .

10. MIRO to attend Homage to LACE RDA {Brazilian who
Precipitated QUADHOS' resiynation) on Cetober 15

Dr. MIRO said he planned to remain in New York City (alter
31] and 12 Cctober SIP mesting) unti) October 15th to attend the homage
fox LACERDA, the Governor of Guanabara province in Branil. MIRO
probably will etay at the Park Chambero Hotel, but will advise Clark

of hla location. .

I commented that | would probably remain in Wachington next
week in view of his plans, but that I might go to New York City to meet
with bim; if so, I would get in touch with him and arrango a meeting

timo and place through Clark,

11. Propayanda Commission

Tasked Dr, MIRO about his ideas on the future organization
and structura of tha Propaganda Commission. He stated that it {a out-
sido the Consejy and not under his direct control, although the Council

accountant hag been passing funds to it. He said CAR RILLG had rosigned

ae head of Propaganda and that he would like CONTE AGUERGO to handle
it. He claimed that MESTRE had not done anything with propaganda,

12. MIRO's Views Relative to Supreme Court Justice or PRIO

being Recognized ag Head of a Provisional Government

Tasked Dr, MIRC if he believed that there were many anti-
Castro Cubans (both in and out of Cuba) who favered PRIO, or the head

of the Supreme. Court to be the provisiona) president if a government were

to be established on Cuban soll. Ur. MIRO declared that tho revolution
{a a fact, and that practically nobody. wants to go back to any former
Fogime. The people in Cuba would rosist any such poasibility, He do-


--- Page 8 ---
14-0000

nounced PRIO's activities againot the Council and ita efforta to unify
the anti-Castro elements, He said that the geople should be given an
opportunity to elect their chiof of state after Castro's overthrow and

yeostab'ishinent of ordor in the jeland:

13. Cifices of Council (Consejo Revolucionario)

When questioned about hia business and private telephones,
MIRO gaid, “The businegs phone is aleo In my house. I have no office
except in my house, but that phone ia always busy (JEfforson 2-4680),
So uge the othor prone (JE{faraon 4-2751) whan you wish to call me,"

'Y need to have a amall office somowhere away from my home
because all tho activities there are driving my wile érasy. 1 want to
find something modest so that no accusation can be made of ostentation -
merely a room for myself, one for my secretary, and ona for meetings.
of the Council, ete. The FRD had a place but at that piace also waa the
proas, the refugee center, otc, It would not be satisfactory, The FRD
ie now practically dead. It was the forerunner of the Consejo as the
unifying agency of the anti-Castro resistance," :

14, MIRO's Views on Goordinating the Activities of Cther Exile

Groups :

Aftor De, MIRO reiterated his view that he should be the
channel for funds and cocrdinating the activities of groupe outside the
Consejo such as the Students, FORD (Labor), etc., t said that Lunder-~ ~
stood that some of these slementa were unwilling te function undor the
Cansejo; and that in view of that situation, did he considor that an
Activity Committee might be organised with a delegate from each of
theae groups and under the chairmanship of a member of the Cansejo,
This would serve to coordinate their activities, give thera a tie-in with
the Conoejo, yet not make them subservient to it, Dr. MIRO repliod.
that this would merely vet up ancther Consejo outside of and paraliol to
the existing Consejo. I did not pursue this further, not having enough
background of these organisations to be able to discasa the matter

effectively.

15, Telophone Conversation with MIRO on 7 Cctober

3
Before my departure from Miami for Washington on 7 October,
I telephoned to Dr, MIRO [rom the airport. Ho appreciated the call and
eked if I had seen in the morning paper the action takea yoaterday by

Aer


--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

early
oY t ved
. . \
the ALABAU Lawyoro' group in proclaiming Julio CARCERAN (one
of the chiof justicos in oxile) aa "President of Cuba at War," He exe
pressed his indignation at this unilateral "political" move by ALABAU
and his adherents among the exiled lawyere, and Judges. Ho added hie
best wishes to 12 and reminded me that ho would probably ge to New
York on October 11th or 12th for the SIP (Sociodad Interamericana do
Prensa) meeting. I replied that I would appreciate if he would contact
Clark after his arrival to give his location in New York City, and that
Clark might havo a request from me for an appointment with him, if
this seemed dasirable. I suggested that in future phono converaations
I would ba known as JUANITO. He agreed with pleasure that this would
be a good procedure. I wished him Godspeod and he replied likewise

to me,

16. Comment

During these first two meetings I endeavored to estabilah
myself favorably with Dr, MIRO and thereGre refrained from bringing
up detafla of budget or opposition to any of his specific proposals.

I listened, ackod various questions, and he talked at length.

In future meetings, after I have gained further background and
havo more policy guidance, 1 shall be able to discuss with him apecific
iasues and endeavor to reach agreoments or compromises, aa may be

required,

