
--- Page 1 ---
OF 1992 |
ON RECORDS ACT

NDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATI

0 a .

| 2025 RELEASE u T

"|t04-10247-10097

an ro . . . AN TO GIA
n . . oeeeoard Use Only
. Do Not Reproduce

ode

nn

Si et 1P-t Ch

15 February 1965

MEMORANDUM For THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting with AMLASH-1 in Paris, ;
31 ;

January to 3 February 1965

following Subjects were discusses at the two meetings on 1 and

Orozco, ‘Who infiltrated into Cuba on 21 Dee 196. . of
Orozeo, according to his We, went to Cuba to rescue (Soa
Vasquez Merey and three others who were hiding tn the

home of a woman rote chor ta Cabreray? ho lived at(x
z y

Orozco's capture, 1f he has been Captured, Presents an
indirect threat to the security of AMLASH-) and more
direct threat to the Security of ANTRUNK~-10 since Orozco
in Jan 1964 exfiltrated through the rat line established
by AMICE-14 (Higuelito), Upon his return to Cuba,

. AMLASH~} will check the above with AMTRUNK-~10; and, if

Still in hiding, Ff the letter ¢ NAFU~9 mentions a
&00d and Pleasant return trip, this will mean that Orozco

1s not under the contro) of the security service, If the _—
letter talks abouth long, tiring trip, this will indicate

that Orozco has been arrested, AULASH-1 was also requested

to send a report on the above and any complications which

have developed or may develop fron Orozco's fofiltration,

b. AMLASH-1 Suggested that hig nom de guerre “Charles,”
be

Up


--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

ate ‘

c. AMLASH-1 was given a resupply of S/¥ developer
pills and carbon, He planned to take the S/W material 5-4
back with him to Havana. J¢ AMLASH-1 again reviewed with |
0% WNSNAFU-9 and reminded GNSNAFU-9 to turn over to his
case officer all letters regardlesa of how received. froa
AMLASH-1 to either WYSNAFU-9 or letters that may be addressed
to his parents-in-law°? AMLASH-1 also agreed to send 5/#
_ out in letters addressed to Jian Ventura (AMWHIP-j's : —
business partner) in Geneva or Rome, AMWHIP-1 was briefed
to inform Ventura. that any letters he recéived fron .
i AMLASH-1 should be immediately air mailed to AMWHIP-1
- in New York. - Since AHLASH-1 will probably find it i
i necessary some tine not to sign thé letters to Ventura :
u: in his true name, AMWHIP-) was algo briefed to inform ,
. Ventura to forward to New York any letter received from —
_ oo Cuba. addressed to him and Signed by a person unknown to
. . hiw. S/W letters to AMLASH-1 should continue to be 5 i
addressed to Ernestina Acosta, Edf. No. 526, Apt. 8, 04,0
Esquina Calles 25 y H.) In an emergency a letter can also :
be sent to AMLASH-I's Rother, }

“a, AMLASH~1 was again debriefed on the cache that had ;
been put down for him in Matanzas. He repeated what he ‘
had previously reported and attempted to answer most of
the questions in the AAVE cable, A cable on this subject ;
was sent fron (Paris)to Headquarters, info WAVE, on 2 Feb, --
AMLASH-1 was requested to send a message either through : .
his channel or through AXTRUNK-10's S/W chennel reporting
how much of the radio equipment and other material had
been recovered from the cache,

to get the DGI to assign this man to Caracas, Venesuela,
AMLASH-1 couid think of only one possibility, an individual
known as Gustavo Gonzaled,0O AULASH-1 has full confidence
- %tn Gustave and justavohas previously been approached on
‘Beveral occasfSns by Pinero to work for him. Upon hig 064
return to Cuba AMLASH-1 will check to find out if Gustava> bat
can still get himself recruited by Pinero and then be Ines *
sent on a mission abroad, hopeful ly to Caracas. (AMWHIB.1, fe.
who also knows Gustavoyewi i} Pruvide the background tnfor-
‘mation upon his return to New York, )

ft. AMLASH-1 reported on the upcoming FEU elections
on 10 February 1965, AKLASH-) stated that Crombet, the
president of the Communist Youth, will become the new

Way . .


--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

(oA

the Paris Station]. ANLASH=1. also agreed to attempt to find
‘Gut. and pass to. the(Paris Statiom through (nISNAFU-9 the

-3-

prosident and that his man, Lapiro Mora, would be one of
the vice-presidents, | (A cable on this subject was sent
to Headquarters from Certs. . 06

«. AMLASR-1 was requested to check with @1zz010)
regarding the precautions being taken to prevent sabotage
of the locuotives being shipped from France to Cuba; i

‘ specifically, how carefully do they check the placement - j

of the seals, are they special seals or regular lead !
seals, are there going to be any additional checks once :
the locomotives reach Cuba, will they drain the of] and i
‘lubricants from the factory to the port, and do they run .
the locomotives under their own power or are. they towed. :
AMLASH-1 agractd to attempt to develop answers to the above

Frequiresents and paces the information to his contact in

names of the-:Cuban techs, tyaioing at La ‘Rochelle.

h. In a general discussion regarding the persons with
whom AMLASH-1 had heen in contact either personally or
through letters, AMLASH-1 mentioned Alfredo Portela.
AMLASH-1 stated he hdd received a letter from Portela and
had in turn written to Portela. He considers Portela a

“friend which was the only reason for writing to him. - oe

{. AMLASH-1 wes debriefed on Cuban Intelligence
Service personnel. A cable on this subject was sent from

@ariadto Headquarters.

74 i
j. <A cable was sent from @arisd to Headquarters
suggesting WAVE send a S/W letter to AMTRUNK-10 stating:

“Este tranquilo. Carlos regresa pronto."

k, AMLASH-1 was asked for information on ‘the fol-
lowing persons:

(1) Samuel Gonzalez Rodriguez-Planes, AMLASH-1
reports he is a member of the Ameijeiras group and
is a good and brave man,

(2) Antonio Lusson y Batlle, Chief of Operations
of the General Staff of the Occidental Army.
AMLASH-1 reports Lusson is an independent and rare
type individual who keeps to hisself and doesn’t
involve himself in political matters, AMLASH-1 hag
beard nothing bad about Iusson,.


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

-4-

(3) Cadte. Raul Diaz Arguelies, Chief of
Artillery of the Occidental ‘rmy.

(4) Blpidio Baez Bigo, According to ANLASH-1,° :

Baez is a trusted Fidelman.

(5) Luis Manuel Cantillo Toirac, Assigned to
the Cuban Embassy in Madrid and one of the security

people. He was formerly assigned to Brazil, is young

and has for several years been with Pinero and the
Cuban IS.

(6) Enrique Oltuski Osacki. Oltuski is a close

friend of Faustino Perez and his stock vith the regine

rises or falls as does that of Faustino.

(7) Sergio Totlon, Code clerk in the Enbassy in

Paris, Tollon is staying in Paris at the request of
Ambassador Carrillo.

1. Gastro enteritis, water pollution and unsanitary

conditions, AMLASH-1 states there are no real problems,

although the scarcity and lack of a balanced diet do
cause some problems. The purificetion of water has been

a problem which probably has been the cause of some of the

sickness in the country.

m, AMLASH-1 did not believe that Aragones had invited

im to fly back to Havana with him in order to get bin
ack because of any serious security mattor. AMIASH-1

did state that Aragones was concerned that AMLASH-1 may not

return to Cuba. Since Aragones cleared AMLASH-) for his

trip abroad, he is in a way responsible that AMLASH-1 does

not defect and returns to Cuba. AMLASH-1 feele Aragones
does not want any problems with Fidel in case AMLASH~1

decides to stay out.

n. AMLASH-1 was unable to provide any information on

the political developments tn Cuba in mid-November and

Decenber since he had been out of the country since early

November, AXLASI-1 was asked to check on the problems

between the opposing factions tn the Cuban leadership and

explained the issues, the background and personalities
involved, :

matters creates re
Cuban offtetats. Basically, the Soviets are not respected.

o. Soviet advise or influence in political and economic
gentment among the alddle and higher level


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

te

‘and. control in Oriente where he has placed his men in
afl Ls

Guevara restricts hi

‘and very hard worker, one of the few, acco

. ~5- .

p. Rank of Cuban officials under Fidel tn terns of
their influence in making national: policy. Raul is still
the heir apparent to Fidel. Next to Raul is Che Guevara.
After that, no other official, according to AMLASH-1, has
any great influence dn the making of Cuban nattonal policy.
President Dorticos' yelatdonship with Fidel 1s good since
he ip a hard and serious worker, has good sdstnistrati :
ability aid is able to vork within the general outld i
down by Fidel, Raul Castro has some political tnfluéace

E nce, but only Fidel personally has any
D. ; ni <¢ in the rest of Cuba. Even withia the.
military Fidel selects and appoints high army officers,
D ara.i6.still strong in the ecoromie field and
has ‘not suffered'a decline in his influence and authority
because of hie earliér policy of industrialization.

mself to the economic field and plays
He is serious
ding to AMLASH-1,
who has worked seven days a week without leave since the
revolution. Emilio Aragones holds an important position
as the organizational secretary of the PURS. He is the
official who was always at the affice of the National
Directorate of tho Party and has contact with all the
officials in the regime. He plays an important coordinating
role, Faure Chomou has been accused of organizing former
13th of March Revolutionary Directorate people, but,
according to AMLASH-1, this probably based on the fact that
Chomon always gives jobs in the ministry he heads to DR
people, Because of this Chomon today controls to a large
degree the Ministry of Transportation. Of all the ministries,
the DR's stronghold is in tho Ministry of Transportation.
Other DR people who continue to hold important positions
in the regime are Alberto Mora, Ambassador Carrillo and

Jose Naranjo.

AMLASH-1 and AMWHIP-1 were unable to develop any
specifics, but from their conversations with Ambassador
Carrillo got the impression that Carrillo would prefer and
welcome a transfer from the Embassy in Paris to the

Embassy in Madrid.

a very small role in the political field.

q.

ry. According to Emtlio Aragones, Anibal Escalante
ig being considered for a job outside Cuba. Tne job will
probably be in the commercial/economic field, but a
decision had not been made ss of November 1964 as to

location,


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

“e ob

s.. AMLASH-1 again reported that he feels(Oriaado
Blanco,)Consul of the Cuban Bubassy in @ern> is .
approachable since he is unhappy with the Cuban re ime.
AMLASH-1 also feels that (Enrique Rodriguez Loeches
Cuban Ambassador in aba 088 approachable if approached
and developed. by the right person. Glarina Garcia Gonzates,)o°

- assigned to the ‘commercial section of thé Cubano Embassy
“tin QadaQj  AMLASH-1 feels is also approachable and feels
money can be tised as an tnduderent. Ambassador Carrillo,

| AMLASH-1 feels, if the proper person developed: him, could

\ probably be compromised with Fidel. . He is a character

_ Mand coutd easily be entangled according to AMLASH-1 in

wa compromising situation. Ambassador Carrillo is a close
friend of Lucy Echevarria. .

2, AMLASH-1 was 8150 asked information on a long list
of other requirements on Cuba. On many he. was unable to pro-
vide information and cables were sent to Hoadquarters on the
requirements on which he did provide info¥mation.

Nestor D. Sanches
WH/8A/ AMWORLD

cc: WH/SA/EOB
tet [sal cue

File:

AMLASH-1 201

Internal Op

