
--- Page 1 ---
14,0000

104-10226-10023) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

5 . igs ATE ot
ol i. ony 7 ! eve OSTE yo
wae) mos coler rtd MATERIAL . Senet :
: POCTHUIS POW MENR US CHARGED TO YOU. . a “tase
: .
i 2 ha N THES DOCU MENE TO EP/VRCUIVES & Loe
: PISPOSELION SFOTION, RM GEESE ON OR BEFORE wee
PATE INDICATED, Ae -_
3 1k YOU PORWARD THES DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER ed
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION 228.5 07 _ ..

DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM

Te A719 use eae icus ef OrTLONS.

DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.

Foyaa'y
DLL CUN Cn |Na. pol.
4s. Cor€e .,
eee oi
. :

ott af
a

i emer nn Li ed MEL MaDe he i ht Neda We fal lah wld ase

YOLDER: _f nn

REAURN TO - 6

£ /JARL Rr ose

wf

ROS SOME ERATE

km oe

—_—— et : .

ro 6108S secret] CONF DENTAL Ty INBRMAL —)UUNCLASSIFLED p

ory) +3 pee wee gree era a
~ - * oa

yee
BS Pa tar

m.
{ seqraceg

“A

;
{
i
ns as $ i : “8
+ \ 4 & % .

a
y
pM

}



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000

we

fay

et ay
Hoe - ¢

UND Cle Convervation at tue Vepartsant of ta on 2b carch L/52. .
LEC gait were jeserr. voye., Préobasanw. aot pauser Lion
Lua at sloner, Lloyd ane orion frou. Whe

o frebemer. ot Sut raturmne: fra 9 tts eres? snd pald
he nad tires cvveaus to nake alaul kr. 22 oroer Vicy ware
a: Tollowss

Ye Ho cele wet in thre Crock (.tacers, . ve Prev and ottiors
complainei af va activitioc a. t.9 eurincers af -%.  lnese
terinwer., .6 off, sanetime. ett as overt st au lornes am
wint Uo omzastigz 1! gtver countrie: rottin ower, with refuress
win ub clearing ety. tre et. (kaos. it Ltowantrr. clener
woke stro oT, gay 27 bat iis uc bolt Cay Lane seweral
tines trash be 7 reuorters sber incite. .@ sat! teat ne
volta pevest Wace warriae. tinh Wie views «5 lf andof Vo4
were ldantiea: c4 %e rouls.. iabs ant a. ae Gbhocuer peat

Grab of tit tio Peers in fC WY War LIST Ve ee Danton. kl
eget peeifie

ant tanth ame erway cad how ile 9 be
cmoslom, if mt ws Bot, WAS COhvSd for 4

20 Frtman wis
around ‘er
wilitn xr @s. & 0
1 CONOR LO Me
tre MMbenw a ore.
‘weevar, ineurmicwec oc 6
fin W warm wer esp (mec

22a, BCVET LTRs
rite aml ras

TC fred &

tome OU
vherun
ete eae te dnobrce
unite. 6, cra-

w infi.trate

Clete i poe Be oo wee
GP oorean gai -
Fa t. idee? BOR oh. PAPEV : Gt.

Ds ee
aptiiayw th
ruddanec, a 27a: 2 Da.
woud te ic Tre r ier ne

fet Guero a. ter bhey

«



--- Page 3 ---
14-0000

Stee

Haas

aed

replied tust in fact tS did receive constant and frequent ioliey
muidance but tial the wesbers oF tio toy otaff of Ket wore Looking
for tre type of policy ruldance wile: did fot ode - a kind of
overall ;lobal stratesy coverin, e-ealtie Ineldents and eventuall-
ties, a bind of polfe, ~uldanee wien. rolally neltier wid oor
soula be written. “reeliieally ne had a objection to s.ewlay tis

— tye peasle ¥o4 solkey dae.

Fimalli, iere Koller questioned the advisa Ality of ,ubting the
new pissian Gaiiittee under tie Urusade. Ho pointed out is fear
tuat, wat wlto RY and AFA siready wkler tag Crusade, Wo Congress
would won believe thore was cotiing tele for VA to cover. tire Joyce
rose to taln guoction oxelainin: the nvecosity of nelping Adairal Kirk
to tind sae covare He pointed out biat Mesurs. brafvn and Levine
nad been detailed to acain taat crusade jatlicity did not cive the
diprescion tuat iPE aml ici and ay new" rivate” racle wuld obviato
‘the necessity for the Volov, and assure! £9 lor tua all Crusade
publichty, posterg otc. would avold ils joalidiite. «Laner men-
tloned nico ceutro to tind Mt:er cover for ta: new Cormittes ari
thare yas uome talk of foumintlous. Wy Ienttor wver at, owever,
teen found at tie wanent and it was a parcnt that Acairal alrk suat
have some mower to quautions wile: arn gulaltled te ulre re nucler
anowored thie arcument by reiterating his foars.

TAWA T Be HRADRS
ciulef
siiional Creanlgathons My.iden

cht: TN. B/eh

Orig - OC (thru abies Ph!)
ec = DD/r

ec « F (Mr. Yoor)

coo ty

ce + Cid

ec >

Nee ee

are.


--- Page 4 ---
14-0000

oo

cm ee me et in ameter mie

Be TION C-2e

R WORT. BITY

STANGARG Fortaa pan. OO ——

to 4 S/P = kr, Joyce Date: 7-br-ery 19, 1952

From 35: = Vr. barbour i?

subject: Fund Hemorandun vo. +62 of Docomber 2], 195] a-teeching copies of
~ decument:. rerarding the activities of tue Central snd “estern
“| Europea. Conference (Llavik-lajer Group)

Your attention is invited to subject menor:
speeci by Jerzy Lerski, Vice Chairzan of the F
Vorving Committee in the United States, prorosi
dorestic political pressure group of Anerienn re
TNurepea:. stock, In the course of his speceh, !

endorses tne official statement of Aims a'd Prineioles of :44

of /mericans of Centra? and “ast-luropenn Descent. This st:

particularly in its paragrani. o. 3, pronoses to.% their ob!
+ snoild be obtained through "unified political acticn,"

Sun whieh rustves a
Coimcilts

ro The Department is obvicusly in complete s:
objective, namely, the overthrow of Communism,
renl parm in the utilization of it funds to
pressure frotps; esunctally, when sich crowns will s2lf-avoeciiy
political and election contests in the United Ststes in orcer ws f-
their objectives abroad,

froups Which are sponsored b- or suprorted thro:
C2. be restrained from participating in or as

.we.. groips sho! d be cautioned, in any
declarations of intent to interve.e in

2/19 ‘62 ae

hei ‘1 fQ62


--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

N\
.
\
\
C-22 Cc. 7
cS fee
PUNY 3 OY dav CE ry Mee? PaaS) VATA? coe
a

See mbor 32, 19°

2%
™

Attached to tris tesorendum are coptes cof décounsnts
rezarcing the activities of the -ontral and faotern.
:

Enropoan Unnfarence (Slavik-vajer croipde

Chreke)

oy
S
“Zz
on
o
cs
he
t~
’



--- Page 6 ---
14-0000 a :
a a eee te an rc a ee eee ee TT

a NTTAL

sir, -

Gn behalf of vr, A, vretatonu, ‘hairman of the last
confercnca, and [r, vcnttantine otitch, -uairsan of the
Serbian “ct nal comedttee, osiir- an of the next maoting
of 4:6 “on$ral and .astorn -urcpann vcnferane@, I an f£ne
vitine vou and vour politiaal frtonds to a reatiny of the
Olly ce lah wALL be held on Tuesday, Cecesber 10, 1951 as
tha -otel tllard, ixecutive ‘oon, Pennsylvania Ave. and
Lyth stey Tashiniton, Neve, at preciagly 3 P.M.

é
"
+

re)

“Agenda of tha veatins will bas

ae

1, hoport of the ‘ocrotary teneral on tho nectinwa of tho
Soneral foxnittce on tha action of the cnt on depertae
tions, in ashingten, New York, Faris, about the press
econferenzo in “ascington, otc.

.
ve keport of ir. Jorey Loraki (Tice chatrnan of the
-Poliah Folitioal Council, orking “ouszittea in the U.S.)
on collasoration with twericansa of ‘entral and last
uropsan ; oscant.

ahs

3. x@vort ef dr. ¥. Stanka on orld ‘niversity,
fhe report of sr, Leraki ie attached to tiis invitation,
very sincerely yours,

(stegnod) Lr. Juraj tlavik
Sneretary ‘eneral

wep
1

(cu d.a7icans ef ventral and .aat -uropean Tesceant!

Yrom Jargy Lergki, ‘lce ‘hairvan of tke ‘olish
Political Counctlte orkin; ‘oantttee in the
Lede, CLE A ttreat, “eis, tpte li, sarin:ton 3, “.

Tne last three decades o” tha past century and the first tro of
the present ono, -ark the period dn wich millions of the tarovertohed
peasants of oentral and astorn surupe cate to the happy t:ores of froo
Aserica, ‘here are ot at least twelve eatilion Us, citizens of
ventral and «ast ..ropaan desvest. 2:18 Lay of courses, 2 creat careful
ostiaate. <ongrasesan Kannoth i, eatin. of Xer:aster, Ys Ye, 17 hia


--- Page 7 ---
TT ra Rim nk te ta Rees meer Bey Ao om ERE Te trae okt be allem ceeite eta Beene A an | a ade othe mR ca Be

\

14-0000 - eee

ay

futonsion of “emarhs An 008 fee rantt. ai “ert on foptesber
Stn, 17°1, ives the total number of thease “loyal americans®

Aa 20,959,709 .00f think it ts rather too iich en Gatinats, ‘van -

if wa wo:ld include all Jews fror those areas the nusber cosld

hardly be vicher than 15 nillions this woul¢ -e 19% of the total

population of the ‘nited’ :tates, Tis sork seeking, @oononte

omi-ration trea our countries was mainly concentrated in the big

eities an: tre crest industr 3s areas, of she sixteen

\ast and sidecestorn sta ria, -Jdersoy, “olaware,

Meryland, .o3t ‘irgt 1a, Wim York, Connecticut, thode Taland,

fasvachusetts, cicatvan, hebraska, (hig, In4tena, Wlinots, ise

congin ant ‘Anusaota, tn soua a, tnore states these wurepeans

cowprise strut ons trird of the population, T218 applios aspaeially

to hin cities such as vnieazo, “etreit, “leveland, Toledo, i itta< —
burgh, “cranton, Luffalo, -ilkoa “arra, ‘ronten, tiawark, Canad :
hew ritata, ete, ne sho le sleo seatiton that not less ths
FAfth oF tia tds entsration manayed to fisd vork on farns~-t:
sich states a9 iietousin, Vinnesuta, Illinaigs, itohigan, Hobraska,
‘asenabusatte, and xow fork, “oe

cha potivical impsrtance of tels creat aegnont of fmorican
popslation 32 steadily ticreasinsg in the lsst twenty years,
Nearly al @ resosctive sroups <ers concerned ebout the hone~
lamig of thsir fathers ant vrandfathors and becane very aotive
certints orlé oar it, Althourth, sith the succeeding conor .
t'ird-or ever fourth, t"to intorest as waned, ‘ue to the natural
Woakening o: ties with the: "old countriaa*~-theee now Americans,
the gona and srandsons of the poor “antral and ‘astern Zurepean
peasant outr-ronto aco congolous of their ansestry, iducated in .
Aneriaan collczes and universitias, they ire gradually onerging in
Awericaa p.biiea Llilos their old inhititive inferiority acunlex is
racidly diss searings ict us study the astin-toa “slephone -trectory.
It as aetc-Ashin; that at loast every twolft: nave is of “antral
ebStern -srcpean dossont. f[ an ast a8 faatliar tith other national
8fFoups ane their acnievenunts, cut as far ae -oloa are concerned, ve
are proad to “sve Mr, symosak as one of thu -ovarnors of the -ederal
sesorve, ater -ukowaki tho newly scpotnted -epaty .irector of RPrey
ure bruk the zayor of tur slo and er, Cseiusta ‘ayor of Toledo. 7
a2 sure eizilar successaa can be clained by otaer vroupa of our
Soatral ana -astern .ur.;ean blow, act of these ‘sertcans are very
helpful al preporly arcroached. o ‘save :eard recently at n ree
coption cf onaral . ore.omorowski a atatarint nado by calor Alfred
Se vheeinokxt a “anocratie Ton-reseuan ‘Pron yew Jereay who offared
Uke Willi-cnees to help tre oxtled leaders cf all of our EPuupe, in
our efferts tu sberate our cart of tha world, .inmtlar statatenta
hava Soon nade Sy athur von resazen of iaiieh desoant,

he estial alvancosent of sur s-ertcan trethren ts viatble

nearly ts 22 aphereg of ocyertcas Life, 014. t.e sole excention of
proparania ise. reat, radio, ‘clavision, “ellywood, tiau % oven

there @:s@ precreas is ‘a ta cctheed, 18 sact “Yelda we hurech,
Riveres tes, and co.ktice the -rea of &*tangazent its ragarkable,
anscieaye of oentral ax! castern 2 0pean . @scant rave v-reoved to be
BS Arat class roliacle clemant ea aolétora ent eitasens of tre
Snttad tates -lrins tie tse worl: ares ano the praesent vost dancors .9
Aveoloiitcsl otr.- le sith ‘oanutiaa,



--- Page 8 ---
nae ate te ade DC PL em MRaN He me ae EO ln eee

1408000" sere

share are about eix uillton +.ricana vi relish descent fa
. the United States, They e-natet anproxinately one hal’ ef the

Gativated to:al of tha Central and Jagtern -+POL@an Crenp. lovaka
and Ukrainians conpota for second place, \aving atout one ctllien
each, tn the vnitad States and Canata, :ithuantans an? -umsarians

Seem to de next in line,: -it'vay be taken fer wanted that all of

Our nations) “roups have at loast @ hundred thousand < arican brothers
in thin country, ft is, an? ft atould be a tronencous aseot in our
gtruvvle for liboration, ‘nm take wo own relish croup 2 exeaplo it

Ao oncoura-tn: to krom that there ara already ten consreseven gf rolish
Sea) ° iadeuss wius

Seacent (asven ocerrates, three :
Samoerat of .r)ehd An, spoakt $ wlaski rally in cetroit daw

‘olared a few weuks a-:o that “all econzrasssen of roliah Ceseent, resarde
lees of party atliltutiong, ara united in ae far ag the onuse of 'ree
folend te conedrned.® According to him, as reported br tsa rolish
amarican Journal Ho, i?eevol. XL of covanter Ththy. 1F lae* lsd -olash
Ateria aa solons are workin: tovethor to devalidate the Teheran and
Yalta agroenents ani to persuade the ‘nited states jiovernpont te éo
on rocord favorinz the »rosant wWeatern dguntarics of reland.® of
other -ro:pa . lovar 8 hava eno “onvrasaxan of thoir depvartemyoung
and prominent ur, atnik from the fourth -ietriet of vi ropota,

Our <sech frionda can clata an old Oxpurrenced seubder of tre Foreign
Affaire omeaittos vr, Sabbath--“ozocrat fros Tllinota, Sern in

rag anc another Con. recsnan ar, *‘tefan cLed recently. ‘Vp to now
Jvhere never waa any Jo. “onstor Wae sould clain ‘entral or sagtora
uPopean ancestry, althcuch onator Laser vas bern of “peorcslovak
Yerman parents, ‘ormer -over.or -tangen claing “sech ancestry and
Jovernor Lauscha jloventan anceatry, ‘hcre are sev-ral .on-ressnen
of Jewteh extraction who worn oithor vorn im cur part of tte sorld

or are of tha cantern “uropesn parontaxse, -9 a of then nay te alee
considered as potential ‘riends cf our BUTE,

aaere

A typiasl orca isation ta whieh we aho.l! be intercated tn our
work i9 shat of rolish american‘ pPO88, OF ADLishad early tn lghh
with the natn -urvoss to Velp voland In revainins her Liierty and at
tho aane tise to serve {4 So eat way the leony rance interests of
tue united tates by poratiny eut the dancers -f£ VOLrEnisa and Suestan
ivrortalism, “y takdas such a Waterminad stant at the (ime -Aun the
slogs ivdendehap ath ois Scecaalud creat asters Ally vas preached
tn s@hin-ton, thay ve rundured a Valusocle sirvice to tis CUnNtPZ,
feltoh Ansricas on:rens ts A sort of federation of all 1 ree of
ioligh Aaertcan Orsabratt nag set e° toe coins of course insurance
Sorpantys sith -o.tsh sattenal slitance, *Q°2,°0% Beaters ant 74
aiYifon of ca-ttal’ aa he vost poworful, cth=re are cxitural, udu
Gational, or chkaroh and vateran roupo, They joined to-etrer in a
etrusclo fer Justteea ror solard, rolisheteerican “OR; rese se the
Cooperation of about 30, -olteNeAperioan Fewavapers tn tis country,

veudyine the problen fF found that thore oxtet paraliel o-rantese
tions of other national ro pa. Their structural basia sre lee vory
pimilar, ! beoaxo better @eyuatnted vith the amertoan Deniartoan
hederation, ‘Though oF.anisod as lons aro ae 1995 et lersiang vonrrention,
“20 cw Nas aaon: ite principal Atue ana euPrases: *feo ponpertemurtiin
the Constitution and lawe of the .nitod -tates-estth All sto t-"lLisnve
Bovenents eiuin: to tring about independence ‘or "WR RPY ve well as
liberty and eoll being tor ito secple and te do @vorytnis- -ceritle to
protect tre Rusca rt sta anc C&amorship of tho ‘un-sedas Siac laced
Pore gre outelida of eeBOPy.® Ae tha olsen er actuation be



--- Page 9 ---
14-0000

| Yedoration, kt tao a young

i et RE
ve ante het arya shen eee Ramen en Mea a x

the visoreus and colorful p-rsunelity of charles

fcass a9 ia the funsarian oduration by iba
gectiva earetery tenhan .. “alosh from ashineton,
[P9999 Cazsittee of Amurica te another very
sACOr the chairnanohip of young ooonornret une Lev
getown Un vorsity. -

mere Tha Te
active heey
lebvrianszy fron i¢

lagationa torvotaor with the
Aa rilean .sepetsoeiue Corry Pasa,
ovak Leacuea of A erica are

The aLove manticnod thrve or
Syelorussian = Ancricsan ‘smoctath
Uneeed Asartgan Ctresiians, and th
Bporeoring a Tederation of Alurtonna of Central eré ‘ast Luronean
Leeace tth tha “eadpiartera at 127k ye Ttrdets | Ketieg Jnahin. ton
unien ts at the ance time the fe. of tha snorioérellunvarian
organisation in Ata initial period of
its officora vlested on April 1951 at the

Madson nertel - sew fsck onferesee ore Stephen ve. Tkaton (Carpatho=

Ruthenian)--ryresident, -r. Lev -obriansky (of Ukrairian descont) <<
Viee rrosifent, -harleos hoemarek (of rulieh desocant:--troasurer.

Heubers of tne Aoard of .irweotorss stephen Te Ealezh fof ‘unzarian
_doacent), John Ltghayonack, thilip itrobak--Necordinz “ecretary,

tir. Loaine for Latvian descont), ‘av, “*ilvijo -rusieste fof Croatian
Geacent) and vte;hen J, Skubik (of Ueratuian dascent}--Sureau

hanager, Josenn A. Jackovics fef “lovak descent, was +ederation’s
Seooretary “sensral cut accuaed hy othar o' fiedra fer ‘19 tendansy to
turn the oderation into a vere tool of kan: ublican crarty maahine he
wan forced to resign, Tt is t to be ovvrlogkad treat the ledoration
ia at the corset under stron kraintan f}ucnoe. Ths offfoors cf
Ba “oanl oP Tirectora cauplain bias yr, “osmarak rever attended a
weatins: of, t* wetpe ant thae ove, chorleg courke froa‘thke ashina ten
Cffica of te joltsh w«srican ‘cnress de, uwtises oniy in the character
efinn ol@erver, ois al sence fo facto of tha -olishesé-scrioan (o- Pess
Sorarently Aazicers te i lara axtent the ‘aderstioz's astivitios,

{che ronays Sor tis s& aenco will :o oxplained orally!.

wcatious a-tivitt

Acaordins tc an cPfiatsl ctatamnat of 4has an’ rrinctples of
Tederation of fesrieaas of “ontreal ant fast uropesn eacent ado-ted
et the “oard of .itrectors “avticg Nell an “ashinston ca ALsust 17,
19.1 there ore as foilera:

1, To exert avers aoffort to cefend tre conctitation of our
Amorican -ay ¢: life, ‘Te en‘ae ani oxorcies evoerr woasura of offers
and resuuree tcrard thie daaisivo defoat of austian orvuntat
inperiealion wiregh in ils renemuia ogsancs “saos a acrtsl threat to
the mors] and tutelloetsal ‘irae tan faintyvtions of vestern civilie
satian an wate? 1s posited our sricelusa inerican var of lifes

?. To coordinate ant taplernent tno conson ant ast.al activitios
of the numeroua sorber or o isaticona ropreoanted ‘eretn rithin tha
scope of B UnLTied sol: tical action arlonted tovars © eyetenstia
Fealieation of t.19 basic objective an! tne eitultans vrorlievice
extension of tne s,dritual aici agence, ang « ntinuatier «° the porving
of cexuplatate will La sixply a justure of denatorial tlessin-s
engendorad in cur Falk of aachta, t:@ formila of sclfedeterminod
freesgen ari tre tiantia <Narter,



--- Page 10 ---
14-0000

to sorve and asslet throuch ch uniftad political action
the a> ropriate azenctes of our Sovernaent and various collaborating
American antieconnuntet orctacisationa in the dieszeninstion of
authontio information on Joviot luneien tyranny and atrecity behind
the tron curtains Cent. surope end asta, in the promulcetion of
necessary st obal setwerk of ontte
Coseaudist oi} Te, ia the Soraue
laticn of politica rhe requirouente
GQnd asrications of :th 2 allies, and
in tho yorsistent cod ‘and othor -antie

format

fon of a

obs
“peoples av Q
‘action r co

tdenocintio influence sad croups in our dosestia environnert,

a he 'e prosote the feourtty und welfare of. the “Intted States

dy Lasteting upon polleiea which aro shaped tn terzs of 3 ecrupulous
and forthrd :nt observance of the sacred nrincijles easbedied ta the
aforonentionud motiments to the litoral human spirit and salon will
inaure lastin; peace to all tho nations of the forld, treludins toad
o? on.pal and caatern wurepea, naaboring Approkinately 159, .00,390

People, .

. {to arse our lovernmont to asak tha restorasten of scveroisn
risdte anc selfecdvarnecat to the nation iiah nave bean “orcibly
Geprived of them and to secure the éxort f the fandanentsl right
10% selfeSatarminition for those nations w=10r the past been
ventral and

f hava 708
fconled tite rijht, partioularly in the countries of

4a@atern -urope. . . a
an

._& Te dspel, on tha happy eceaaton of the Literation of all
peoples from the yoke of -ortet ansstan Agporialion, covernnental sofion
to fulfill the cuaranty of free and unfe-tored elections in these
Countries under the supervision of the ‘ntited Nattons ani with strict
ro.ard for conditions of s»opulation CLatributton existing prior to the
institstion of the Kuseifioation policy bent on tha axtination of
the national identities of tne Poapeotive enslaved countries,

Te Reoogniain: the twofeld navd, vise ridding 211 vountries
involved of itxplanted ‘soviet influence, together with ultivate solu-
tion of territorial noundary @lapulos, 1% La urged that strict priority

of action ba oxtonded to tha rormor consideration,

8. To abot foraarylly the realisation of the Frecediss objeatives
and ooncvnitaatly c-nirsvute to ‘n@ prevanttun of # ceonorally
¢teaotrous world wer 111 through the Va rorous advancoxent of psycho=
lo.:teul) sorfare, wits particular erahasieg on euratagtial trorevanente
in tho status aad function of the Yorce of Amorida, rososadin: proclas
mation ef ‘nurigan Jriendship ane Support oF tha sideratin: vovanonts
@twarrins throughout the wida pertp.eral uronoan ant tatatte area of
Nonetussian poopies Auportaltattoalry sabjucated an the soviet enpire,
and deninds sor trus resrosentation of these onalnved peo:tes in the
counssia of tle “nited vations,

. 9. Ts gecure naximun and Unetiating aid on tye part of oup
“overauont for the cantfold operibions ant the rotontially unlinited
@aransion of tie ANJOP SPuand ueronunts Lahind the iron curtatas of

Zurope an Asta,

Taeueh cany oF tne Proolainsd also seom to be ddentasal with


--- Page 11 ---
14-0000

‘the rederation, regardless of sone

r@ also at the nom.st several sorteva costacles
for cur slosa co ir Dn wo Pweer our 615s and 30 “ederation. ‘or
two ArT e- ferent ational zrs.pa, scze of the
Mattourlities pregent in 2... have sot tnetr counterparts in the
-ederation a0 is the ease of -sache,  sten.ane, }ounaniaca and Gerba.
Tho efforte are rada to brine these natticred /Foups within the echose
of the “ederation, Gn tha other side ‘kraista “SarpathoeKathentans,
syeloruspiane, and Slovak astencniste are uot represented in our
Committes, It shoul¢ bo strescod also tis sone of the correspurding
Mow oniuration -roupe, of the last senticsed nationalities sre botag
ecnsidered by our friends from 1.25 as BAreGPeFative jue to their
soparstietio tendanotes, 2 rsalise tiat- tse thorny crobles of the
Sndependenca of the sone of tha mentioned xationalities oo 14 hardly

be at the prosont soaeat tatrccuced in 02.5. A would-be taclined to,

sugsaet trat as many of our izzedinte, aias.ere sinilar -te those of
substactiel cifferencen we should
take advantasze of auch a isr bod7 of orzasised Awarioan friends
eacerly Intordsled in tig Liberation of cir respective countries .
within the wholo area of Sentral storn «.rop9, The sane vould apply
of ecourea to all coxponent national orza-irations of the *ederation
euoh an for tnatance Pelloh Aucriean 3: gress wnich is sot yat closely
linked with ‘he Yedoratien, J sould suczest that ae all our ZProups
havo already ecotsblisied their liaioes officers to appoint ay ison
to Tha edorstion of tacrteans of ‘contrai ant taat suFopean escent
in crear to be iaforped atest their activities and to reprogent there
eur point of view, seeh as ehoparation say ve of a creat isportange
in unany fields, 1 a2 sure that sll -thess tucricaa or-nninatirnos vould
be willing to halp us in riein: bafors tre free scrld the problenaps
oO: verortations an. forced labocr in cur cert of the torld, a9 our
relish amertean Jonr:réss ses vYory hoi,ful ia tringins tne Katyn
Forest masaacre inte the itch? ef the frea epinion, Lat 1s u90 ou
A4meriean brothera nut only in scch othereigs vital aervices as
sanding nilllona of food and clothing parzels behind the fron Curtain
or sinning tene of thousends of affidavits an4 jeb assurancas for
Utaplseed rarsens, tet us ecorerste with *-o92 as close as possible
in tia vost inportant politieal orobless of car stras:le “or freedom,

thoaa of curs thera -

Tne principal polizical tse. facin: ss in that reepact ta
that of pressing for & "Liberation Folrey* of & Vntted tates snd
other restern rortora, 2th tte approach of “evantar 19%? slectiosa
at da becoming olviaus to all cf a that a: #21] be of axtrene inpore
tance tor the eauso of cur 'rea sho WELL se olectad ae the nes
locislatora of the “nited =tatess is sliece ve aro et allowed te
interfere inte Anirican desesric politicos, es repreaon'sttves of sup
Countries wa sre daeaty interested in wrose hands the “atw ent the
futuro of the world evante is caaRr br abe 25 ¢he yoare $o cose, tt
28 now a conmorplace to state Wat covtet «issste and the -nited tates
WAll decide the fundazental, untvorsal leases in whieh cir countries
area 60 nach eoncerngdoa! tierty cr levery, .¢ Solteve ¢ ty that
tite should bem cotter o Correo: interest to se@ ant te the eltigens
of the tod tatao, Tt e::l4 be ore thaa furt a shortstsatednasg
rat to runitaa “atin e 39 ‘@ctatve atrus:ie for the very Oxlstence
of Our nations: wa are lucky te yosseas here tewerfut and umd stantin,
Aitseg ba as Leaet ls wilitos scericar Voters ¢:; enatrat~ sectera

. sFepean ceecort, “ae, are e@ycelly aaser as ourselves in tringiag



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

CRT ee ce a entemerem ete een cet EUR 5 pega ene,
7 -

frecdos Sack to our part cf the world, As food Amorlear citinana,

; taxensyers, evl‘iers 24% werkera thoy sro fully untitled to sustain
us in cur e'ferte to i:berste our countries, -erardions of party -

: toh
raxe tz itean

' efhlisaticons we ehei36 asuicrt our fnithfal friends on

‘ cur enemies, Sucy a > r oat a Ts

LéCour Tnicoes in the < of tr S sartlYey Fet, 97 li oandi¢ ates

for the neat in the :ouse of :opresentativoa or nenete and gtate
“overnorships, rsyerdless of their party -ednpeteney, heve been asked

. for thetr stand itn tnat estter and their record of votins was ahocked

from thet point of view, “sch is tho basic techniuus of the araneure

ereiyn @liairs 40 wor't be oither

clicy 1n tite country, Apzlisd to

& nov thiug in tne (nited ‘tates, It 16 a woll known “act that the
orcsertsed Jews of New fork onc other big 2merfean citios tave nontly
ecenipituted to tho xiracaloss reeanur,;once of the freo state ef israel,
{ -Fisheim rieane susteis vizorously the national -¢! fer a. United
“ paints The three *hyohenate" ~roupe of dzarleane‘arnane, irteh

hand, *taliaus are mainly repypcreible for thea eventful avcliition of

Rozo of Entiers rolicys nuty In our caso,-~a0 do not want

to Costedés anything; our aia is cunstrustive., @ need our Azvorigan

friends and roletives to es psurate sith ue for a posttive purpose of
Tt way Se ie the United “tates the uost powerful way

Liberation.
f° chen-ine thea eat tre: f anarioan policy. dus Faspoat of

-ilnontar

T ga@ no Faason why alllions of Asoricans

their future lusislatora erat s:and have thoy taken in re-ard of
Lideration ef our countries; (tre you. Cor, are you a. ainet, or ara
you Just neutral*)-<what ceve tnoy cone to materialiso sach » liborae
tion tn their past activities, what and in which vay do they intend
te do in future’ Such 5 qsestionraire way no very useful in reviving
our igeua besore imorican 3+ litical circlan snd the wide vablic .
Oyinion, ‘te sore of ue t% e2y accn too dold an inithative, Hcvevor
Af we really are of tha ozinion that without the spoedy liberation of
Contrale ‘astern uropes-tite arznificent country of the "“rited tatee
earcet survive o:ther as s neppy and free land then by the raising
of the Liberation cauoe wea sre in this respect not oniy filfhlling
our duties towards our res-estive countriesdut aleo a vorthy aarvice
for the free poaple of savrica,

> ae


--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

. 20 Marc w9se WI

WVCPAMRM FOR: Chief, “outheastern Burope -irieion
‘ Chief, Lastern Furope | ivisios

ae eat) Future of ‘trastourg Frese, Eure

University tudenta

1, Attached hereto {s a eo-y of « letier I am
forwarding to Ur, Tyson an this subject,

“<* B, Chet BF fo on record os having e“sised the

former ase officer of TIP XIC that FE shoul be

eff “ed an orportunity for evaluation and eorert
sorearing of etutents of f* origin for future potential
operational ue, on the understanding tha? no etriert
would be apr reached for this prozran diring his seimited
tera at the iniversity, ‘T provsbly hao a sisiler
interest ia this a-tter,

3. Thta es-srandus te te oBk thet y a von as
inforved on 4 aontinuin- basis of yar views ot tric 2 bLjeety
and ale: to 1-4 you boo th t yo can expect fron wo tho
irforsatian whieh shall cone to us ip renly to the attache

vant.

be Any coments wi {ch vou nov h. ve on thie aubject
ard wild rive to m either inforeally or '7 eas secu, by
15 April, wriid be arcrectated,

THA VS FATES
Chie?
Tatorn t! mal Cryants .t) ms iivision

Attachment

Crofi. Vably
MAstributione
Orig & 1 « Adresses
1 cro
2eRt
2 © Trofect fle -


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

i
t

nee

apae

_ ES Cite eS

Slee

nin ulin oan * Aithch trier rei

In rey rover wWyf at

tes

20 Paren 1552

7 asec

fear Levering:

T havo real with ruch interest the account you rece:tly
seat te Mr, “acewood on tho Unireraity in “trarbourge

T huve aleo noted thst in a reeset Fund “e-srandkn

" ~ (Wee IKE), the que tia ves ralaed a. to what shauld be done

with the .try:bourr ctu ‘ents afte: they have exr letel their
otudlos, shoule mo o cortanity prevent it-olf for their
rotumn to *lip-ratec” couctries af their origins

Ta any coco, this queztian wlll be of cortinuing eancern
te beth your oreantiation amt oure, acd I hae that v9 cvy be
wutunliy helpful in slar: ‘nz hoy wa can make une of those
stuienty aftar the eomletion of their ctuties in Stracbourge
Tosartec this effort ve shoo3-t acrpactate receiving from you
@ list cf the present stu‘ent body at “trarbourg tocethor
with docrachieal dota ant exrested ca ploti.o o° stuty ¢. tee
for each, Ve ehxl: also like to hav a otate-ent as to the

~ tyra of contract artors! inte -lth the students an! ac te ary

@lization 1 posed ura those wh» enrclle I should Itke to
ecuss this yoo tion vith you fram Lime to tine and vertioue
larly after recciving the infcrstion herein rejvested,

Ry continued west ui hes

Tineorely,
OLlver Ha-twood
Croft vty
Tastrituti as
Adyes>ee @ Adcro.see «2
Re Cio
2-8!

1 = Trofect file”


--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

ee ae RN TO AME a a EEE

> 1
UMCLSSSIFIED RESTRICTED SONFIRT CT HAT sreess

{SENDER WILE CIRCLE CLASSIFIVaTION To. and: BOTTOM)

y

CENTRAL IMTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

[_Jinrormarion Cl) stenarure
(Cheriton (CC Jotecr eepur Crewe ~
CC Jeomenr (_)ereparation of reecy [_] orspatcn-

(_Jeoncurrence {Jee coomenoation CJerne

REMARKS: = are any of the officers of this organi-
zation on our cleared consultants list?; I
believe you understand the situation, which
is that it may be a good t ry a direct
approach to this On behalf of NCFE.

Prom. Baa
M, Se . Jane

SECRET CONFIDERTIAL RESTRICTED UNCLASSIFIED

Form NO.
sep tear 2074

acne ne os mame menis S eet ean ncaa tinal tn scm rans an AP

at ae Slee

eee natee PERO ioe Fs


--- Page 16 ---
we a eR = he ork ence tine He Eon worm ml

1400000
me me nee A Let Rl TN Teme eae WE Nab aS ot ce ee ate ee er A Ee Be
uy
. Ey
- we
: ne AMON

19 Kareh 1952

taek
'

MEMORANDUM FORs Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
“cups Bote Crusade for Freedom and Nattonal Infomation Bureau

1. On January 10th I called your attention to the fact that
the National Infomation Pureau, a reputable investigation agency
which conducts inquiries {nto charitalle organizations and advises
large donors, had given an advorse recomicndation on the Crusade
-for Freedom (see Attachment 1). Tals catter has now risen again.
It may be that 1t would be ulse to undertake a iigh-level approach
to the Bureau throug: yourself or Genoral Smith, for tho following

Treayons

Pye

According to an acsreement with us and with the State
Department at our recent mcetings, Crusade for Freedom will bank
heavily this yoar on donations frou corporations. They ave now
discovered that these corporations rcly to a great extent on the
National Information Eurcau's acvice. Several corporations have
indicated thes, according to their practice, they cannot give to
the Crusade unless it nas the tlessing of the Eureau, and you will
note in Attachment 2 that one puch cormoration -- Barnes Nanufactur-
ing Company of Mansfield, Ohio == has written to the Crusade citing

its doubt.

2. Meantimo, members .f the Crusade ‘ave rac conversations
with D. vaul Heed, Executive Director of tne National Information
Bureau (see Attachment 3) and he tas insisted tiat ae cannot report
that the Crusade 1a3 cat the basic stendards in pailanthropy until
his Standards 7 and # are met. Tuiese are the suilication of an
annual audit and of a detalied annual budget, the prime reyuircoment
being the disclosure of totals.

3. You may want to read this Attachment 3 with care but I
cannot myself see any manner in wiica we can meet these standards.
Tierefore, I believe that it may be necessary to make the ap roach
to the National Information Hursan described above.

wee

“yy
o
{


--- Page 17 ---
capris Fe tule +

14-0000 ae
Fe ST ee eae a

eLUhay
e2=

weer

y The officers of the National Information Bureau ere ag

followss
Board of Diroctors
Allen Wardwell, Honorary Chairman
Faul Le. Foles, iionorary President
. Valontine E. Macy, Jre, Preaident
Ralph He Hlanchard, Vice-President
_ Randall.J. Lofoeuf, Ize, Vice-President
Craig R. Gnith, Secretary
Ellis Russell, Treasurer
Edward K. Bachan Mrs. John B. Hennoman
Janes 0. Blaine Edward J. Keyes
Mrs. Sidney C. Borg . Hugh Knowlton
. Allen T. Burna Alexander Lindey
Harry M. Carey Arch Mandol
Homer Folks Mies Adelo W. Horrison - \

Maxwell Hahn John B. Niven
. John M. Shaw

D. Paul Reed, Executive Director
B. D. Burhoo, Rosearch & Advisory
Mra. E. R. Goodwin, Research & Advisory

Do you know any of than?

TIOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisationa Division

CIO: TWB:eh

Orig ~ Addressee (thru ADPC & BD/P)
lec - GC
2 ge -

3 Attachments
l- NIP recommendation on Crusade,
2- Ltr from Earnes Mf2. Gompany.
3- NCFE meno on wT.



--- Page 18 ---
nite pCa GTO i

SO ee mmm gE ae UE Ty DCT ROE alent Tee EN

14-00000 aa ~

pe ted GO2.

10 January 1952

i
--- 2” MEMORADE: FOR: DEPUTY DIMECTOR OF GEIRAL INTELLICENCE

a SUBJECT: Nationnl Information Buromu, Ince

1. aAttrched ore two surveys fran the National
Informstion Pureau, Ine. The Netional Information
Burenu is s reputeble investiration agency conducting
Ainquiries into American orranizations which request
funds ince. the public. It advises donors on whother
the org-nisaticns are worthy of sipport.

: 2. The attechments contain the remots of an .
“ Snvestication into the Crusade for Freedes and the .

frmricen Cormittee for a United Europe. Note that the

Bureau's recornendation in respect tn the Crusade is

adverse, “he fmerican Co nittee for a United Europe

on the ether hand gets the Bureau's blessing.

Plaies [enter

TUCMAS W, Pi.ADEN
Chief
International Organizations Branch

ad ee 2
Fry |

ta
if
ee


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

re nk rd

I,

NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.

IMPORTANT .

This report Is a privileged communication and-is strictly for the contidential information of the
person or organization ty whom it Is addressed.
“April 27, 1951

FLLCAN COMMITTIY Ot UNITE Roy. .
337 Fifth Avedue
New York Lv, Sew York

ORIGIN AND PUI DOE: «American Comittee on United Purope, Ine. was inoorsor.ted in New
'y 1949, Stated puroose of tu- Comalttes ta two-folds

York, FetFuary

In Furope to "1, eneoursge the ideo of unity and lend asaurance thet a

unified Furopo will have the aunvort and friendshiv of tie people of the

United Stetezy de give desporutely needed finsnoial sup, rt to groups - an
such a8 the Zuropean Movaasnt - working in Furope on dehalf of unity.”

Ia America to "1. give Amsricans a better understanding of the steps to-
ward unity whieh Furope hes already undertasenj <. encourage elvic, edu-
cations: and other grouvp to study their implicsticng and the aeans by
which dmaricon policy can further tte wergy ani finally, 3. as specific

issues srise, the Comnitter wil. point out what we Anericany cun do, ao
individuals and as 2 nation, to help furore ualto and thua to help therselves.”

By vay of background information, the Comnittese strted in its early days:

"Despite Europe's recuperati.n from tne visibie effectr of wartine dom
vastation, »ntiquated nations: barriers t. unity and progress atili in-
vite dissster for ali countries. A continent divided into seventeen se-
parete, confiictin,, soli.tical ont economic vockets vresents a weak and
vulnerable flank, perilous to world pe.ce ani securitye

®Four decades of bloodshed ani economic deterizreti.. have taugnt the neoples
of Furope th t survival is tmcosoibie witnout unity. As never before, they
h:vea bonded together - etnteruen, trade unionists, business leaders, church~
fem and educators in a dosen nations - in tre soverent for furopean unity,
Althcuch determined to accomplish Union, they foce many obstacles.

"Convinced of our staxe in the success af their work, the American Caanittes
on United Europe believes th t Americen eusvort snd enc urecemcnt can be
decisively helpful to the realivationd® this objective. Leaders {n Furooe
heve confirmed this belief, ona insist th.< tne time for maxious eftort {5

at hand,®

PROGRAY aND ACTIVITIFSs The Aserican Committee on Calted Furooe desoribes itself as "in
thorougn agreement with Winston Churenill"s assertion thot 'We must spread the knowledse
that this thin, ts realy possible...We must ereste a elim te of cofaion.'® It will also
Speok to avoid pleading for eny single precorerived scheme or precise pattern for

Puropean Union, consetous trot the nature of Union must evolve from the needs and aspira~

tions of the peoples wno vill unite.® .

a es



--- Page 20 ---
14-00000

—_— —_
NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.

a
—

: “ IMPORTANT
This report isa privileged communication and is strictly for the confidential information of the
person or organization to whom it in addressed.

we
April 27, 1951

AHF} ICAS COMMITTEE On UBIFLD FUPCPR, INC.

Grants huve been ade to privetea , rou; in Europe working for Furopeen union.
have been oelocted wich heya, in the ocinion of tie Anrricer, Comalttoe un Or.ited
Europe, conere?= rengrims for (1) etren thenin, the Counedl-of Furope #6 a- political
outhority; (7) su:pertine beetle elm a: the Morgcall Plem and tre Military Ald Prograa
within the Atlentic Pects (3) inciugicn of Vertern Co rmany ino unified Europe.

Groups

The major grevp receiving Comuittce oupjort iv The Furopern Movement, an overnll or-
ganication composed of crix crrenisottions of privete citizens in Furope, which cleima to
hive helped in7luence the goverment: of Wettern Europe to cstablieb the Council of
Furspe in 1949. Europeun Movenent hoe initiated conferences and resesrch on econoxte,
cultural and legel suertices tevring-on unton,

In the United Stote: the Comzittee has jublished st: tements on Europeen unton by furopesa
lesders, 2 Meveletter wit) & efrecletina of soma 2,500 copirs, ewameries of proceedings

at meetings of various Europese grou;a, and public opinion ,olls.

The Committee ai eo aponsored lecture tours by Peul Reynnud, Lord Leyton, Sir derold Buttes
and Paul-Honri Speok ond single seetures by Winston Caurchill, Robert Schunan end Paul

Vag Zeeland.

The Current prozren is es foiloves

Continued fund-raising for su::ort cf Furopesn grouys, particuler y the
European Movement a6 6 center of work in “urose for + Union.

Publication and dictribution of addresses, wtudle: and reporter, end
eponsorabip of meetinys at strict Luro,ean stetcenen may give Americans

a first hend account of the vork abrond.

. PECEINNTL:« The office:+ snd Bo rd of Diractors include tie following: Chairman,. **{iliew
J. Donovan; Vice Chatroan, Sdllen Wb. Dullecs Secretarj, *George S, Frunaiin, Jr,; Treasurer,

' Emmett F. Connelly; Executive Director, william P. [urkees

‘Rayeond b. Allen *Caories h. Hook Carl T. Mixon
Charles 6, Cheston David F. Lilienthal *Prederick Osbora
Lucius D. Clay Herbert ©. Little Kurt ¥, Pantser

3. F. Connety kobert =. Mscutre *hobert P. Patterson
BR. P. Gamamky Walter H. Mcrzulre Waiter Bedell Snith
*Pavid Dubinsky Stacy Mey #arnoid J. Zurcher
*arthur J, Gold>derg *eorge Hebolsine

a. Cravford Greene
@ Membors of Frecutive Counittee


--- Page 21 ---
14-0000

<
ee meer neme -seme

NATIONAL INFORMATION BUREAU, Inc.

a,

1

IMPORTANT.

This report is a privileged communication and is strictly for the confidential information of the
person of organization to whom it is addressed,

a3e

| BMERICIN COMMETIF” 02 URLTED FUFOPE, INC, April 27, 1952

FLNANCES: A financial sudit for the nenrly tvonty-one month period from inception,
_ Pebruory 16, 1949, to Octuber 31, 1450 shows: cus contribution incone, $210,915
. disbursesents, $172,072. Distursewents includes grants to Europenu grou;o, ¢76,6513
. Furopean conferences, $11,963; Popular education, $19,674) funderaleing expensen,
926,201) ahd cdainistrutive expenses, $34,585. Cash balance, Uctobor Dl, 1950, wos

$17,846,

Contritutions to the American Comsittes are reported to be exenpt for income tax
purposes. - .

Budget for the your to October 31, 19751 totale $150,000, of whieh £100,000 fe for
European operations.

: COMMENT AND CONCLUSIONS It is difficult to measure the influence of orgenixzations under
taking to influence the mass publics howsver, he can repo:t thet the Burecu imowa of no
reaso:: why those intorosted should not contribute to this Comittee.

cae

NATIONAL INFORMATION EUKFAU, INC,

cnt TT



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

vabee

LFTTPR OOF COURT TIN

If reply refer

 W-/FfAZ

13 March 1952-

Tear Freds

Yhank you for your report of 5 arch 1952 on Horvat.

‘Attached hereto are copies of the o.iginal eo: respondence.

We should appreciate your meking a direct acknovledge
ment to Horvat on behalf of Hr. Levsy as requested in his

* 20 February letter, Wa have acknovledged the receipt of

Mr, Dewey's letter and have indicated to him that we vere
referring the nattor to appropriate hands,

We should appreciate receiving a copy of the reply
which .you send to Horvat, .

Yours sincerely,

Ol:.ver Hadwood

Attachment
Attechoent wis hinded to dohn on 12 arch 1952.

ClO/MB8erbgno from ADFC to DD/P of 13 Harch 1952)
Distributions
Orig - Addressee
1 - PY/Ex Asst
1 -cIov
2 - RI


--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

_ Karch §, 1952

HORVAT, Pavie

y Pavle Horvat is of Slovenian orifin, atout 50 years old and was
born in the Prlekija district near the Hunearian border (formerly a -
part of. the Austro-Hungarian monarchy).

Horvat became known durin: the thirties throush his numerous
~ . manifestos and posters by which he attempted to organize his ow <
w . political movement. This "movement" was labeled various names at
pe . different times. At one time it was sinrly referred to as a "peasant

movement," at another time as the "Slovenia Secticn of the Croatian
Peasant Party," and still later as an “inderendent Slovenian peasant
niovement." He never had, however, any following and never set up his
own electoral lists. On the other hand, it is true, that the Croat
Peasant Party of Dr. “acek considered him as one of its trustees in

Slovenia for a short period.

He earned his living as a farmer. He also had a small village
-erocery shop and occupied himself in his district with "interventions,*
that is, performing all types of secretarial services for the peasants
of the area, A.ong other things, he undertook to organize the
transportation of the seasonal. workers who went to France and
Germany during the harvestins months. He had difficulties with the
home authorities and police in this respect and had to ap-ear before
the courts on a number of occasions. :

At the beginning of the war he fled to Sagreb, Croatia, at that
time the Independent Croat State (Nazi purpet recime) of Dr. Pavelic.
There he set up a small office for the relief of Slovenian refugees
but it never reached any large proportions. He was not connected
with the Refugee Comittee which handled the main relief work (Cne
source tointed out that the mere fact that he xvas able to establish
an office and function i:. Zagreb during the period meant that he was
at least passively acceptable to the Nazi regime. :

As far back as 1935 he is !mown to heve misrepresented himseif
as & “peasant leader.”

After the war Pavle Horvat fled to Austria where he a-ain claimed
to be a Slovenian peasant leader and atterpted to whip up propaganda
for the creation of a srecial "peasant group," avong the Slovenian
refuzees; he failed comleteiy. He vas uncble to find followers in
a single carp to forn such a group, and the refugees refused to attend
his meetings. In addition he is known to have boasted that he was
acting on behalf of Hr. hacek and the Internstional Peasant Union,
thoush he was mancated by neither. The Allied authorities were
finally forced to intervene and brin,; a stop to his activities since
they were causing discontent among the refugees and disorders in the

DP camps...


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000 .
en RE HR er IEE, MUIR Ba RN ot

_. In July 199, Horvat wrote the Honorable Josech C, Grew in care. |.
of the National Committee for a Free Europe introducing himself as 4
the Representative of the Nemocratic Slovenes and President of the :
Interrational Peasant Union for Evrore, and suz-esting that he join i
forces vith the Comittee in the common struc-le against Communism.
--In return for a trip to the United States he offered to bring 2
large confidential rerort on his activities to date and present a
scheme for successfully sunpressing cozriunism ard delivering the
subjugated nations in the shortest possible time. He was informed
“ that the Fund was confining its activities to refugee leaders already
. reziding in the United States and that the prorosed visit was ~
a : Aimpozsible at that time.

: Horvat has recently announced his forthcoming arrival in the

> United states, Several Slovenian and Croatian newspapers in this
country have received articles (which he wrote himself) glorifying
his past and precent activities, None of them, so far, have taken any
notice of these articles with the excertion of the Croat separatist
(pro-ustashi) paper, "DANICA," published in Chicaro. Supposedly .
Dr. --acek was highly amused on reading the article describing the
great "Slovene peasant leader.”

Nobody in Slovenia in pre-war days would have considered Favel
Horvat as a person to be taken seriously in publie life. He is
considered by a number of sources a political impostor and as
personally unethical, Neither the International Peasant Union for
Europe, of which he claimed to te president, nor the Denocratic
Slovenes, of which he is a repres .ntative, is considered a levitimate
organization. The Director of the Fund's Yugoslavian Research and
Informaticn Desk was the editor of a daily paper in Slovenian for
eleven years before the war. He never net iiorvath, seldom heard of
him and his perer, as far as he knew, never took notice of him or his
activities,

—

FCR THE RECORD: This rerort (on Pavle Horvat dated 5 ‘arch 1952)
was forwarded to us by Mr. John Lzich, assistant to -r. Dolbeare,
Director of the National Councils Division of NcFE,

BY


--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

ee ee naman nme tame nN cee ER ER RI ti cue cme dS Lehn Nene ein Mt ae eaene a eT, Se 9m FUR

° SECRET
feruety Infarmation BRatet OJ . .
: r
- BROMUS Fon, Tore/PY/orn
vas cry/orc
: Prove 7 ‘Pepaty ‘irector (Plana)
~ STAIN Mttacks oA tha Jovict ‘th of “rior Inventions?

1. 1 understa:d that your office hag alroady addressed itself
oa to the orrortunity wich wea offered by the increasing absurdt Ales
of Pusstaa claims to heya teca the invantare of a list of discovuries,
evplorations, and Lavontiona wich by now commrise the bulk of such
- diaeewrrios and inventions important to -odorn life. This is, of
Course, an extromaly vulnerable escries of claims an:' one shich
e@rposes itself to ridicule so readily ap to render it an excellent
- terget for attack. There has been sout plry on thin seen in the
American press but 1 feel thet it sould Le core effective if the
Faropean presg and Radio -ree Zurope should hanile the lod.
CN nee ne

2. In the Sunday edition of ths vas:ineton iost, there was a
very good sumary of the Russian "firsts." ‘The article vas written
in fust the risht vein, althouch a nore dead pan apnroach wold
perhaps be sure effective in ce:tatn places. If you do not have
twnis article, 1 sucgest that you set somzone to clin it for y-aen~
as well as i recall, it is to be four! in th magasine section or
the editorial (news reviow} part of the never. { heard one on the
radio this morning while. woul Mt in aleely with tits general lias.
I do not krow tho a:t'or of the crack, out tt fs cortataly a "first"
thet ths Eussianc sould surely te riven ali the credit for. The
creck was that "the cre ulin was the first to put peace on a war

basis.”
deigses) FRESE. wisece
PRATE Ge VISET
ee: alyt
Chief, AR
cof ec

- am ee tab cel Oe


--- Page 26 ---
(Pee mara nme fe aR pal etn TN tle tml 9 San Ae iE

14-0000

SCOT TSFORAN

in fc Ws -190F

~ ; | AB March 1952

Dear Toms

With reference to the ~tephen Maineayk ea.e wich Sam discussed

~ with you during your recent visit, several questi.ns have arisen
concerning the broader arpacts of the type of activity Matneayk was

undertaking in ad‘ition to hiv PFE duties, .

Specifically, wo woulrt like to know what sort of eamrloymant
contract RFF emloyeco enter into with RFF, If ro.sible, ve wuld
like a corny of a ty-ival eontr ct, e are intcre:tes in nowlng
vhat restrictions, if any, sre rlaced on enrloye:s' outsice interests
or activities while eployed with ft#, particularly 13 they would
epply $e a case auch as Mainesy's. ‘e would also like to hive
inforratioa on the tyre of security a-rearent pre-ently in use
betveen RFF and its exploycce, —

There are attached sev'ral rspers bearing on the “alnozyt casey
forvarded with a report on the satter, which wio prepared for our
¢ friends scross ‘he strest. This recort wis to the reneral ef:ect
a that the American m.naper of the Lalaburg of!ica of Radio Free |
Burope has been deeply conearnet over events artaing from Mainesyk's
recent death, ‘hile lo-kin~ tertuch the personal eff-cts of the
deceosed, he fount eviderce thit Maincasyk had acce-ted roney for
the purrese of -asaisting indivicuals to escare frees: behin? the Ire
Curtain to the U.u.7one of Austria, The RFF manacer was further
disturosd to find that the entruste:! funds were not Listed anong the
assets of the deceased or de: osited with the Anerican Express

Company at Salsburge

Sincerely,

x 1 Cop cnl ~

Three enclosures
CLOMEV IDLY
Distritution:

2eRf

Orig © Addressee

1 = PY/x Asst
4-060



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

hee

menor roars ARE een EEE ran nama dene NA MM ak KODE nomenon Mente cana =

Sour
ccry :
January 21, 1952
i> Amectean Consulate , :
.: funteh .
. Germany -
Gentiénens

The uncersigned, Sr, Fela Gyorky of 21 Fast 92nd citreat, New York
City and Mr, Alexander A, act of tho above adiress wish to recuest
your asuiutance in cennection with consejuences resulting from the
su'en Aeath of Hr, Steven W, Mainesyk of Radio Free Europe in

Salzburg, Austria.
The said gentleman was holding our roney as a trustee, which

comey was sent to his t> de raid out under certain con‘itionus ve
vere trying to save our fa~ily from behind the Iron Curtain and we

- were negotiating vith aifferent.peorle who tere willing to wrlertake

this task and we needa! soxsone who world pay the.e persons the agreed
a@nount in question when the operation was prorerly concluded,

Through the aa ¢ rentie- ants secretary -e@ rece!vad wort that Mr,
Maincayk wos seriously (11 for the pact few nontho ard suddenly
passed a:ay, and ts. make certain thet our interests sre properly
protected we are taring the Liberty of eriting you thio letter in
eonnection with the sbore mitter,

The total amount sent to AMFXGO, “alsburg vas $3,800, = out of which
Er. Mainesyk paid altogether $300, = thus leaving $3,500, = in

Kr, Paines; k's name, - of coure, if {t fs n-ce. cry te won ¢ both
be glad to furnish alditi nal proof to ouprort this present letter
and we wold sreatly aporeciate your bind assi- tance, be wold
also thank you te acvise vs as ta.vh t additional] stops you deam it
necessary for us ta taie in thie natter,

hind ass stasce and eou teay and

We thank yo: in advance for yo:
renain

Very truly yours,
Alexander A, Back

Dr, Bela Gyarky

AAB/mak

Sewn


--- Page 28 ---
14-00000

Satan

Goede
COPY
. BACK FXPONT & IMPORT CO,
21° Fourth Avenue
. New York 3, NoYes UsSe'e
Cable Address
Fenber of Comierce & Industry *buckexport®
Asvociation of ew York Telephone
, ; ORohard besson
January 22, 1952

Arerican Consulate
calzburg
auetria

Gentlomoens

Se just receive! the followine cable from Dr, Eni Khe, secretory
of the deceased Hr, Stoven Mainzcykte

SYATECEYE DIFD INTRSTATE SPFFCTS Tt CULTODY CP ARSC TCAM CONZULATE

+ -ALZBGRG  SUSGTST CONTACT THEM LYTTFR POLIOWING, DR, PMI FHH®

It so happens that yesteray wo erroneously wrote to the American
Consulste in Munich, Gersany and we are orclosing herewith a copy
of the cafd letter from which you «11 see all particulars of our

protlez.,
Your prompt attention and kind assistance in this matter will be
greetly apprectated.

Very truly yours,

Alexander A Back

Dr, tela Cyorky
ALE /eak

een te re omen eS


--- Page 29 ---
1400000 we co
x

. . Aneriean Consul tey
“ Salrberr, Austria
: : - bebrusry 7) 1952

. . My, Alexan‘er 4, ‘-ek,
so fr, bela Syorky,
pee Back Frport & le-ort Co-rary,
215 Fourth ivenus,
Rew York 3, Mew dork,

+ firas

The racolpt is acknovlr’ od of yocr lettor of January 22, 1952

torether with @ cory of the letier a’ore 724 to tie American

* Consul ite General in ftunieh recur ‘ine certain orivata transactions

“.ygu arnear to have had vith tie Vote Sr. terhen Falncy, an
averican citisen tho died in caleturs on vanuary 1, 17524

In accordance with its s‘aidinn inite sticns and pecding the
deaisi-n of the a rrocrfate le-al a fer, the Consuliate is
acting as rrovinional consemater of the effveta of the denausod,
Is would avpecr thet “re Salneayk 7254 treectate ane the Go caniage
has ber erveavorin: te obtein drt rt 5 fron tia f-e-psedta
brother, Fra Charles “atnesety (1G eeley tyenuey Chttsro,y “Lidnats,
the nesrest Gaowm kin fer atrice e-ncercfrt his {nterest in the eutates,

Unter the ¢ etroun:tareas cox: vil? meeormive thit the Consulate
brs no a thority t+ tale 2 hive aradnst

the e-tate earec-tin: to ra ar frterer$ av! to peter
yo. $a the Cort thet Pheve “let wvever the mtuer when

tho ertate will hoe eft our be

At suer tire ac anexes.t ofa an | vy rv. S41) be informed
mf requeste! to alo riss pe rssif te tater: tis bo
: 8

vincerely yourny |

Pobert 9,°
“amertean Gontul

2u
Ri ‘euregsrigy



--- Page 30 ---


--- Page 31 ---
ks ) ct 5 D tw-£ fas woud
: Ee Lp oy 2.0
stn uss vith PDE

. — Op Cex - GAL a
Ee
| babe le mena oe
—_ hk bo of Wt.
_ te, bh fl Fe — _

th. Z At Lis Chae Be
. ; egal fin Bile :
4 bye : 5 eS Ww os a


--- Page 32 ---
1400000 ere emi nec
Le ae dale le woke Me "a
Ucar Tons
. . “ith reference to the Stuphon tulncsyh cure we
recent .

daring your/vislt, ceoverel quest! a Love crises concerns tue brea r a.p ects

cMtucin, On discon in addition to us

ef the ty,e of sclivity “uluesys nee u
KE duties.

: Specifically, ve vould Lise to snoe weat sert ofe..loyweat controct Kee

esployees cater dato abth xvi, If 5.0: de, va would Lice a copy of 2 typleul

» if any, ure ;lacec

Q@atrsct. “To are inter. sted dn caaring piiut res

4

on emloyees* outsice tatereste or wctivities widic enplove? with Rr£, particulary

also lige to ive

ae they wuld oply tow ce wich us Manctycts. Te woe

daformtion on the ty,e of security ecree.unt preseatly i. ace utiees MO ond its

e.pluyecs.
Tosre are athatind several ,.jer: beoriny oa tie Salacuys ove, ee Ee

woS ,F@parce for our £

was to the pe.crai effect that tie
Fre Europe sas teen dee, ly caicer.e:: .
Oh Sake eenttprs “hile Llooci:

CIMIN CYA
“Ir &.@ purpose of

Wiel to be USS. ocne of

asbielin, imivideai: 19 Gage Tr,

Beet Ged eatra ve. funds

Mec deceased of 2.2 ot tite wericun

!

i
ewtrtas, Tas DFE nl lur wes Rare ab
. . \
were wwe nar lel awwig, Ga ose ts of 4.

\

Way INES Bryer at aroun. \

Sevean &

~ ane betunred an Nadave



--- Page 33 ---
fee eee a en IS eee od ne, RTT ance SER ate mene eek a

14-00000 ek

Tee

a U Harch 1992

HEYOUANDUN FOR THE RECORD

SUBIFCT: Fhotostats in re International Conter of Free
Trade Unionists in Fxtie, Paris

The attached photostate wre made from accounting
documents, while they were in transit. through us from a
TONIC representative, Paris, to 77 IC headquarters, They
are forwarded, as indicated telov, to provide information
ss to intividuals associated xith the subject organization,

[2]

YEAS Wy BRACEN
Chief
Internstional Organisations Divisica

Attachzent (6 pasos)
CIO/NEV sd]

Metrivutions
Orig = bE (FoWelty, Finotts +Z/3tr, Freenan) (with attachweta)
ok © FE (Hr, Overton)s SE (cr, irane) (vith attschnents)
1 © [0 (hr, Flesners Mics Gtern) (with attachnents)
lL Project (XFATIIE file (vith attschments)
2 = RI (with attachsents)
1 © C/I0 (vithout attactzents)

C4
mn
oy


--- Page 34 ---
14-00000 we Seotalatnnetnentasthertlinaanteeatiemietianbteincemeanr cane nies aeeeca cor neon aieeceeteeeec cdot tee a ae ee

- E : : 7 ener 7 Cul pa pale :
: ‘ : : ) nae, CF las one
4 Fate)



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

be ah
seated aay

: car cers ee
by oF areesle( ta ore
>

TERRE ©

nec
hee
hat

ced

Mena coud ce Aoi MRR bon be RETO Code™ Ses ete


--- Page 36 ---
14-0000 rE ERR rr 8 ORR I SONIA RRR at tl * ncn inl TOA RR ET,

ete eho
es g00b

A

PPV BT :
dL Stsr ee 370 0
Gaee ea}



--- Page 37 ---
14-00000

te ee aetna ence

wa

A,

PD Bass
. CBWE SULAL Se

ae eee

cet ean Anna Ne


--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

as


--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

Sd eee ee re

1 PRT ph ton
eee Oy Cat ave



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

21 Fare 1752

MOSORANDNS FAR TIF RECTED \

‘UN'CT: Telesuone Convereation wlth caslral i

rT. Waller on 2) bares.

ne wday axi aked ne wo fase alan: tuo

Adidral “her calle?
warnings

le Hs obseets to wat i nas scar! in ton "apravab of CLA
officials of the sian to cub fcudral Kirkls Cranittas unter the
Crusario for Freeda... lig sald ne tout tie comr 2f tie Gusale was
ty now almout noneextotent ant cited a moent wecting of an acvertio-
ins poour of thier ne is a menber wiere, ho sald, various aabere
turned w inlm am! asked hin te quit kKidcdnse I caid to Adatral nillor
that T trougnt tiat the "av rial’ to wiien ca reforred wos a natier
of policy as betwoen tae ctate Pevaruscnt and CA ai trat 1] toucht
1t proballe tiat Lf there agi been ary auci op roval the GA officials
wis pave 4b nad din itr) tic neenssity of uring fs views teiore
putting the plan int. effset. ie povlics tat ue wanted vo bo as
helpful as possibie ant t:at if ali Acohral chrk 2 © fall Lack on
was tho Crusado for Precoa tien temaoes an would uave we yleld, but
ha sald that in any ovent bf + ral Kirk's Cailttes werc to be aided
te tin Crusade, io Crusaie wild .2ve te be exgpanced. ‘ic couid not .
poesitly atiers:t to furmich exvar enine tee crescent acreasent with the
State Tepartiient io cut siowa tie covivity of tic Crusatie.

2. Ha said tisi se wanted to {eve a warming: to all ser at
heade would ciortly moll wi lin He gald that .¢ cal rseently
hat a talk wht Frec Ssltear: ro ooltear wpeand gation
and iiav au a reseit af ewla. couviciicn as lo tie
mocessit; for reorgania~: war ltenfolu. Sa sabi ce thourht
tere were tm Ay a ran idt eyes went fheotioce were tat
they wore tue ol! se. tic or tiat t. ai pelatives woo arrvady
held fots, and ne saii ne invene to clean et WD Lu mc tiat
he mirht snan be allo to rent a i.oor fa tie New fore ¢
tiat tiene nay be sane rest. tions ac a reiuit mal bist mm
prerared for them, tutac 4 VAL NP BSL URE We Wanbed cin to conduct
efficient operations ans x ne vad a srucn Litat te da w until
ws eslled tim of’. Y assume Liat tuls was a fect.

LVS tA. ag FAUT

Clo
GormBren International *rixdsations Mvision
Ordg « AP GeeDE/Feenrct
leee 1 “yOr
ce a are Card

2 cc FI


--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

: wae, Execu: ro : vat
abou
“TOMEEY URES taiig .

“uate ay O/ UC
a Ey nc .
| a eal

r

21 Harch 1952

RANDUP GOR THE REONRD

“SUBJECT: Connittee for Russian Liberation

1. I called Bob Joyce in tho State Department yesterday
and asked him whether in nis view the State Departnent would
object,.to placing the new Committee for Russian Liberation under
the Crusade for Freedom. I mentioned particularly a possible
caveat of the State Department -- that wo might be expanding the
Crusade at the very time we aad agreed at a series of meetings -
held recently that we would cut down its activities.

2. Joyce said that the avrecrient with State was as to
method and scope of Crusade publicity and activity and that the
addition of the new Comittee under Crusade cover would not by
any means‘abropate this agreement. He said that we could so
ahead and count upon the State Department's approval. I asked”
him whether he would like a menorandum to this effect or whether
he would Like to consult others in the State Department and he
caid no, that this was unnecessary, that we snould go ahead.

Seurlrdoue

THOLAS W. BRADEN
Cnief
International Organizations Division

Orig: 0D/P (thru ADPC)
lee: EE (Mr. Poor)
lee: C/I0

2 ce: RI


--- Page 42 ---
Z06 hard §2-

: 4, bbe

‘ple bed

OP sath &

ne E
os we

fie AnD a var


--- Page 43 ---
vee
azZtsISSYTONN G3L9141838 JWILW3IGEINOD

we Napa toupee

139938

SSNYVNIY

a . . . ‘ 77
Wa] NOLLVaNaHHOD3Y J: BONaUNNQWOI—]
H9L¥dS 1 (—— AW JO NOLLVEYERNd — ‘GK
una (J ava3y 193910 [J] NoMov__}
BUNLYNDIS [~~ wetavAyosnt (-—9 Waossdy—]

Tvitiw |

dtTS SNELNOY WV191SI0
AQNI9Y FIMISITTILNE WWYLNID

(WOLL05 CNY ols VINLVTTETSSVID 31981) Tia 832835
Ww

)
-138938 1nz7@1aNdd a31dtars2 Garsatssvtown

aver o3f
‘OM NEOs.

0000-71


--- Page 44 ---
mt ie tS aR MRE RAIA amare YY TLR NM, Nm ithe SAE A mtn ete Edita wl rae camel sth

14-0000 . ee

. 10/52

Mee Wimmer -.
on informtion copy of Ictter sent
Vy Mr. Jackson tolay. Mr. DLamewcod
de receiving a copy via regular channels.

M.Mocrus

i Perl

varch 10, 1952

: Dear fensignor Vargaie
. ; . 4a I wind ip oy year with the Rational Comtttes for
@ Free furope, I thought 4% appropriate to send you a lctter o-.

7 not a isttor of fargsoll, but ratner sone thoughts on the
. Hungarian “ational Cowil aa I hive olcerved it during the years

. . In tha first place, I vould like to eongratulate you
. - gad your associates en having done en oxtreordinary job of
holding a very volutilo situation together. In fact, it waa
& wire job, and one whose valuo we may never fully
because so ming ef the benefite are intangibles

I hope, therefore, that you will eartinme to work vith
i will to hold the Council togetner, ap it would
present a very serious provlen to sdxiral tiller 1f tho
Rungarian group ‘are to fall aparte

I would also lito to con:ratulcte you on tao effective :
work the repessentetivos of the iumarian ‘ational Council

have done abroad, particularly in Trance and Ceruanys You

imow how inportent £ consider tals work. It esers to mo tas

the real task and duty of a «ational Council 1a to help tho

@dles, and the front linca of this work are in Europes

asido from the obrious necessities of food, clothing,
shelter, the most impartant aspect of tne work de hal, I would
call a “consular” service, as these poor pesple do net know
where ar how to turn. in this consular-type work, I think tat
General Hemuxyey and re Auer havo been doing an excellent job,
amd my persons] feclines in this matter are cag-lrtely cone

by

To my way of thinkins, exile political mtters in Sou
Yor and vasiin ton ghouli take a definitely second place to


--- Page 45 ---
14-0000

+

nee Latina

i rr mat ete amare Se A

Slave this is an honest Ictter, and not just pro-ferms

appreciation by a retiring iresident, I must aloo, wafortunately,
Pleasante

dnolude sone observations that orc not 29

I renenber very early in ray work with Slik, that you
taught mo the political moanin; of the vord “polarization”,
end since thm 1 havo hed arple eppor sani ty, in tho Hungarian

National council to seo polarisation at works wore

NCsE haa croun in the past yeer inte a large organisatios
engaged ta Berlous work, snd frequently proving ite eftectives
wens behind the izen Curtaine To put it. motacr way,
the past year Ulf. has evolved from just a hope into a profeasional
weapon i the var eyainst the eave Theretore, cetivities

Adziral Hiller agrees’ with me ompletely on this paitt,
and intends to take such ection fren tie to tine ag my be
nesssoIry 20 oduhiar such octivities when they cocur,

However, I recognise tht it 4s not enouwh for SCTE
te take wilaterol attion. +o must to assisted by yeu ond
theee of your asnoelates uno understand tho the real onery is,
and are willing to subordinate fratrioidal strife, polarising

attempts, and disloyal sctivities.
* 2. @ ry

I fully realise that these aro nothing bat big words
wilees I can illustrate thea more specifically.

I have ia ty poescesion enough illutratians to fill a
Volum, but i would liky to selcct three in particular to
mention in this letter, noi becawe 1 have any particular
desire to single su’ the iniividualy concerned for censure,
gather because what they hive done not milly illeotrates
the point I an tryinz to mises but aloo reveals an attitude
ef mind which is prestically incomwoensible to a Anoricaa
working for a gront causes

5

Tho fret case that 1 have in mind is that of re
Ferenc Saye
Lost Fetruary, re tagy wrote a latiar to ‘re Frank 3,

Land of Kmmeas City, Fissourl, complaining bitterly about the
Rational Comdttes for a Free Burcpo, aocuing it ef *mapparting :



--- Page 46 ---
14-0000

o3j-

outmaded and old-fashioned reastionary politica! Ldeolortes",
+ land to advice bia as to how this oltmtion could

Rr,
be breu:ht to the attention of rresident Trumm in orier to
heave hin do sametiing apwt it, 4s a % of that letter,

shite Hease cheak with Miz, an American orpenizstion, we to

ca Bre Bagy acerad to uneretand vhat I tried to explain
te hin, and with what I consicered comilete honesty and sinecrity7,
his

T havo never eva mentioned it to yous

ir, Racy haa once agzia written to iresident Tramn
this tim: directly, ind once asain ine tite House bas vent
go the

!

T consider that by. ary has troken hie pledge, and
I am free to tell you acout the ineident.

This tire, altnowh tho words of tr, Nagy ere sore
tecperate, the Relady is the erm -- dissatizfaction with uhst

I cannot help cowrntin: st this point that ia the
Hungarian National Council toere is probably co cae wo hee


--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

ebe

contributed more to “intre-—omittoe cantroversien* than Ht.
Bagy Aieelf. Furthernare, em analysis of fr. Hacy's dofiniticn
of “Yonwernts and reactisnsrico’ would be extremely interesting. .
It ai-ht buve bean mare secmrete had ho said “people who :
sepported Ry Covortmant in Li? and overytedy alse".

4B to the miter af ay exile cawtittco, whether the
Eym-arian National Council cr -re Sagy*e Contral Lastern

_- Luwpeun Comaittes, Calne aiie w “guarenice* +9 the people

3. Behind the iran curtain thes prusdsco would to carried out,
Rr, Bagy'a statamnt is elise Srivolous or prepostereis,

Rr. Hagy ulads uw uit a rewuest tot tie President
etve his blesain:; to ire Eagts oowposed soper-comilttea <<
the Central i astern burvpes: camditiee — tiich ruprosants
"a total aajority of FO to Qe af tae entire population of
Central baste Larepe.?

Ian frankly fascinated ty the processes of Mre Uaryts
sint, I eannot believe that all he thinks apowt is tho promotion
of Leftioh Kungarcan politicias in cxile. I emmot telisve
that es a human being ho does mvt Sec] some seaze of respansie
bdlity tewand Hur? and the iomnrarian dational council, who
have monta after month helped kize I do net vic to sound
creamtic, I do not asz for tats, and I an nov sugrestiag .
thst in return for our bal> wa Lave an oblivation of a quid
FRO cude hut 1 do say thas tds cucgilon of loyalty does
arise, aad the -uestion af roqenaibllity is very reals

Furthermore, Fir. Saucy bas been in this ecomtry long
enough Go to wrierstamd tiss tris Kind of intriguing is a
Gistressing irritation to ereryens, incluting tio cite Housi.s

a a °

ra)

Ry sevomd ilinstrutioan alae eoacems Hr. Kacy. fre Baggy
recently sat a telecras to i>. -ossewffy, of witeh tan follow
ans is a teunalation, I bave toe srizinal inmyrian if you
care to soo ite

TYG Kail oWBRITYEO ve cs LOAED OF THE It Yore
RADIG FUE MRC: RASS LF YW STAFF & XLiBSe
BrAQr ARha Golde, fare BANCLY ABEUS, LAJOS
HAIASZ, SOLS) SAIN, §s25a STNBAICS, PRS L VARTA

: STOP COMLL.S20B7 SE: Y2eR TAT CHL BADIO STATIA
LEKOASTS IB THE AAS CF Ms INMAGATIC HiGDARIAN
EXRISS, I AS THS ¢aeG270T Cs TE LPASAUT vi. TRATION
CALL TER MGS GF TEs [CRITICAL CCHMITTTZ FO
DA OUATLLY FOUR eASTCE Take LUTICS IS ACC YTABIG
TO we


--- Page 48 ---
14-0000

ite

o5e

Agnin I wewld like to imow titst ts podag teouch Are
Kagy'o mints

RCFE, an tnerican orpasisation, hired Hr. -csseufly
te te to responzibls hesd of ite iiuncarian Deak in marichs
tire ieaseutty ras 6 very careful choice after weeka of consule
tatdon on both sites of the Atlantic. lils specific instructions
wore that tie Aumich ask should be staffed by people

geusesed for frrec.tocal capctence, excludin:, of cured,
OD 5 aD

At the oune tine, 1t vas felt that the HC7E kad pernitted
political arfilicticn to overshadov fimetional cometence ia
the iiew York Hungarian .<ok, and the ow York coax simly
wasn't eny good, Tnarefore, the ew York beak and the /amieh
test had to Le broxjrt inte aligmente So Hr. csaseutfy uas
emt to Azerica avi vas iven tic sesponsibllity of biring the
Recessary persomel — and ih how York wos instrusted to wo apply
the sane yardstick that he spplied in ihmich.

whem Mr, Deesexffy bad fulfilled bis Hew York teak,
again after tho most serious coneliloration of all the angles
Aanvolved in each one of iia choices, Mr. Nacy emt his the
telegran quoted azere aa thouzh ‘ire Hacy ere in the spe powecn
to control, or at least to voto, the mocboranip of the

Does hr. lazy really believe that he is in tiat
position? Gr is tds pure polarisation. 45 we all know, this
is 4 move directed azainst ire Collert, who dove not hey
to hove the suns political coloration ag ::, liagye Ina
recent conversation 1.10 i'r. Mary, 1 asked hin if the telerram
would hive bean sent if i+ cellert bad aot deen selactody end

he adaitted tnat it would rot huva boc: scnte

There te an additions] interenting aloxent im thi,
an that ire Hay calla for a vole aa the irexident of the

end international wiuty in arder to bring about the Liberation


--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

The third cass I wid lik to motion cuncarma Nre
Zoltan Praiffere

After “re Lesseuffy mide his salections for ‘ne Eow
Yorte teak, Ire Pleiffor rot in toush with hin to protest
the faot thet in oelecting ire Collert, I'r. ienseuffy nad been

thinl to the ‘zallhoLiers Farty, tideh because “re

\eauoutly had formeriy Leu a Saber of that partys expscted a
clean eweep of the Hes York Deak, irrespestiva funotional
camctence., ti. Fielffer farthor stated — sty! this is the really
inportent point -- txat because of the appointment of He
Oellort, fire Pfeiffer would havo to “atts-k" it, cesseuffy fron
Row en, wherever and wamover possible; in shart, a detlaratian
of ware .

Again, 1 would like to mierstand itr. Pfaifforts

mestal processeze “ho coog he think ho is? bhhere docs he tink
he ip? This 49 a ver7 serious world, and not a iufolf Primi
Gpersttae Mre Fieiffer is not in ianispest conducting a politieal
campaicn against a wurvard merber ef a Lofteins partye Hre
¥folfier la in Hew Zcrz, an asacolate of UCIT, with every
Opportumity to have his opinion beard and his influence felte
Dab after a decision has theo mide, in pood faith and after
long cvasideration, to exmloy a man Leoause of his cametence
to daa job, 1¢ is %, ifeifier's responsibility as on assealates
of tho come organisation to help thst mn dp bis uerk, and

not t inculce) in declarations of war in cider to dlerapt the

I hope tat somehow or otter, 1% will ic possible for
to yorr membership (iat Bit docs not intend

to te hampered or sabutaged vy exile political mnewwring.

1 also hope thet yoo will ve able to perouads your
corpatriote that insafar as Wit oan interpret leds paligy,


--- Page 50 ---
14-0000

oTe

it belicves that the “overmrnt of the inited Staten,
forvard to the overtual Uderation of tuwary,

with reneyed thanks far your highly successful work
in the past, and the furvent scpe that you wild be owually
sesceaaful .

Go De daakeon

Henad gor Bela Varga

227 Kast Tond Strest
Seu Yor, He Yo



--- Page 51 ---
oa een EE ERS Tele bebe adde Nity,

14-0000

oh, . sypeesy aa eees
wd .

ae

aw .
: ; °

- a ae pepe
~ . eee ie 8
. (TD Mareh 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT DIRECTCR FOR POLICY COORTINATION
- “SUBJECT: NCEE

1. For quito some time the ctaf! officers of this diviaion concerned
with utilising the ractlities of the NC:i and with-oxploiting the
Albanian, Bulgarian, and Rumanian emigrations have been aware of a lack
of adequate coordination between our own activities and those of the %
NCFE statf. in conjunction with those +I Civision officers responsible
for handling our relations with that organisation, we have atteapted
te explore the problem in order to find a solution which could be
considered realistic and practical,

2. The difficulty. lies not only in the communication system between
OPC and NCrE, which does not always tranamit, at exactly the right tine,
the right ideas from cne organisation to the proper individuals at the
right level .n the other, Althowsh us Havs maintained very. close contact
, both informally and through formal channels, only too often we have not ;
been in a position to learn why NCE staff officers have made a given decis- t
ion in regard to some emigre organization in which wa had an interest; and :
on the other hand, our desirea and needa have not always been fully under- fo
stood or accepted in New York. Again, it has happened that we were :
ignorant of developments that closely affected ovr operations until it
was too late for us to maxe o-r influence felt, and, correspondingly,
. it must be admitted that we have ourselves pushed ahead with courses of
action without adequately brieting the NCFL. Tne most extreme case in
point known to us concerns the Rumanian exigration, where we and NCFE
are now pursuing conilicting policies. he upshot of thia has been the
gradual development of a situation wherein Orc is supporting an organisa-
tion, the NCkc, which isnot fully responsive to it.

- 3. This situation is not regarded by us as reflecting any fundamental
inadequacy in NCFc, or as presenting any insoluable difficulty. ‘here
exists a problem in staff interrelationship which ean and should be
resolved by a reform in our organisational ap.rosch, The goal toward which
we believe we should work is one where OrC communication with NCIE would
de channelled directly along a single high-level line which wo:-ld firmly i
tie in AcrC's office with thit of the head of the other organisation, ,
Iseas, suggestions, information, etc. would flow, in the regular channels,
up from the 0?7C working level to AT?C's office for review ans transmiasion
to the top office of NC*s, and flow down from there through YFS's usual :
channels to the proper individuals in its.operational machinery. Yersonal
contacts between individuals at a lower level in the two organisations _
would frequently occur to supplement this usual cranneal, when security ‘ ~
permitted, but should be in the hands of responsible personnel who
understand the OPC policies involved.

Le is the first

a


--- Page 52 ---
14-0000
cafe eee = pele Ee nmr ns OE

Thee

experiencai, knowled,eadle, high-level ClA oflicer

be stationed in the hCrx organisation to work
directly with Admiral Miller. ‘or cover purposes he would carry the
title of Deputy to the rreaident, but there should be no doudt in the
minda of the NSIE tov echelon as to his complete identity with cla,
Because his sole task- would be to represont A'pc's interests, he should
mt normally be in the NCYS chain of command, should not de paid by that
organization, and should not be made responsirle ror any given HC:£
function or activity. e visualize his tunction a that of a representa-
tive charged with eyslaining end representing CIA's intereets, functioning
as & chsnnel of inforzation about the organization to which he is
accredited, and controliing all liaison between the two. In our opinien,
the establishment of thia post, with a suitable individual assigned to the
2Job, would imnediately correct most of the present difficulties, and would
provide the necessary machinery within which a fully satisfactory relations
stip botween CPC and \C:= eould develop.

een me

GRATIAN MH. YATLLVITCH
Deputy tor Pelicy Coordination, SS

88/PC/ossrej

Dietriotion:
Addresses - Orig. ' 1
SD/RE = 2
Se/70 - 2

LY = 1 CPtm Keates )



--- Page 53 ---
2 CIA's ~

a meats ee CREE

Ww] ana my Cte ee .
apt 4 ere

£) perl dias SM tole _

ouan. NCAE
ha. 4 Pet tht: |
i} Cd wiaahe. Rab = be


--- Page 54 ---
en ANT mS ah rn NAY Ket oe ait a tna cesta BER MANS LK a ner oie ate kee rset Son we boknantaend MRO eA AUER TE hela

mee m sfoad Le 7 hn pote.
eet da
oS Pe ,
Ply
as Clare aa = w | aren, debs & Pep

inc Wee ee DopTo ae
a /A- Coond . Com oP
petin, rm Cudgtie revi rom
Wpbets wm uschcb cua here
Chsva-



--- Page 55 ---
14-00000 carne inemaedieeeiinnenintaieeinainaibeneeedirieniebeemmeserorededite nencenmteettticanen ieee iin Tartareione Teen ac cuateat tee certaec caer ae eae eae ee ee

Suef ers

SECRET

7 Vareh 1952

MEMOUANDUM FOlis) Mr. Thomas W. Braden
SUPJLTs Relations with National Councils

° 1. Attached hereto io a study concernin: the National
Councils, with certain conclusions and reetiiicriationgs.

; 2. IT hava deliterately delayed oulrittis: this etudy Lecause

I wanted to Le eure of the validity of my eriticton asd recomendations.
To this end, I discuceed this paper at eeveral etazes of tte develop-
mont with varisus officers in the line divisions corcernsi ani aleo
with indj uale who have been in close touch with the Hatioral
Councils Biviejon of NCFE. ds a result, 1 feol that what is submitted
in the attached etudy reflects not only my own views, kut aleo those

of the responsible area experts.

‘ 3. I feel you will agree that, under ovisting corditione, it is
impocsible to carry out effectively any of the functions reiated to
national council catters with which wo are charged. The reeent "Nay
Affair" and the resultant eubarrassnent cerves se @ good Lilustration.

4e In view of the interest that hac teen deronstrated in this
paper by SE ard Ee-2, it is sugreated that eavics of the study be sent

to them.

5 This whole ratter, I believe, 1s of euch i:zjorterce as to
warrant further discussion, and I should a;sreciate havirg the

oprortunity of talking to youe
el Lil STERN

Attachrient
As stated above

ec: DCFY

SECRET



--- Page 56 ---
mom - Cie eee RENT REI nN aS hn ON SME me eee wig om ARE aT Ao

SECURITY A Se vtec

SE

‘G RALATIONS ,

LULDOSy ; .

The purpose of this paper is to 3) review brlofly tne accom lish=
ments of the Rational Gowieils Division of NOL, 2) atterpt to point
out the rvasons why the Natioral Councils have not acconpliched what
thoy sut out to do and 3) make curtain recommendations respect
to policy and aduluistration to remudy the present uneaticfectory and

- unworkable situation, This last assuces that CIA mut continue to
; “sponsor the National Counell complex. However, it cas do a0 only if
. certain basic changes are made and if it is recognized trat it le
inewabent on CIA to regain control of the important perssialitios of

the Eastorn Luropoan emigration.

_DISCUSSTON
“T Orde Objegtive National Goupeils Divis!

The National Councils Division of the National Corm-ittee for a
Free Lurope was created on 3 April 1950 by resolution sf the Loard of
; Directors, The underlying principle, as stated in the Declaration of
: Policy in June 1950, was to ald the "non-Fascist and non—Cormmunist
: leaders in thoir peaceful offorts to prepsre the way towerd the
: restoration in Eastern Europo of the social, politicel and religious
j libertios in which they and we believe." The councile were to function
: as "representative, harmonious and effectiva groups" and, as such, to
play a part in the strurgle against Comminis: in Lastern iurope. They
: were not to be considered as governments in extle nor as ence in then-
selves.

National Cornmittees and Panels,*® as supported by HCFE, were to
fulfill a two-fold function: as 1) avert instruments, they were to
a) serve as a symbol of unity both in this country and ebroad, b) provide
a reservoir of "name" manpower for propacanda use, ¢e) supcly general
Propacanda policy advice, and d) su ‘with both ceneral and
Specific intellicence with respect hoseiand activities ami personal-
ities. as 2) covert instruxcnts, they were to serve as a cover for
Operations undertaxen by CIA aimai at coxtatting Soviet oppression in

the satelite states,

*These ares the zstonian, Latvia: and Lithuanian Panels, which were set
up with the help of CFs and which Ninction well.

SEGRG:


--- Page 57 ---
14-00000

vee sett

II Status of Con ittees

During the course of the pact year, It har beovxe Lncrcuotogly
apparent that national comittcss have fallud to ojeratc as
‘roprenentative, effective ani hursonioue proupe.” 7% of tha ctx groups
of omlsres supported fineaclally by LCL," only three seve any cort of
a working counctl (the Albenfar, Liigartan and Hungarian) usd only
onve-tho !hinvarlan—operatec with any doyres of + ¢ The Czech and
Humaninn Councils have eplit intra tuo opposing f: « The Cucha
have recently affeoted a reconciliation walch, to dete, te mercly a
paper “agreoment" ary: de ctill awaiting implerentatisr. So attempts
at bringing together the kuranian Acsoclation ond the manacien
Committoo have succeeded. The tulgurian Comittes, wutie mot oplit,
has teon handicapped by the dictatorial methods of ite Ursirran,
Dr. G. M. Dimitrov, and has therefore boun of little yaiue an an
organization, Attempts to offset this situation ly an enlargement of
tho Conmsittea are now under way. An enlargement of ti« Albanian
Comittee is also considered to be necessury, Lut here
with tho british is a compliceting factor. The Falez, efter long
years of dissension, finally ceer: to have ayrced or toe forzation of a
Council of National Unity. Additional. inforuation regurcizng each-of-

these. committees is appended hereto...
III keaponge tor the Failure

the stuted objectives hac ofter, keen attributed to irwrizue, rivalry
and jealousy anong euigre politicians. while thie 1s sertzinly a
contriLuting factor, it 18 one wiich chould be exjacte: in any dealings
with leaders reared in tho intricacics of Ealkan ro - 4 more
important end far nore Lariec caus: for the prezest vo ings of the
national councils has been ClA's failure to provite evz.imuing policy
evidence to, and appropriute control over, the Lxecutive Committee of
NCFE in New York. ‘This failure has in large part rer 3 fron the
Jack of a clearly defined meckeniem within CIA througn stich to perform

these fungtions. ae

ed
At present a-situation exists in which there izs

1) No final focus of responsibility for nationel 41 policy
in Washinton. Various indivicvals throuchout CIA exd vepartioent
of State are rediling in naticral council and relatct retters
Owing to the vacuua which CIA has permitted to develo; ez because ro
one is charged with finel resporsitility, Furthermre, cecters of the

i

Se
"The six groups ares the Albanian, [ulgarian, Czcen, “nzerien, Folish

and Rumanian,



--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

eed

~

SLCURIEY HF OSHA

“York often confer, and reach certain
agreements, with high r: : individuals in ClA srd the Lopartnont
of State without consulting, or oven informing, anyone olso. This
has led to 6 pereat deal al confusion, duplication of work and, of
evurce, embLarrassment.

Lzecutive Comittee 1%

2) An office in New Yack which fo poorly steffed and which has
rue itcelf virtually i endent of CIA puidance. (oue protaLly to _
‘ths lack of proper »uidance and control in tho past, there te ut °°
present @ jreat asount ef freo wheeling in the-New-York office. . The
nenbere of tue axecutive sosittee cece to feel that they are en
sutenomous unit rather thas acute of thosr sponsoring office. ) Pur ther=
nore, dealings with the expecicnecd politicians in exile. from the
eatcllite states require a staff which is mature, has savoir-fairo
and a broad background in isikan politics. This is not procently the

Cace.

: 3) A feeling amonz existos that the promises and threate made by
NCFE ere meaningless and oat money will be forthcoming under almost

any conditions.

TV Focuible Courses of Ast523

Corfronte1 with the situation sketched above, it would azyear that
Aincofar ag CIA is concerze?, te following alternative courecs of action
are possibles 1) Keep the sevsent set-up; 2) withdraw support from
eni:re affaire; 3) ask the esurtment of Ctate to take over; or 4) make

certain changce along iincs recommended below.

Since the present set-up is unsatisfactory for the reasons indicated
above, obviovely the first sternative: ney be irmcedintely dicnissed. The
; eecond alternative is not Deasible because the peoples of the satellite
; co.ntrics ere LAnpoctant all of the United ctates in the cold ver end it

io to our interest to affaci ntunce to the principal astern
Luropean refugees ard their =ajor organizations. The state Department
cannot take over reletic the enigres because of the official
recocprition civen by the ed States to the "Democratic Kepublics" of
baztern surose. The logical, indeed inescapable course for CIA to
follow, therefore, is to continue to dcal with the cost irportant
Eastern Luropean ericres an the basic or es which followg,

va -
wel \ charjred with emizre affair

wits useful for the tiisies Tunetionst

merts in exiic, but perely

a. Fresti ce Use
To serve as a symbol of resistance to the subjuyated
veoples behiné the iron curtain. To provide speakers
ge, crt

Boe



--- Page 59 ---
ce ne ne NR i Ne TEES oy

14-0000

see MAT

~~ SECRET

at various neotings "in this country und at
vatherin:s, euch ac the curopeaus Uuverent,
abroad.

be Peyetp)o-ical Varfere :

To engece in al] sorts of activities wideh will
enevorage tic spirit of resistance of the peoples
of kastern Lucope end keop the story of Eastern
kuroje's etrugzle for liceration before the
poople of tho Wect by appropriate yublicity.

ce. kescorch, Arslysio end Planning

To orgenize and carry on lonc-range rescerch analysis
and planning projecte which will utilize the talents /
of the Lectern Euroycan refugees. This area includes i
the Litrary of Congress and other reecarch projects and

the antivitice of the horizontal international

orgenizetions, such as the Slavik-tayer/Nagy Groups.

1 3) fiethon:l Counctis p41) Not Control L3k. Nothwithstanding the
State mpartucnt's views, it is wice at present to malntain the eepcration
between the nationsl covnreile and RFE. ‘hile emigres should continue to
have an opportunity to 2zeax to the peoples behind the iron curtain, they
should do co as individusl patriots and not as representutives of a
council or of a politi party. RFE, if it is to Le an effective "voice"
to the eetellite jeorl muet neccscarily keep free from petty intrigues
and political "expire building" currently being exhitited by the national
councils, COtiould the national councils become the real symbols they were
intendei to Le, they could then play a significant role in RFL.

ECPI DATIVIS
The following policy and administrative recommendations are submitted
as essential to the succeceful operation of emigre affairss

1) Folicy Kecorrerdations
a. lsirtererce of Netione] Councils

vuring the foreseeable future, the stricture of the
retiona] courcile wil) have to be maintained. It is
fuggested, cowever, that their activities in this

country te limited to the functions mentioned cbove,

e
ro
4


--- Page 60 ---
mt, git. bho _

See -flus ppl
_ Attoree GQ foo Ta
ty urbe, de we
a sollertl:

Or he Mtn lrrrve >

el a nef el a .

Quo _- W-e.

(aa act sans


--- Page 61 ---
14-0000

poet

“5 SECRET =”

Astivttine

be

Spmedon of Fors

lw

It 4s further recom:cnded that a greatcr decree of
US control be effected over the vast reservoir of
«exiore manpower now concentrated in kurope. The

ily 1) provide a much-pbe fs ea
ner clorents oft aL gPOthany Fr, Speer -
tenste nade byAhe Frénch and the Ones ae “dL
these elerents, 3) bo u

It would addition
outiet for the y,
2) offcet the
Eritich to u

the pgycholg_ ical warfare aspect
long-ranzo/ planning of ye liter
satcllite states.

It is recormended that the activities of horizontal .

groupinze, such as the International Feasant Union, in” LG.
‘. the Christian Derocratic Union, the Slavik-iiayer/iiacy 4 dy, hi 4
Grouzc, etc. Le encouraged. Constructive work on
the part of the exilce fron the satellite states
1 that would cut acrogs national lines should be viewed
1 favorably ond may well Leese the rost constructive

element in the emigre political complex. .

ndatiornt.

2) ddmiristrative Rees

There stould be, in ClA, an office charged with the rcesronsibility
for all enivre catters. While it is reeocniad that this entails a vast
amount of adiinistrative work (budget, personnel, sccurity, etc.), the
discussior tiat follows will be devoted only to tie political aszecte of
the work.

Tre terms of reference of this office for "kmisre Affairs" snould
be, inter alia, to 1) formlate policy on enisre matters, soliciting and
bearing in rind the views of the CIA lice divisions, the vepertrent of
State ard oties offices of the United States Government, cd 2) provide

direct policy puiderce and control aver the NCFu offices.
‘

ClA Offices

‘a, Relationship with Dther

. The office for "Lmivre Affairs" should act as an advisory
body and serve as a furctional link providing the necessary
" saison between the CIA line divisions and the “ational
Councils Division of ICrh. The office of "kuigre Affairs®
should likewise be kept regulerly informed of all trans—
actions un.ertaken between the line divisions and ‘CFE,


--- Page 62 ---
14-0000
ena ne wae Se Sa ot ar tt dn a ee rane re Sa i we ak Pmt ARENA Tair tn tte

vi

The office for "Snisre Affairs" should 1) rmaintaln close.

contact with the arca vesks of the Departaunt of State H °
und 2) moet jointly with members of the Jopartment in a
CLA-State Coordinating Comittee, (see chart attached)
rmulating policy on exigro matters.

for the purpose of for:

The office for “imigre Affairo" should maintain close
supervision end control over the "CFE offico in New
York and in Paris, This can be act:ievod only by having
integrated in NCTL's offices one or several hich level
individuals working directly for CIA.

Detailed recormendations on the structure of the Office for "Enigre
Affairs" is appended hereto.

ELLLN STuRN

erage

te


--- Page 63 ---
14-0000
pee crn cman 18 1m nn RRP TDOLEY Sept? CO SUET ance RE AAI eam goes om teas ot 7

oo, | SECURITY INFUP-S
SECRES

ONGANIEATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PROPOS:D OFFICE FOR
“iG. AT AUION,

T. Orcandzation

Chicf

De;uty Chief

Two Staff Assistants
Two cocretarics

Il. Functions

The overall function of the office for "ugre Affairs" should bo
the forrmlation and coordination of policy on national council and other
emigre affairs and the tranemittance of cuch policy to KCFE.

1. Liaison and coordination with otnor CIA Offices.

a. Transmission of material from NCFi offices to line divisions.
b. Tranemission of material fron line divisions to NCTE.

“¢. Coordluation with the linu divisions on all emlyre matters in
which they have an interest. If the office for “buigre
Affairs" fo kept informed on the needs of the line
divisions, the !CFL shauld be able to perform functions
useful to the divisions.

ds To facilitate the dealincs between the Office for "lnicre
Affaire" and the iine divisions, there should be one
person in LE~2, Su ana WE~3 desicnatai as lialson officer

on emigre matters.
2. Liaison and coordination with the Department of State.

a. There should be a ClA-GState Coordinating Camitiee, which
should mect regulerly to discucs catters pertaining to
the national councils and erigre affairs,

b. Although a mecber of the MCF: may occasionally te yresent at
@ meeting of tne Coordirating Comittee, regular sessions
should be attended only by members af cia and the State
Department. The system, which has teen in effect during
the last four ronths, under which bi-weekly neetings have
taken place between a representative of whe NCFE in
Kew York and the Department must be discontinued,

3. Supervision of the activities of the TCvE.

a. The office for “unicpre Afvairs® should be charred with the
supervision of the UcFs office in New tark sui is Faris,

od

SEL

Niet


--- Page 64 ---
14-0000

ne nee mann Fe RARE ROS ROEM ES ce nN a tat itn Cont anata gat ae a

%. Onc or more high level indlviduaie in the NCYE offices
should be CIA events. hile having authority for certain
spot decisions, they should be rec oncille for all actions
to heniauarture Lr tasiin, ton. There ciould be regular
contact betwecn the NCE officer and headquarters.

4. Handling of ul) other work related to emizre matters.

a, Sterilizing and distributing Zinnia rerorte.

be Proparing meroranda on eripre matters.

¢. Coordinating action cables with ling divictors.

d. Maintainin; extensive files on national council and
related endii re affairs. .

Cry
oy
a

-

t



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

‘ Ys

ie ee ae Ni

tne | as but Ane |


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

CIA, STATE Aly HCFE .

RELATIONSTP BS

CLA-STATE
orlineting Comalttee

Cffice for
"Enivre Affairs"

Faris
Office

_ Control

~ =» ~ Cordination


--- Page 67 ---
14-0000

6 March 1952
MEMORANLUA FOR’ mar E. MILLA
. FROMs THOMAS MYERS
SUBJECT s german Moschnor - Convicted Spy

1. Pursuant to our conversation, you are advised that the captioned
individual was convicted in the U. S. Court at Numberg on 31 January
1952 on @ charge af espionage. VW. Se Attorney developed information
which was tumed over to us indicating that among otner things Moschner
chad been directed by the Czech intelligence service to procure
infometion about nadio Free Europe, especially bearing on the guarding
of the installations and the consequences of an act of sabotage.
Moschner was not an employee of RFE and tho dasis of the espionage
charge against hin was that he had endeavored to odtain information
concerning personnel and activities of tha CIC. :

~ 2. Through the courtesy of a-friendly U. Se agency, we: have
been provided with a copy of the targets which Moschnex had been given
by the Czech intelligence service. I am attaching a copy of the list
of such targets sai you will note that the activities of this individual
clearly refiect the interest of. Czech intelligence in possible sabotage
of the physical installations of RFE in Munich. Further informetion
is being developed in this matter and I will advise you when I receive

THOS HYENS -


--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

1.
26
3e
he

Se

6°

Te
8

‘eo

10,
le

12.

136

Use
15.

"eee

STRICTLY PRIVATE coPY

APPENDIX "a"

ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF INFORMATION REGARDIN's 24Di FHZE EUROPS

ISSUED YY THE CZECHOSLOVAK INTELLI“ENSZ CZA7272.

The following are essential elements of inforaations

Plans of all RFE buildings and RFE trancaitter etations.

Dimensions of antenna used and distance oetseen antenna towers.

Phone numbers of transmitter stations.

Plans of all telephone lines, specifically leat-ina and terminals.
Relationship of one RFE building to another in an operational senses
Addresses and telephone nurbers of all individuals connected with RFZ.
Details of functions and operations of eacn tranzaitter.

The number of guards at each RFE installation, nationality of such guards,
and duty assigneents and locations, whether accompanied by police dogse

Number of civilians usually in RFE buildings at nignte
How and what transmission operations are conducted st night.

Complete plans of electrical power lines and power supply at each
transmitter station.

How many rural policemen are located in the area of each transmitter
station, addresses.

Addresses and details soncerning guard personnel at each transmitter
stations

Number and identity of persons working in all of =72 and their addresses,
Distance of transmitter stations from rural police headquarters.

NOTEs A certain amount of repstition in the above essential elements of

2/15/52

information my exist, However, they were euxcaitted to me only

as notes taken from a highly classified report cni therefore may
not be as exact as given by Moschner during his interrogations

On Monday we shall attempt to get the entire report of Moschner's
statements regarding RFS and shall submit further pertinent details.


--- Page 69 ---
14-0000

UNCLE SSTFIED RESTRICTED C  CIDENTIAL 3
wh FSENDER WILE CIRCLE CLASSIFICAT TOP anD BOTTCM)

CENTRAL (RTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP-

(weprovan (77 inrornation C7) sicaature
(action [7] outer repcy (J return
CoAonment TC Jpreparation oF repry ——1 oi sparen
(= koncorrence (J recommenoation (—] Fite

REMARKS:

Tals story of the Nagy affair as it was
related to 00 by Contact is pretty old hat, but
you might nevertheless find mate: ¢ interest

in it. V
TWB

CONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED UNCLASSTFIED |

scp s9az 274



--- Page 70 ---
14-0000

ee
a ee

Ce ne ene on RRNA TE MUS TN

Stoney

Chief, Operations Division, GR
Attention: Fr, W. F. iowland -
Chief, Contest Division, 00

Rungarian Exile Activities

1. A Hungarian Governsent-in-fxile which feels that it oan
"ayaken the spirit of resistance ana result in piercing the Iron
Curtein and liquicating the vonmnists ia Funjary" has teea forned
under the direction of Foreno Hayy. This croup cane to our attention
when Louis Goldstein, a itew Yor« Jeweler, suggested that a representa-
tive of this Ayeucy call on Paul veles ead Les einer, Sew York lawyers,
who bad been approsshed by Serena hagy rejarding the organization of
thie croup. Mr. boise furnished our "ew York offine with information

regarding Mr, Sec7's organisation,

-2, VMeabere of thia group other then acy are Ceza Telexi, Karolyi
Pezex, Zolten Pfeiffer, Dezao Sulyok, Zoltan Eay, Istvan Eorankxovics,
Albert Barthes, Paul Auer and Aladar Szecedp-tinezak., The objective of
this group is to fora a covernzent~ineexile which would casbat Coumnisa
dn Hungary, strenjthen resistance, develop the underjround, ship radio :
parte and transaitters av well as ara, revive a good propaganda canpeign, '
reise troops ard fon resistence in the cvent of war, and set up 4 teapo= :
rary dg iccts governsent in hungary if the vest wine. This group, which . ot
Claiss to reprozent 83 per cent of the Hungarian pesple es of the last
free elections, would hold frev elections 16 s00n as possible and let
the poople choose a new governsent. They want official recognition
a8 a Lovernzent~in-exile and US Governzsnt financial support with the
control of funds handled by the US Governzent. (Our field repreceatative
comments thats "This is the first of many groups probably being forusd
in the hope cf getting sone of the Mutual Asciatanse 2100,000,000,")

3. This group cays that Radio Free Europe 15 a joke and s travesty
en the term "desocracy", and that sorething should be done about it.
Members of tha organization claia that Communist propajanda is beaned -
out by RE and that tho Munio: ofrice is etelfed with the following
Nasiss Ealle Czonkas (fnu) Maori (phonetic); Aledar Kovacs; Lasslo
Beroiy Ancras isexely; (fmu) calaveri (phonetic); ‘dejo Pabarnuk snd bis
wife, Also, the followin, Coammists are on the Munish staff: Josef 1
Keneni (phonetic); Zoltan canie; (fnu) Mikes; Laszlo isabo.

SEeag T


--- Page 71 ---
14-0000
ae ees mitemente tne | SAN
a cesarean ee a A ne ene LSE, acted em mur

eg

eount]
; . SCCURITY INFORMATION
"Bunarian Exile dotivities® ole

‘4 The Hunarian group hopes. to be a soubor of the Central and
fastern European ‘Comaittes which will be soapthing of a coordinating
cosalttes for the various yet=to-be-forned Latellite governnento-in=
exile, A partial list of tho weabers of this large Cazaittes (all
of whoa also soon to clais that Rik is rotten) follows

Te Ferenc Nagy,. President
aa ae . Tetvan Rarankovios
: . - Josez Cerny -
. George Diaitroffo
7 Keisan Tosti
Comel File
Mikal Erek
Vlatko Kecok
- Stanislaw Mikolajoayk
Stefan Csuski
Augustin Popa
Vaclovas Tsidsikaukas
‘Gonstantin Visolanu

$. Me, weiss is getting the political plans of the Hungarian Oroip
and the Central and Faptern Furopean Comnittes and vill give them to ns
when Le recoives then. Once he has given ua this materiel, be hopes to
lot our field zen deal directly with the national ¢roup lecders, These
leaders hope to sell theaselves and thoir ideas to Cli and have expressed
their villingsese to supply CIA exslustvely with intelligencs inforaation,
(We aseuas that this group's cooperation will be conzensurate with the
ayouat of finanoial support vhich Gls gives them).

6, Our field reprecontative has comaented that this group asy also
try to discredit RPE althowmh *...208t of these buss would be starwing if
it were not for RIE help. They eireacy have Levyor Weise believigy that
RFS ia exe of the vost evil things going.” ..fke told these two Jer. heise
and Mr, teines/ that we were interested in petting all possible iasornation
on these groups and impressed upon thes the feat that we could ,uarcatee
no faveretle action. It was aleo necessary | w persuade them that Radio
Freo Furepe is not supported by our agency."

7. Paul Soisa saintaine a iev York lov offico at 369 Lexington
Avenue, Fo was tora on 29 Sove.aber 191] in ew York City and served in
the Infantry curing World War Ii. later, be was in Xilitary Governzent
in Kores, His partner, Hr. Veiner, vas born 20 April 19]5 and attended

Harvard Law Sehool.

veut


--- Page 72 ---
14-00000 —
one eiSpE un aPaeee rial Ce Weta Ra Me iantanaeed We Fad

oe epee Re EN ore ee ett

7 | vin cy ‘ : uo .
phat © | SECURITY INFORMATION

Hungarian Exile dotivities Je

.§& Wo shall follow up on this and shall keep you advised,
If you have particuldr pointe vhioh you would like us to discuse
' vith Mr, Volos, please let us know.

2 . \
: H
1

i

B. M, ASHORAFT

. @os AD/O (1)
i ~ Ghief, Pyshological Warfare Divtaten, on (WY .
; Chief, Cover bivision/PLANS/0S0 (2

4
noudt
eM
‘

.

ounces



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

ect Ya. vacksen ~\
dr, Lang

iY 21, 1952, PROY SPYWCER

“Second, ry can plans; until 1 know when we are to

ase Tr. Lens and what the conseq:encen cf that interview

may to, Lean of course sake no cefinite travel arrangenants.
T shouid like te ca te Stragtcurg and tsls with then there
about the enlargement pians for the: College de l'Europe

r

Litre; I nant to have a feu cays in faris, if possttle
catch up cn covelopzerts in Royall's areas -and-1..feel-4
impoytant to have about a week in Liston. Porpettlair the
question of dates ny itinerary would prebatly be Strasbeurc,
taris, Lisbon, New Yerk, anc If there iy to to any consider-
able delay before we can see Ir. Lanz I shall plan to co

te StrasLourc from Srarifurt, then return to Franafurt and
then go direct to fanis, It world please ro if I were atle
to go Lack to New York in time to -o to Now Hiampshire to
vote in the primaries cn tarch ll, but this may Le an idle

hope.

Third, ovr Yrankfurt negotiations; as I cabled C.P,
we reached complicte arreezent on the technical hasia,
covered by the draft licensing-arpreenent, Threughout our
ciscussiong we were trested with the utmoat courtesy and
wonsideéeration. The cricinal craft sitmitted fcr our study
contained ceveral arbiruities and specific provisions which,
if ifterally conatrued nevld defeat the purpose which toth
sides seened tc ‘have in rind. Our sucgestions for chanres
and modifications were accepted after a minimuz amount of
eiscuasion, nhenever we made a valid point, the fact was
recognized at cnce ty tie others, Lick arrees with ce that
one could not expect tc receive any more courtecus or
considerate treat:ent, ard we were ali very much pleased
by the atmosphere at the rinistr3. You realized, of
ecurse, that the technical sice cf the question is ky no
Beans the complete pictcre, and it remaine to te seen how:
ely we cen clear up tha nonetecnnical aszecets. If we
tan have our cinn apjointseat arain tencrrow, I curht to

te alle te have a cable in Yew Isrk for your o ening Koncday,
indloating the proszects, tut if cur apnreintsent is delayed
until some time next week = cone cf the local hancicaps we

are encountering = is a harneval-period er "Pasting" which
react.es its climax rencay. shing jis muca nore of a
eeletration tian Sacrge caszinston's tirthday, so lick and

I are willingly sacrifieiars our Kelicay tonorrow (strike

eut tick from the preceding clause because he tells re

that the Gersan cperaticn doos net recojnise G. sashington's
birthday. ahen I asxed Sir tf they ast selected Sashing
instead tecause it lasted lenrer, he avoided a direct answer, )
ac as nct te cet invelved tn a possitly long rosteFashing
Searever pertod Serfewsiy, very ifttie werk fa done in
Servany the day after trie ;rinctsal Fasenine celebration

ard wo Acre ve can fet setters -cre cr tesa cleared un to-
zserrow, tut J @a:ajl net arcw until I cet a teleptons call

toto evening after return to ‘rarkfurt,

cnn cane ee ateedein


--- Page 74 ---
14-0000 ee a NT ARETE Be

1752, PROM SPEKCSR

RACERPT

¥.1,. Tha Ronn telephone messace cane throughs
Lens cannot ooe.us tomorrow, or Konday or Tuesday--or,
perhaps, an;tine. Frits got on the war path and said we
could act tase that Lind ef trush-off and Lens, through
his asstatent Herr Ur shippersnapper finally said he had . +
turned fuii responsibility cover te a Foreign Office
official, a Hin, Lr. Strohm whos Fritz knews. Prits thea, -
tried tc reach Strohm-but--he was ellegedly vnavatlablo;
Fritz decended that word be got to hin and finally it. was,
Strohsz recarzing, "Shy, there is no hurry atout this, is
there?" 2trohm tcld Frits he couldn't see us before Thurss -
day. An aypointment has therefere been made for us at the
Foreign ®ffice in Donn at 10 A... next Thursday the 20th.
I haven't wcrzed out my schedule tetween now and then but”
shail pretably do Strastourg and faris and then proceed
from Franzfurt to Lisbon assuming that to be possible which Ly
I don’t vet know, Flease infcrn °.L, of the foregcing and
Bob Lang wili ask to see this letter as Lick has just tele-
phoned to «unich a teletype’ ‘message for Fet referring to
this letter,

I as, I confess, rather coneerned stout these re-
cent develczcents, Tne “"arreerent" we reacted with the
Bundespcest cn technical peints has no significance without t
@ parallel pelitical clearance ia Fonn, so speed with the
former has no meaning in the face of delay in the latter.
Tell C.L., therefore, that my ten=watt freen light hase
gained ne wattage. :

Bce ee ee let m

cect Fr. cacison
Mr. Lang

a

i eramenaame 8


--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

‘ would not only expose and thus jeopardize the existence of any r:

\ a
Co C poy y a» February 142
SECUPIIY incsee cew

DRAFT s TELEGHAY FROM TH HONCHABLE JOSLPH C. GickW
TO CONGHELSUAN O. Ke AHUSTRONG.

*

I keenly regret to inform you that, upon further reflection and
upon the basis of information which has recently’come to my attention,
l consider it inadvisable for um ito address your Psychological Stratezy
Conference, and that I find it necessary to ask you to release me from
speaking at your meeting of Saturday. “hen J was first asked to cpeax
about the significance of National Comittee for a Free Europe and the
activities of Kadto Free Europe, £ understood that the Conference world
discuss propaganda and peychologicel warfare, I ysphe from the relesse nz
issued by your o fice, that among tle purposes of the conference nre the
presentation of definite plans of action to increase resistance moverente,
and to nid the peoples of the Soviet nation and the Satellite States to
overthrow their regimes, .as well as to eetablish a continuing orgarization
to carry out. the programs developed at the conference, This release alto
indicates that there will be full and cperi discussion of euch matters and
that persons purporting to represent underground movements in Poland, tre
Baltic States, Russia, Chins, Kore*, etc., will take part in discussions,

It ie my personal view that it would be unwise to discusssusttere of
this sensitive and provocative character in open meetings, particularly
where programs of specific action are considered. It seems to me that
public duscussions of such matterc end revelations of plans and prograss

Air gtence
movements which may be identified and described, a3 well as the livee of

the people perticipatin,, brt would +1co provide quantities of advers<
prenaganda material for use by Soviet and satellite propayinda m-chines.

It is mw conclusion that ry positicn end responsibilities 9c Chatraan cf

the National Comittee for a Free Europe cake it inappropriate for me to
speak befcre or lend my name to such a gathering because of tne signifi-
cance which might be attributed to cuch zppearance. i want to express ry
full ey:pathy sith the sotivation of yourself ard your co-sponsors, and

to point out in thie connection shat tho aiu3 and objectives of the Neticral
Comaittee for a Free burcne, of which I a Chairman, are to keep hope alive
among the prisoner pvontcs «* she shave ctiies and te provide easeistarnce

to fugitaves fron Scviet tyranny, 1 cspecially deeire thet ay dcctsion
against appearing shalt rct be a cause <f em arracsmenl to youcclf or tre
others concerned. I thercfore cu, gest tnat yor inform those who you Dslicses
should know, thatdie tc urforrecetle circusstances I have Youad zyself

unable to attend.

Crig:
D/PY- for files lr. Weener read to
BO/P = chrono - 1 air. Crew over long-
wee 1 disterce teleplone
Kenry Poore = for use 29 gui ies today ont the

latter said he would
AbyA wee the weeage fron

3 = C 3 E T Pance tou. bp


--- Page 76 ---
14-0000

. For Frelim. text license negot. betreen
NCFE and Bundcepost subj. to Ger. polit. aprroval ’
seet Bonn to State 1688 of 25 Feb, 'S2, C VR-265,
Confic Sec. Info., copy being retained by DCPY,

1 Mateo Sate Mehra ees aie at oe


--- Page 77 ---
14-0000

‘SECRET

sual ywtontinsea!

18 February 1352

MEKORANDUM POR« DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENPHRAL TUPPLLIGENCE

SUBSECT s “eyhe ‘Voice! and Radio Free Tarépe
pach other ; Complenent

1. The attached leaflet was inserted as a supplezent in
the January "Cruseter®, a nowoletter which is sent cut te the
8,090 regicnal chairmen of the Crusade for Freedom organisation.
It was prepared with the ecoperation of the Voice of Anerica
officere in Yew York ant was reviewed by the * Area of the

Departraent of State.

2. It is intended to acquaint the regional Crusade
organtrations with the facta about VA and offset any critician
or unfortunate couparisons that may have epruny up during the -
1951 canpaten. .

A. OATES L
Reputy of
Peyohological Staff Livision
Attaoechwents
As doscribed above
Pietribution:
Addresses ~ Criginal
on/p 21
are -1 .
c/er el
c/sz 21
cE 21
cro 21
DCPY -1
RI -2

SECRET

"mee


--- Page 78 ---
14-0000

THE “VOICE” AND RADIO FREE EUROPE
COMPLEMENT EACH OTHER

Both Are Indispensable |

j .

“ W hat's the difference between the Voice of America and Radio Free Europe?" “Why
is it necessary co tiave buth the Voice and Radio Free Europe?” These are frequent questions
asked of General Clay and the other leaders of che Crusade for Freedom.

The Voice and Radio Free Europe are both vitally needed if we are to win the
Cold War. .

They are completely separate organizations. Each performs a distinct function in the fight
against the gigantic Soviet propaganda machine. .

The Voice speaks with the authority of the U. S, Government. It is financed by Govern-
ment funds.

Radio Free Europe was set up by private citizens. Ic is financed by millions of individual
contributions co the Crusade for Freedom.

Voice is World Wide

The Voice is a worldwide network, broadcasting in 46 languages over 75 transmitters. ft
is the only American voice heard in the Soviet Union. Its 120 indiwidual daily programs of
news, music, roundtables, commentaries, documentaries, service programs, etc., have a potential
audience of 300,000,000 listeners. - :

Radio Free Europe is much smaller. It concentrates on the captive countries behind the
Iron Curtain: Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania, Bulgaria and Albania. Its cransmit-
ters are in Western Europe.

The Voice speaks for the American people, spreading the truth about democracy, giving a
true picture of. life in the United States, and spiking Moscow's lies about us, It repcrts in full
on official American acts and documents, presents news and world developments from our
poinc of view.

But Voice is nor limited to Government pronouncements; it regularly reflects American
opinion as expressed in our press and radio. In a friendly way—with programs of informa-
tion and service—it promotes a better understanding of the United States in Europe, in Latin
America, the Far Ease and the Near East. .

Crusader Supplement January 1952



--- Page 79 ---
peso
—
14-00000

i i {
und the Wo.
Around the Clock

* aay

and |

Aa ae Manabe
mates NEP AAA SSN

NOTE: To determine Greenwich Mean Time
focal time zone, add of subtract the
al the base of map from your loca

Ttde tot |

a 3 3 “4 3

to: show at a “vast
and relay stations carries Voice of America pages how
Ustenery everywhere,

Latin American Programs are transmitted from shortwave stations focated near New Yo
Programs in 46 languages to Boston, Cincinnati and San Francisco to all counties south of the United States, ;
z prograi To Far Eastern countries the rams are broadcast frum high-powered transmitters
neat New Wark Cie nes the Cincinnathe va mltted from stations in the United States located Fear Sam Francisco, then relayed by shastwave teen at Honolulu, Manila snd Ce
in power from 20,000 te 00 000 warns vin directional antennas avd with transmitters ranging (Ceylon) and by a medium-wave transmitter at Manila,

ini be, map Indicates a considerable overlap of radiv coverage from the various transmitters,
times the Overlapping areas Indicate different language ‘programs, and sometimes they indica
ated | a single language Program is broadcast on several wavelengths, In order to give listeners a chk
itters are located in the cleare:

'st signal in a locality, Vertical lines indicate Time Zones, with GMT at Noon es.
International Date Line as a dotted tine,



--- Page 80 ---
ern ea A amen 0 aah rin an SEL ae eed AE a am BES

14-0000

am Exiles Speak Over RFE

Raugio Free: Europe, on the other hand, does not portray America. It concentrates largely
on what is taking place within the slave. countries. Over its transmitters Poles speak to Poles,
Hungarians to Hungarians, etc. They speak’as “the voice of Free Poland,” “the voice of Free
Hungary.” etc. They look at their people's problems through their own eyes. .

“ RFE programs specialize in identifying and denouncing Communist informers and collab-
orators, sending back messages from escapees, and exposirig the corruption and crimes within
the Red regimes.

In cheir broadcasts to behind the Iron Curtain, the Voice and-Radio Free Europe have es-
sentially the same aims: co keep alive the hope of liberation; to let listeners know thac they
have not been forgotten; ¢o stiffen their resistance against theie Communist oppressors; to ex-
pose the fraudulent basis of authority upon which the Moscow-dominated regimes rest.

Both combat Communism and the persecution of- religion and denial of human rights.
Both report the superior industrial power and fighting potential of the free world over the . 5
Sovier-enslaved world, , A

: . 1951 Year of Progress for “Voice”

D uring the past year the Voice of America:

1, Stepped up daily programming from 30 to 50 hours daily. i

2. Made progress in overcoming Soviet jamming. :

3. Increased its broadcasts to behind the Iron Curtain, adding the “splinter” languages of
Georgian, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Tatar, Turkestani, Larvian, Lithuanian and Estonian. |

4, Inaugurated programs to Albania, Finland, Israel and Portugal in their respective languages; :

: . to China in two additional dialects, Swatow and Amoy; to Japan and South and Southease .

t Asia in Hindi, Urdu, Thai, Burmese and Malayan.

5. Became more outspoken and hard-hitting. One of the principal chemes was the support of
the UN effort to ‘repel the Chinese and North Korean Communist aggression in Korea.
Major attention was given to exposing the fraudulent Soviet “peace” drive.

6. Began work on the “Ring Plan” approved by Congress, which calls for a network of power-
ful relay bases girdling the globe.

7. Created * “Vagabond” '—a ship equipped with a transmitter, so that radio broadcasts may
be relayed from shipboard.

8. Received 318,000 letters from overseas listeners—an increase of 35¢;, over 1950.

9. Need'ed the Communists so successfully thac Radio Moscow and Soviet regional stations
doubled their attacks against the Voice. :


--- Page 81 ---
14-D0000, oe a. 7
one rere rere Semana AAR HBB a OP oP SO hee CCE cota ita ened deenhaC nan oeead cat

REgT Peres |

In reply refer to We ICS). °

1 Povruary 1952

Mr. Abbott Washburn
Hational Committee for a Free parops, Tre.
110 West, 57th Street :

_ New York, How York

Dear Abbotts .
Our friends acrose the street have reviewed and

approved the proposed issue of the “Crusader” which fe
attached.

‘Thay request that the following minor corrections
be mades

Item 3 on page 2, Iatvian should be added after
Estonian,

Item 4 on page 2, Israel should be added after
Portugal.

Sincerely,

John L. Dazewood

Attachnent
fhe Voice and Hadio Pree Lurope Complement each other
both are indispensable

PY/IS/AGLseve

Distribution:
addressee ~ Orig.
Dery -1

2
gy ie RESTRICTED
PY/Is=- 1 °
SD/RE- 2 S°CURITY FORMATION


--- Page 82 ---
eeecer ee ee MR HT ee IS AS TS eesti
ene ee NE Fr Samm -

14-0000

corr
Confidential

January 2h, 1952

MR COMAN DUNE
“10s Mr, Tom Eracen

FRM: John Devine

SUBJFCT: "Crusader" Article on YOA

, The cory fox the prorosed issue of the "Crusader" dealing
with the Voice of America has teen reviewed in the Department.
of State and hss been approved, There are ony two minor
corrections vhich are as follows:

1. Item 3 on pace 2, Latvian should be adjed after Estonian.

2, Item & on pace 2, Israel showld be added after Portugal.

This is an ercouraging move on the part of RFE and should be
very usaful in getting VOA's story to a large segment of the
American public,



--- Page 83 ---
14-0000

Ses

Ou le be F
SEAL iT’ 2erOdeaAr TO,

FRO: Anrere
TO: Svaretary of Stete

NOs T1I7, Pebrises E, E pome

In view wolleknium., Turr sensitivity (DEPTREL €4?, Jan 31)
E-B doubte thet def orsicenl atd b: i vorably ected upon

by Turk Govt.

/¥ | A TRUE onPY oF

THE SIGNED ORIG~
WAAL, Arad Meme. : we

Tabs 26Ccs
dec’'d os Februsr 7, lb?
rl? asne

te nlso belicve eny sich @-pronch ng oontenpléted by RE
might serivusly feopercize possibilitv Ture secaptance

VOA rctay base proposel.

depret duleay in reply caused
service. i

iTskO :

iDer TIAL

SrCvaityY =

ORAL ON

by farble 12 Le-TzZU requiring

bCChes,


--- Page 84 ---
14-0000

fae

7 February 1952

MEXOVANDUH FOR THE RECORD

SUBJECT: Project TPTONIC: Mid-European Studies Center,
American Personnel °

Attached hereto 4s a copy of subject list as of

20 November 1951. :
por NB
THOMAS VW. BRADEN

Attachment on original only

ro twee
i akg


--- Page 85 ---
14-0000

EVROPEAS STVDIES CENTEM
American Pers ol - ~~
MOVEMLEL ody

ASSISTANT TO THE LIHECTOR, LIViST ON OF TUTELLECTUAL COOPERATION

AND ADMINISTHATIVE YEAD OF MESO © renponeible to Lirector for exile
recearch program, textbook cropran, American education program,
Edtitorsal Departuent, and adminictrative operations for Studies
Center located at i: Went O7th Street, Neloe

Names Stetson Se. Holmes

Qualificationas An Rutgorss Marine Corns, Majors
Conptroller, Popeslrookn Foundatinn, Ince

Salarys *2,699

DIXZOTOR OF DANUBIANS INCUIRY; RESEARCH SI PEAVISOR = supervises and
eentrols tho reneareh efforts of aporoximataly 13 exiles.

Names Jacok #optner

Sualifications: AS University of Fernsylvaniays
UA and Fh. De candidate, Columbia; chief of Amorican

Red Cross Uisesion to Yugoslavia.

Salary: $5,000
RECEARCH SUPERVISOR - supervises and controls the research efforts
of approximately 2G exiles.

Names John #. oodall

Gualificetiones 2A and WA, Duke Inivereity; PheD.
candicate, Columhias CIC, Franca.

Salary: £1,209

PrOSECT MANAGER FOR AVERICAN SCHOLARSHIP PRODRAM and temporary
supervisor of textbook project -- as scholarship project manager

fereens applieants and sunervises the activities of 37 exile scholare
Temporarily in

ship students in AmerlLean universities and collepese
charge of Lh exiles doing preliminary work on tertbook project.

Supervises the research efforts of 7 exiles.
Hanes Maurice J. Downey

ualifieationss AP, MA, and PhP. candidate, NYU,
Na togtne in educations infantry, U.S. Army.

Salerys 25,990


--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

American Personnel <2.

NESC ENITOR -= responsible for the translatincs, rewriting, and
editing for publteation of all manusers pt produced by exile

researchers.
Names Hugh Corbett
Qualifications: BA Oxford; Najor, British Army;
intelligence officer tn Luposlavia and Albania;

former adltor, Rinhard and Henry Holt; forser
editor and chief, Office of Uilitary History, the

Department of the Army.

Salarys %7,090

CHIEF OF THE ADYIUISTRATION SECTION - ressonsible for the fireal
control, supply, file control, and general administration.

Salary: %4,000

L TiPIsts - total salaries -= £10,666
lk SECRETARIES - total salaries -- £13,789

CLERK-TYPIST - Salary -- $2,600

LIBRARIAN - Salary -- £3,120

RECEPTIONIST & ASSISTANT LIBRARIAN = salary -+ 23,120.
OFFICE BOY-MESSENGER - salary -- £2,310

SWITCHBOARD OPERATOR - salary -- $2,560

ee el eS

EDITORIAL ASSISTANTS - rewriters, seript typists, etc. - total
salartes -~ £10,720 :

Positions not yet filleds
: 1 RESEARCH SUPERVISOR

1 PROJECT MANAGER for the Textbeoy program -- in charge of
collecting, evaluating, and revising existing IroneCurtain
: country pre-1739 textbcoks for post-liberation use. Super
‘ vising preparation of new texts where revision of old ones

would be insufficient.

‘ L.PROJECT KANAGER for American educavion section -- restonsible
for promoting knowledge of and interest in European satellite


--- Page 87 ---
14-0000 Se nen os

tee

American Personnel -3-

countries by working through American education
system on all levels, coordinating research in
this field.

2 SECRETARIES


--- Page 88 ---
yA Fab S 2
Seues

bewee. code aus bere Go twee * berped

Shain 4 dy ,

Parrnnordstrve ane salad suv. —~ |

ud He che bh Hh tlhe

cttme Yo be ‘Un pore. g _
ton in pana.

Ton © | Me ne Myo
wae in tha gob bs Vruntel Uke

Sak hindoay AS alk | cbt aE Scab)
4 Jam ouive
d.

4 Vga aL Sane we $0,
Sa tit RIE dwonbh bere, dha ee Pe
5? Hescga ! 1) aeas ptil tle ddeien

2) bliin oda

uth RYE hes W y
oj et} bf tniree CE Sheu!
chan calles

mr IT I urth, aw
entealane, po ther n tere. Oe thd -
Maece Liha thes ROEMY qe Am Vissccory

Dies

AONE Shae ete any, Eom


--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

a rn en el AE PT A SLi eal A lies ikl pn eA CNH os AEST

30 January 1952

MEMORANDUM FORs SPECTAL ASSISTANT FOR TNSPECTIOW AND REPORTS —

SUBJECT Radio Pree Furope Proadoasta Regarding tho
Czech Currency Refora

REFFRFNCEs: . 1 /P Memorandua to PCPY of 16 January 1952,
Same Subject

1. At the risk of mating this memorandum overly long, a review
of the cable traffic on the above subject appears desirable. According
to information available to this office, the canpaign to take the -
psychological initiative in connection with the rusored refors of : :

“ ourrency of Czechoslovakia was first proposed by FE Division on
30 December 1951 in cable to Frankfurt and runich (OUT 95920) aa . '

follows: .

a. Persistent rumors clain Caech currency reform {aeainent.
Rungary allegedly printing new Ceech currency. Long New Toar
holiday appeara suitable for reform.
. db. Request all information this subject forwarded to Fran
and Iruni.
Gc. Balieve general knowledge rumored refora to Crechs
would harass government, cause excessive buying.
d. Sugeest Creech operation out of Germany exploit theme
soonest in ETOBODNE NLASY and/or pamphlets or other redia
enphasisings . . i
(1) Eeonosie and political desendenoy Cseehs on ee
Busetars and consequent disadvantayes. 2
(2) Instability Crech economy. .
(3) advisability population unload cash for goods,
@. If thite Legion prepared sugrest exploit these along

2. Om ® January 1952, OPC/0S0 Munich vired Frankfurt (14 10416) _
the following ceasage fron Willian criffith, Policy Advisor for Fadlo to

Free furope at “unich: :
®a. Radio Free furope :

PM es


--- Page 90 ---
14-0000

*a.: Radio Free Furope reports indieste probably Czech
e@urrency rofors schedulet for early 1952 affecting larger notes
and vith ot least 507 devaluation.

db. MMB concurs this estimate situation.

e@. Request ‘eomments on plan which propose submit Radio Free
Europe New Yor for approvals Large caapaign reporting above 0s
__.Snforsation from inside stating it latest regiae attempt defraud ~
, immabitants telling listeners they can thenselvea foree postpene=

aent or abandonment reform by: .

(1) Changing all 1,000, 500, 160 notes for enaller.
(2) Puying roode getting rid money.

dad. ‘stinated result buying panic flight from-crowm.

@. Advantacess .
(1) Increase econoxtoe oriajs.
(2?) Disrupt regize plan.
(3) Guaranteed propaganda success (1f refora Radio Free

Burepe holoet evade if none helped postzone.)

f.: Risk: ust be sure astimste situation as planned campaign

enly possible once.”

Later that sare day, another cable (IN 16526) quoted Griffith as
t

Pa. Intend all-out ono week campaipn beginning January.
bd. Roquesting National Committee for a Free Furope, Ine.
approval Radio Pree Purope channels.
@. Tine elensnt forbids waiting.
ad. Pasa to %. 2. Jackson.

Pre Co 1. Jackson in New York on 2 January 1952, received a sinilar
meosage direct frez his people in Iuntch whe had been alerted in response ©
te paragraph f. of EE Vivisicn’s esble of 3% Doceabor 1951 above. The
undersigned happened te be with Mr. Jackson in Now York that day, and
at bis request obtained telophonia confirmation regarding the above
exchange of eessages. Accordingly, ’r. Jackson told Ais people to go
ahead with their operation.

3. ca) Jammary 1952, OPC/OS0 Frankfurt cabled (I¥ 10728) their
ooncurrence of the all-out exploitation of the aucgested thens as fcllowss

®a, BB rvny E280 {IN 1OLL6) concur all-out explo!tatioa
these as encther regine attenpt defraud Crechs, best approach.
Shoald stress foviet ruidance planned reforn in need bring Csech

ecanoxy


--- Page 91 ---
Biota ta RLF nettle trace eee aR rt aR Sts

TADDDDD = ewe epee a ene ge ve, RS ARI IY AAAS ENE POMC 2 REN Ye A ISA eS CEL

"economy closer oxn and continuing detorioraticn eecnonic structure

CBechoslovakia,
b. Pelieve matteds aimat foree postponement er abandonsent
oe should te confined susrentions and left diacretion populace.
- : Passttility rebuttal canpatzn and dissafection seezle aeon if plan
abtasdoned following unloading cash and huge buytas apres.”

he 0a Priday h vanvary 1957, 06 cabled wunteh (oct 97623)

*guspend action eutlined referance pending instructions which
follew soonest.®

©. oa S canvary 19S? this suspension wae anplified as follows to
Frankfurt (OUT #1085) with copy to Hunichs

hilo considerable evidence currency reforn say develop do
mot wish embark on oreration until mora certain of fauts and. know
gore about your plane for handling it. Advise ary additional’
infornation you able obtain possibility ourrencr refore and send
outline contemlated cperational program inolading channels
dissemination and thazes.®

&. om “onday 7 January 1952, the following cable was received
from Peatoh (IN 12619),

Va. Roferance too late. Progras bavan OX 7 January.
b. Instrnet.®

7. On 9 January 1957 at the request of Fr Mivistoz, we called
wr, Yahosl, assistant Director of AF7 in New York, sho advised that he
hod had no tnetructions ts suzpest the Caech currency erecran. He said
that Rr. ¢. %. Jackson nai cabled to APF, “urich on Saterday, 5 January
1952, te go ahead with the provran if they vere satisfied {t was a bona
fide there and would not Neckfire. At our request, *r. ‘akcol sent the

following teletype ceseage to “unich, RPYs

™ 1d you cont!nve Caechoslovakia currency {pregras) beyond
Jasmary 7Pth as outline! toletyped prorras contest Ma. Cur
friends advise ~- ore ~ o-nsideratle doubt on part ‘=formation
gathering frienis here that it hapsened or will Baowen. Two =
that (formation gathering frievis advised Munien recresentative
to tell PYF Manton te Sold off. Ascune you enly west ahead 7th
en “erich infermtion gathering friends advice an! exay.®

To the foregoing


--- Page 92 ---
cnr pan ee ef = ar ANS A,
pee oe ee mS a

14-0000

. - :
To the foregoing he reectved the following replys

®Caechoslovak currency (program) ie continutne in a restrained
manner, wo are prepared to takes credit if 2% doesn't nappen. .
Manich representative did not atvise ue postpone until after mid
7th. went ahead on itunioh information gathering friends lecal rep.
Rut wo had their best advice and blessing en this one.*

8. According to the foregoing teletyse exchange, RFF ‘tunich were
not advise! until after mid-day ‘cnday, 7 January 1952, of the contents
of OFC's cablo of Friday, k January 1952, suspending the action pending
ferther instrustions. It would.also appear that Orc, ‘unich, advised

RFE to proceed.

9. The undorsigned vould like to point out that none of the three
outgoing cables (NUT 4920, OT 97623, <7? 93033) quoted above, ware
coordinated with the Psycholorical Ctaff fivision who have the primary
Feuponeibtlity for all matters conceming ECrh. and RYZ. Had we known
about the decision to suspend on ik January 1952, we vould have been able
to advise Fe in Yew York in plenty of tise to call off the operation.
In this oonnection, a subsequent message froma Kunich stetes that RFF
does not consider that thair oversoas staff is subject to commands of
OPO stations, the commend channel ramming only fros NCPE New Yorks

10. pn/Pts merorandus of 16 Jamsary 1957 on thi subject refers to
the Director's recoumentation that FF? Le prepared to play this these
either way, taxing credit for etther having provented the reform by
prasature exposure if nothing is dene, or having warnai the peuple in
tine to protect thenselves if their currency is devaluatod. As indicated
in Oriffith's sesnage of 2 January 1952, 71 was aware of this double ap-
proach fren the start , and has been taking the “ee pravented it” line in
the cocastonal references which have been rade to the currency probles

in the past three veeks.
11. To avoid suah confusion in the future, it le recommended thats

a. Before a theme is referret to RF overseas for exploitation,
or even brought to their attention fer ecnsideration, it be given :
to PY Nivieion not only for review here in Crc but also for dise
cussion with the interested people is FFE¢a Kew York office.

d. All cables


--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

- , a
a - —__aeeR Ey
Tey th. ;
be All cables bearing on the subject be coordinated with
PY Division, or that branch having Fesvonelbiliny for RCPS

" probdlens,

@. Coordination and clearance with the Nepartuent of .
State be arranged by the arva division before any suscestion

for exploitation gets out to the field.

& Tho comand ‘ehannal ‘for giving instructions to AFE
be clarified so that aessaces intended for their overseas
otaff will first be oleared with their New York office, which
Clearance will then be indicated in any measagea going out

over 0°C facilities.

° 12. In view of tho interest taken tn thio sattar by the nd/rta
" @ffiee, it io sugrested that tais sexorandus be forwarded to DD/?
with any conrenta you care to make.

A. CaT¥S LLOYD
Deputy chief
. Poyohologioal Staff Sivision

Derr/icLend
Diatributions

Addressae « Ortyinal °

PY/clo eo

Pr/Is el

Derr 2-1

RI 2-2

Pre,

ae 2



--- Page 94 ---
14-0000

~ +e Ti
> . hl. nid ‘.
Sean oe ohat ate
COMIN TIAL see : eT yphboses
if cnorancun :
dammary 29, 1952
Tor Mr. 0. E. Madwood
From i. !!, Prunty . .
‘ \
“phe encloand letter copy 4a oclfeer,laratory. It confirms,

in sy alnds 2:1 the worst suspictona thst I ive had rejarding
this public rulations firm in co.reation with we Crusade for
Freedam. That is cno tinge

The fact that they would proceed, cven Lf thay had been
‘commissioned to cvll this mecting for tue Crisade for Preedom,
without consulting the Nattonal Co-nlitee office, on wicse
behalf they are suppened to act, is, in ty opinion, aoouming

alarning proportion.
_ Either the Crusede fcr Precdon worms on behalf of the
National Corsittes, os it doen note

This 16 the ort of thing that will realiy kill the Crusade
for Froedom in th city, and is the Tiale on a tole serica of

oindlar inc idenco.

A.

tc
ry
a)

a
rvy



--- Page 95 ---
14-0000

‘ Janvary 29, 1952

Dear Abbotts

I have just been inferned over the telerhone
that Earle itogers. of Counsel Services, Inc., has called
& meting of the Crusade for Freedom Covrittee in this
e@ity, and has failed to consult me in any way in this,
TB ters

This hes resulted, as usual, in cousing
utter confusion in the minds of everyone, and bodes no
cood for the Crusade in this city nor for *he sponsoring
orpreisation ~ the National Co:nmi tee for a Froe Europe,
for widch the Crusade is operating. In your letter of
Docemter 7, 1951, +o tt, Hulbert T. Bicse:le, Chairman of
the crusade for Freedom in the District of Columbia, you
desigrated mb as, Diractor of tho Bauahington, LC, office.
AS I lave received no instristions from you to the con=
trary, I have presumed this situation to te continuing.

The fact that ur. Rogers would proceed in 4
matter of this kind without co:sultaticn with tnis office,
and without being co:misaloued by you to undertake such a
moeting, is most disturbing. This ie the sort of thing
that will really kill the Crusade for Freedow in this city.

I shall hope to discuss this matter with you
when in New York on Thursday.

Sincerely yours,

Roburt J. Moore

lo, Abbott Washburn,
Executive Vice-Chairman
Crusade for rreedoz,

L west S7th Strret,
Wew York, ~.Y.


--- Page 96 ---
or ___SEGRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIGNS: Giver designations should be used in the "TO" column, Under each comment a line should be drawdf adtoss st “as
end each tree eaest numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO'culuma. Each officer should initial (check mark insulliadnt)
before turtzes rvsting This Routing and Record Sheet should be roturned to Registry.

: FOS ‘aso 81-10 . SECRET

P- ans


--- Page 97 ---
14-0000

t
3
2

ve

ow win the te
eee Oe

Jamary 28, 1952 «

Dear Allens . -

1
This letter concerns the matter which I discussed with you
briefly last week. :

For some months past toth the officers end directors of the
NCFE have been cencerned es to what protective steps could be taken
in behalf of foreign naticnsls working fer Radio Free Furope in
Germany under conditions wrich might arise in certain eventualities.

I attech copy of s letter becring on this matter which was
written by Lang to Gates Lloyd on November 5, 1951. It gives a
concise cutline of the problen and suggests a solution cf the some.
To date, es fer as I know, we have not been able to secure any
assurances thet. this is being teken care of. If, us we have been
informed, the Army suthorities in Germany ere willing to help upon
receiving cleurance from the Department of Defense, we feel every
effort should be made to implement this promptly.

Apart fr-m the very res) present und potential future value of
in the group, the Committee feels thot it has

the foreign nationals i
a definite morsl obligsti-n to seek the sure degree of assist nce
and srotecticn for them as would be efforded United States citizens

under the conditions referred to.

Persorally, I feel this obvigation is e broader cne which ex-
tends tc this Government cs well.

Last Tiursds: when ve were discussing this question in New
York, Jee Grew was ruch interested ard seid he would be gled to cssist
in any way possible. We ali felt, hevever, thot this is not a metter
whien the Comittee can t up direct with the Defense Depertrent or
other Government egencies here end thet 1t enn only te breught to a
proper solution through set. n the part of the Director or yourself.

Pleese be good enough te trke tule matter under consider: tion
end give us the benefit of yrur edvice, :

YouwB,



--- Page 98 ---
14-0000

es

en epee nara = arg AT Mt ene ZAI Renee ns EN A MEET ce a alah ten 0 ner ae ae

STRICTLY PRIV/TE

5 November 1951

r

Deer Mr.

4a you know, RFE hes, ct the oresent writing, seme 1000-1100 -

ein Gervary. They cre lergely concentrated in Munich snd its

elthough ccme tre sesttered on ind urcund the Frenkfurt and

region. The stsff is compoved of Americens, Czechs,

Slerehe, ‘Bungeriens, Poles (at un early dete), lerye numters of German
rousekcepirg end engineering personnel, plus a few French, Swiss,

Belgiers, Pritish, etc. Full deteils on the disposition of the staff :
tre eveilstle in Munich and heve been turned cver to EUCOM in an effort :
to iuterect ZUCOM in the most sericus problem which faces us tcday - . :
thet of evicustion in the event of a move by any of the Russian armies. .

Through Lt. Co. Ciccolelle we heve been fortunute enough to .
nave cur fmerican personne] included in the evacuation plen of the :
Munteh Peet Commend. At this writing, however, we stind te lose cur
extrecrdirzrily cepeble, well trained ard ecmuletely westcrn-ortented
foreign steff.

ZUC&M, on its own, has done all thet it con but needs a directive
from the Derertment of Defense in Washingtcn to the effect that the
PFE steff is to be considered a "war asset" ond given a high prierity
on the evecuction schedule, This pricrity should include the foreign
netivrsis who have been trsined into the PFE effort since vithcut them
whatever egency which would take over the RFE steff would be canpletely

lost.

Cur investigations, snd very censidercble work dene ‘n the field
on this subsect, prove th:t EUCOM is more then willing to tcle uron
itself? hic additions] evacuation burden if so directed by the Dapurt-
mert cf Deferse.

This is a matter of extreme im-ort nee nct orly te us but to who-
ever will inherit the tesk cf influencing tee satellite ere:s when and
efter the Russien ermies have ~oved into western Europe. RFE ‘as proved
thet it is the Czechs, Hungarians end the Poles who cun best do a
psychclogical warfare job, Without their ecnyplete participstion we
would te lost in this "peacetime" effort, and witncut their future

“perticipeticn whoever inherits cur tesk in tine of war would be equally

Tost.

STRICTLY PRIVATE



--- Page 99 ---
14-0000
ee a ee et a NORE © Nel tat Ae ot Ligh a DA meh mre OME tt Rein PAE SA de aaah ms

. . STRICTLY PRIVATE

“2 Se

| May I therefore request that this metter be given ycur innediate
f and urgent ettention. So far as we cen tell, cnd we have gone into

: this subject very exheustively, 211 thet is needed frem tia aide is

H a declaration of interest in the entire staff cn the pert of the

i Dopartment of Defense. , :


--- Page 100 ---
ileal eieneanenanaeieneeetenen teh aeeatehenamndideendaderer omer ediee oma en re

oo .
jc Apo,"
Me TAT as A “9d 13 Yeon fu

o €E2 3. are

j

Cc P
berets aang ae Ons a
\

ORE CO im Ene,

O02 vary peda aa Me be gPa,
CD Get feosk doom 4

; ase oan Vaca.
hhes ab Bert a
/ k @ WS wie © Sate 1®
i : Bader ren Sern. en

S Lb etbelcs avatieel tI
run, becsee mA- Zan? yu
ot Ae Pte ta to ebad =
@) Wtf amecel eon At

o| prinry _ eve Aw | defaTaer?
133
cifie La Curkans _ 22,
leu gh oo) tt tS Chis

ita
“4: (27 Siats Chur. rae ® five oon



--- Page 101 ---
bene.

_ . ene a

cc. & Ahan Towry ane
nr ve te Weg, “Hagia

ao" Kia. ae ae

7 ta) Sees nn ed Us to,

Wee h'S2. == - Cerk on Co
mo vn NSE, fel, den ben, wel - dirpchng 1230

Toles of wil LEG tent ow face wobec in tin Plane ~
nding Usd Pod ul oo — 7
Vranas Tae dunday AT, Seber ane Hh pur th ace ~.

A Hom om ey ab old be welihd - US, Sly p Se. ty ptid UI ing


--- Page 102 ---
14-0000

t

Ww ECS ° Caen cor Thy 3A

ee a

: NSS Veen det Le.

eer | tg fefer a
its Laan t- Fenn
Tr thy i oly GW +
soans net atid Ci
Wayne tudewhe < wcbberattnteet
Bee.
Pen Aten wilt aso eT le EVER
maeT et ondlf O4, 2 CH wtele E
5 tte fh aw TY Ons da WeTrnorey)
Re LA Conapwrkne sz!
wh Ths -

beneath ate

rac Ty 10}a— '- Ne wel
Ff | ” wel i



--- Page 103 ---
_

My s MA Eee Onde

© N#o
M erste DS et Cree. Ode

wy Semen Ali) Oran)

Offs at sho,
Of, L-. After A eases . ad hl,
‘ fs Onn pew wi A$ ~

fps wm beards WH Hay —

mk Tone fad or
aoe “tral ble dy -
Be Me te ty Cl athe 3
Chime =
Cooly a C20, 0 Ope 1 wt Un,
Joc, — aia

ANN hoe mtd, Coa tt bud The “pt


--- Page 104 ---
Guba len. C. | é

ee one
q pet. T A abn. A wk
fer ws urvetien

an h
me pon
AvwThen

poe


--- Page 105 ---
14-0000

at

- at ne A. oy. ng
NKCd . PA. ore . No {

Evra con Tin Pla
“N, ~~ Toler 746, . -u on Pane —
7 mm ftoyh SP Aheke te werd be on trl a

. Avec ptia perredunes — Gran
L ; eae on aa PN ne ne ee et


--- Page 106 ---
ae ee me

14-0000

- Sa ete vt he ° 7 ~~
Curriculum vit- of: ~ t
JOHN S. TAYLOR, JR. 43 North Linwood Avenue
95 rue de la Faieanderie, Pittsdursh 5, Pennsyivonia

ae Paris XVI, France .
Phone numbersTROcadero 08-66
Date and Place of Firths 28 Ootober 1912, Wilkinsburch, Pennsylvania
USA Passport No2453792 Carte dtidentite Xos AT 62011

Warital Status: Married (no children)

Heights 6'S*' Weights:210 lbs Health: Good
Educations Grade School 8 years College 4 years
High School 4 years Degree B.A.(Lideral arts)

. The Pennsylvania State College, Sfate College, Fennsylvania
Important Civilian and Military Experiences
Employers US. Arny .
Position: Entered on Aotive Duty as Seo nd Lieutenant, Infantry-Reserve
. Length of Employment: June 1937 - March 1959
Employer: Transwmntinental and Western Air, Inc., Kansas Jity 6, Missourt
Positions: Traffic and Reservation Salea Ropresentative

~ Representative Traffic and Sales . at Pitteburgh,Pa
: Manager, City Office
— Length of Employrments May i939 - February 1941

Employers US Aray
Positions Enetered on Active Duty as First Lieutenant, Infantry-Reserve

, Statinned at: New York, N.Y. Noumea, New Caledonia
vhs . Washington, D.c, Norfolk, Virginia
Honolulu, Ted. Le Havre, France

: Separated fmm Active Duty as Lt.Col.,Transpa tat on Corps-Reserve
Length of Employment: February 1941 = February 1946
Employer: Transcontinental and Western Air Inc., Kansas sity 6, Missouri
-Positiona: Assistant to Traffic kanager, Int'l Dividi on,New York, N.Y,
{ Assiatant to Traffic Manager for France, Paris, France
‘ Length of Employment: February 1946 = August 1946

Employers. US Aray
Positions Entered on Active Duty as Lt. Col., Transportation Corps,US Army

Stationed at: Paris, France Bremerharen, Germany
: Antwerp, Belgium New York, N.Ye
2 : Cardiff, Wales Washington, D.C.
Resigned from Active Service with same rank

fem acne ee

Other Information:
Speak Trench mai eratsly well.
Have lived in France a total of three (3) years and am now a
resident.
Practically all of my expsrience in civilian and zilitary life
‘has been office management and direction in outside activities.

Referencess
Mr.Alexandre de 8ondini ‘“rePhilippe Hottinguer Monsieur Jean Yonnet
Vice-President, Int'l Hottinguer et Cie., Commissaire General

cit tak ay ee snes earatomtngie es

Automatic Electric Sorp. Banque,3& rue de Provence au Plan de Modernita-
of Chicago,2 rue chartran Paris, IX. tion et d'Squipement
i ‘ Neuilly-sur-Seine Telephons? TRI 28-84 18 rue de Martignac,

Telephones MAI 76-22 PARIS ¥I
Telephoner DIV 75-70

eet Re


--- Page 107 ---
ye Phat Gv Diffuck PS 2

AT etm RR LT IN, LE meee ae ile

7 9S Sun FL
Vn, Bardens :

de oat then. 2 rpsih, X fad
Sr s liz td “Gif, Et rile, fe

wed te brur aE utd fon ot,
Apatite de Se ORLA able dt Cine
Peg ie etd Undstord 3° cugld
hg | dace l adt nahh en
meow an lem —
Uren hey Grok nan
ie" — 1 pea
a “hit Sh “hee aoa - gke Ke pil .
Pn ind. U 0-4 -

“fo iE
Conmulten dt 25's Ursee "
“hg 2." Le pil eS fenitah r

a dal yest. Thaw —

FL weebe"

Ped Ban As De J
b UA- "

ssleselen 4 - “Pt By, huahdliys

dL elapr Te wend, its Uhiag

a ee es


--- Page 108 ---
14-0000

SECKes

SEPURITY INFeSMAT SH

18 January 1952

MENORANDUN OF OONVFRATION

Present were Messrs. Jackson and washburn of CFE, Kesurs. Sarrett,
dJoyee, Levine, Sargeant and Kohler fron State, aut Messrs. Dulles,
Wioner, Liayd and Braden from CIA. The neeting vas neld in

Kr. Barrett's office on 17 Jenuary at b:30 pa.

ONCIUSNN: That the Crusade for Freedom organization should sontinus.

The following is a tranccript of Mr. Bradan's notes of the
meoting.

C. D. led off, adnitting the frustrations tnat a long campaign
en the Crusade for Preedon caused to the State Department and spg-
gested the following prograns

le A leday dell-ringing campaign in ail cities.
2. Direct mail to corporations.

At this point, Hr. kashturn interjected to aay that be wuld need
about two weeks of "Low drums’ promotion before tie i-day caupaign.
Jackson went on to aay that ‘undor such a schame there would be no
time on tha part of the chaiman for a bulld-up of invidious comari-
sons in the cress. At Jackson's request, Hr. sashbwmn passed around
a@ Crusade publication entitled "The Voice of dmarica - 195) + A Tear
of Frogreas®. Tois brochure, wiich in four pages :raisea highly the
work of tie Voice of Amories, is to be mailed ty tue Crusade to ita
chief contritutere.

Hr. Barrett then mada the following points:

1. The National Camdittee for a Free Europe grew out of the .
idea of helping refugoes and of giving then a volee. It has chmged
ever the years to a huge operation wita many now ideas, end the
Crusade for Freedom camo along as a cover necesal ty.

2. He asked unsther the demands of funderalging had not begun
to make less effective the primary Job of holring refugees, whethor

iat)

pe een ER TE deem Sena eae ARIS ANG ae Ena

(Rate ed ine ee CEM SEER


--- Page 109 ---
‘eon a ce eee a en eae DEL opt rte amr ance eae Hc

a

ECRET
2.

the tail == Crusade for Froodom e= is not waging the dog. He
renarked that in a conversation with Alan Valontine ho hed found

that Valentine is inclined to agree with hin,

3. Against Mr. Wachburn and the Crusada for Freedom, he had
only one complaint. ‘They were too good, too big-time. They made
auch an effective appeal taat the recipients couid not avoid running
down tho competitor. Ho stated as ita opinton tnat tac Crusade was
Joopardizing a muiti-million dollar operation -- the Volce of Americas <=
and might even be jeopardizing anotier miti-miilion dollar operation <
Radio Free Furope == for the. sake of raising three million dollars.

Lh. {le thought balloons ond some other oporationa done by tho
Comeittes wero best done by private means,

5. Ho leaned toward going back to tho beginning and looking
at the Crusade as purcly a cover oporatisn and mt an attempt to . 1
Yralse large funds and making a lot of hoopla. He augzeuted that the .
Crugado siould raise only enough money and moke only enough of a
esmpaign to provide a dignified cover. Ha suggested mall colicita-
tion, magazine advertisements, the publiolaing of two or three large
enonynous gifts, all without hign-prosoure. Then he said, "Let's
get on with the main Job of radio and refugees.”

Mr. Dulles asked whether this danger to the Votes wap so great.
"Didn't you get more money tals year?" Barrett's answer tas "Ho®
and he pointed out that there was no damage done to the Yolce by the
Ceusede tais year insofar-as finds wore concerned but he feared the
feture. Dulles asked waetlior we couldn't work out the timing of the
Crusade so that thore wuld be no interferences on tho hill. Hr. Barrett
did not directly ansver the question. i!e sald the cover was bad. Too
many people already kmow the truti sbout the Crusade and ne is vorried
about {t. He said it surprised sin that it worried nis more than it
worried Mr. Dulles. A large campaign raises tho question, he sald.
of iow all the work 15 dona on suca a call amount of monsy. Ho
thought the Crusade called attention to itvelf as cover.

Howland Sargeant asked Jackson to answer this question, "f
Wiat various uses aro the Crusade7® Jackson Minted then as follows:

, 1. Cover. He agreed with fr. Karrett that the Crusade both
increased and decreased tie security danger.

2. It bringa in nonsy.

3. It edscates and interests izaricana in the whole prodles
Of psychological warfare and propaganda and dose oo more than any
thing else tuat is managed ty tne Goverment or by private funds.
He thought tis was greatly i-porisnt and sald that al tnough be

SCCHET


--- Page 110 ---
14-0000

SECREI

-3-

realised that mistakes had beon made and the Crunnde had eri tich eed
the Voice, strateieally the Crusade muld be of enormus help to
the Voleo ky publicising the necd for communtoating te people in
alavory. .

Sargpant thourht point 3 vas tho most inportent. te asked whether
the Cruaade couldn't be ted in with tiis point. Jackoon said, "Yeo,
amt wo oro atarting wit this iesue of the Cruneler publicizing the
Yolco.® Washturm added that 25 million contrita:tors, counting this -
year's and last yearto oontributions, may prevent cutting dow the
operation se Farrett sugcesta. They will raiso a lot of queations.
Barrett disagreed and repeated his sugeestion of a oneenonth operation
confined to magasine adverticing and dirvet mail. Jackson axked atout
the magatine acvertiaing. lie said you had to write copy for magazine
advertising and tho copy would have to advertise hadto Free Furoje.
Rarrett onowored, "You can control the copy on maragine ads. There
is a lot of tine allowed for going over thom carvfully before they got

into print.®

Wachturn repeated several tines that it wuld te a creat ahano to
Yes the Crusade go. Jackson said the Crusade gave a real lift to
exileg not only here but abroad.

Rohlor said he had deen tiinking about tho prohlem and had te
suggestions to make:

1. Could we oxhort people to give a dollar to fattlo Pree Furopo
and at tha emo tine to write a letter to their Ongressmen backing up

the Voloo of Asorica? ,

8. Ould tho Radio Advisory Omrittes of the Voloe of Amorica
tees up edith tho Crusade to help with general publicity?

Jackson enovered the first question "No". He thought that would be

dangerous. To the second question, he eald "Yer®. He again outlined
big idea for a campaicn calling for education on a genersl paycholegi-
egal warfare progres with o final request to contribute to the Crusade.

Hr. Pulles again acked Nr. Darrett atout tia financial problens
and the timing of his request to the hill, Barrett said he vould have
the noet difficulty fron January to July. hasbbarn eaid, "Then we'll
wun a coaspaign in September only and there’1) be no hornm-blowing until
then.”

Culles said that he thought tnat if the Crusade could be limited
to ieptenber he doubted that it would interfore wits “re Barrett's
fd-raising probleas. fhat, coupled wita a better degree of coontina-
tien, with the use of Kr. Louler's private advisers, and wit) a great
effort on tho part of the Crusato toward payabological warfare education
wald give the Yoloo much invisible supjert. sorgeant said he agreed

SECRET

me ie fern Sat oor ae Aaa

+ te dee


--- Page 111 ---
ee eS Teal eae aN

14-0000

; SECRET
be

with Hr. Dulles’ view of the Crusade civing inviatble cupport and

fle thought that to hold the whole Crusade organisation togethor for
a year mrely to conduct a twoeweek cazpaign would waote many good

ments tine. Barrott agreed that a twoeweck campaign wouldn't koop

the organisation alive. ‘

Sargeant asked Lf there wore mot other ideas tmich could be fed
through the Crusade macninery, thus asking nore conatructive ues of

it.

Varrett ratsed the question 2f internationalletng tho Crusade
effort. Jackson replied that ther was an sbortive Yrenen project
wnioh he thought would shortly fall flat on ito face. The British,
he thought, would chortly make a final deaicion as to whethor to go
ahoad with an exile prograa or not. Ho seencd dublous that thay
would decide to do m. ia montianed Joan Paul David and salx at
Liberte as the only foreign operation in this field whicn had any
epark to it. Barrett agrocd tut asked heather or not some Furepeana
couldn't be put on the Hoard of Directors. Dulles replied that thie
wae vary difficult, that they couldn't attend neetings for one thing.
Parrott said, "Couldn't there be an annual necting simply ao a front,
ag cemouflage?" .

Jackson said that NCFE did get tnvalved in European organisations,
that they had clone affiliations uit: tne Furopean hove.ent, with the
Pree Trade Union Comittoo in bdle, wth the International Journalists,
wits Strasbourg Univermty, and all the radio progrmas were reaching
the point where thay were thought of as prograns belonging to the people
to whom they wore broadcast. NCFs had, no thought, internationalised
a great deal and in 4 very natural way. A board of foreig directors
would epoil that naturai process by motting up an obvious p:oney.

Washburn again raleed the arrnent of timing the campaipn to toke
plaoe only in September. ‘There waa no direct msvonee te this sugees-
tien.

Sargeant, referring again t» the uso of tho invicible assets
mentioned by Dulles, tought that if tio Crusade continued it siwould
be planned not primarily to raise funds except as cover. Attention
ghould bo focused on:

1. Ine development of unterstandings the battie for tie minds of
men, .

2. Two or three concroto tings wiicn private elitisens could do
in this battle.



--- Page 112 ---
14-0000

~ SECKET
“Se

‘Parrett took this up at ence at mentioned letter writing. Turning

t bashturn he said, "Abtott, put your alnd to work.” iis thought wa

should be able to find soastuins. He ougzeoted wa ask Washburn to
look into other projocts lice tie leticreuriting caupaiimn taat was
done for Italy. Wo montione*? the Corson Council for Anerican Unity
and Mre Dulles sugrested tix Friendship Loague run ly C.ristian Herter.

Dullos asked for axressume:t of the group to do tis caapalen on a
modest bacia for the montn xf iepteaber only, to keep tho orgerd zation
together, to include the Gomi ttee of the Voica, to assura full opor-

@ination of all publicity ast to work hard on the spocific ideas
mentioned ty cargeant. Levins asked If aucn a campaign woul not
wean playing Radio Free Zumze dom to, aay, fourtn plnos? Jackson
eaid, "Ao, 1t would not moat taat; Radio free Furope would sisgly be
one of tho themes that was ;isyed, somatines at the top of tie ‘adder
end somatines dom the ladder, 1% wuld depend."

Borrett again raieed t.« cover proble: and his dlovati sfaction |
with the Crusade as cover. ‘xiles equlained tnat this was a problem
that had to be lived with. .

Zackeon once more atte ted to get agrocaent of the group on
the following pointe:

1. ‘The Crasada to erative.

2. To bogin not eariier tuan wepteuber and to be of very snort
curation.

3. The whole organigstioz to devote itself to education in
poyemlogical warfare, inclutiaz we wore of the Voice.

4. To study meano of civic action on local and national lovele.

5S. Theat everybody agres to tals progras and work cut tae details
as soon as possible.

Barrett asked Cirot Joyeo and tien levine wheter thay ayreed to tals
progras. Hoth did agree.

Barrett said that he os<_d mot commis ainooif w wie progres.
He eaid he wae leaving shortiy and felt tnat i060 could net comuit the
Departaent of State under taess ciromstanoos. Lo said he would
agree on one joint only -- tat we Crusade amuld not dloband -- but
be reitcrated his conviction teat tt cuxnt to be of « sucn lower
pressure than the discussion so far outiined secesd, and he again
mentioned macasinos and direct agil. Jackcon sald that it was all
very woll to toll the group tiat thay wre not to dleband but be

SECheET


--- Page 113 ---
14-00000

OCrrs 4
yas

oboe .

catd tio firot question the group would then ask {9 “What shall wo
dor*® Ae said tint question nad to te anewored. Barrett eald, "We

hevs a coordinating oosriittee of Braden ani Devine t> wrk tds
protles out.?

Tareq Followed some dissuscion'of the dalloon project wideh 1a
the sukiect of a separate Kesoranteas for the kecord by Are Oates Lloyd.

2 ‘
TAS We. RRADEY
«nlof, Latemstional Organisations Branch .

PY-(ZFsTeBs eh

Orig = SOCI (thru ADPC and DD/P) ~~

1 ce = PT
1 ec = GO
Zesc-

SECRET


--- Page 114 ---
14-0000

ne

SAN"

epee

SECRET. -

17 January 1962

Dear Mr, Uinotts

Enclosed please find six Copies of
Pamphlet entitled “unecrquered™. As you
roquszted, thoy are teing forwaraed to you
for delivery to Tertcze,

Sincerely,

Ferowk C.K

SECRET


--- Page 115 ---
14-0000

Secu worker laweer, bumanitanan,
ere ot da tatonhy

Pp. devoted to socal Pouce
and equal rhe Milada Hotakova foughr
vevamddied. oo tara better was ol life for all.
Her tewtame tothe Nany and the

—_ { Communists tay already become parttof

so the Antes at the Gre howlovahian

a fight ter treedom,

Uno as the stony at bee Aghe.

Ceqanghe I9Mb te

Nattosar Cowra: por Sbare Evaors, tne

laee

&


--- Page 116 ---
14-0000

. .. ~ ‘ fo
— . . .
4 =. ~ National Committee for a Free Europe, Inc
ry } S0rsrMavenve © Room SOL © MawyonE tw. © TeLerWoNe novany 9-2108
“ta - Codes atanese: mevencomm
OTFiCERs ‘ .
fomyt C. Core October, 1951
Caneaam uf Us SOMD :
Lewes 6 Pole : L
rexcaweans OF TAS SOND \
pee © Hee ws comme The National Committee for a Free Europe 1s hap-
Ck bane py to send you a copy of its illustrated booklet,
Wresere B Drees UNCONQUERED, the story of the outstanding Czechoe
ea reer Slovakian patriot, Milada Horakova,.
Spaces Peence :
ves cemeet
Peale Aired Milada Horakova was unbelievably courageous dur=

Tieice mapas ing her imprisonment under both the Nazi and
eusrien oper mean =§=Rugsian-dominated Communist dictatorships in
Czechoslovakia. She was a true defender of de~
Caer t. Aiba mocracy, and sacrificed her life for those prin-
Berncad Puce Bicxanier ciples of liberty which all free men everywhere

A A tee. ye. hold dear. .

Reber F Sexthoed I cannot urge you strongly enough to read
jltosy UNCONQUERED and learn the story of this brave
woman whe dared to oppose the Bolshevist con-

Laan ©, Cay spiracy to destroy democracy in Czechoslovakia,

Coot joven : I ask you to join us in working to preserve
: peace with freedom for all mankind. If you wish
J
Hugh &. Even : further information about the National Committee,
Ates W Dates
Dents & Eeethoser please write me, .

a fet Sincerely yours,

dicikee Cc. D. Jackson
President

rn cee Additional copies of UNCONQUERED, while available,
are 15¢ per single copys bulk shipments of 100 cop-
DeWet Facer ites or more are 12¢ a copy.


--- Page 117 ---
14-0000

Michelet 6 LEE AME 2 NN Be adn Afflalln aes Me net omanhth,

ie aS a eh ne ae ra A

te devine trots,

the Lequadataes:

TSO ON TY Miseon, Howane COMPany,

tn Vravae had a fesuve au,
Tweed mere the a cole,

seed with spectators — rare in Communist
bratton thew touster tial of 13 of Creche

Chil defendant in this mak trial was Milada Harakova.
reat Crech democratic te adersby the Commu:

nist regime.

Doctor af Law, former worker
for the mutucipal administra.
uon of Prague, Member of
iment... the 48-year
Grech patriot stood) firm
against the verbal lashings of
the Red prosecutor, “Milada
Norakeva you are a traiter
to the Peoples’ Democracy of
Cre heontovakia, What is your
defense?"

Defense? Milada smiles. There
is much esas, But where to
begun? Almost 25 years age...

Though graduated with a Law
degtee, Milada Horakowa's love
for poople brought her te head
the Children's Bureau of the
Public Welfare Department in
Prague, Here she established a
system of foster homes and
proper adoption procedure, Wer
Iegal raining awnted her in
solving juvenile delinquency
and the establishment and
admuristration of homes and
hospitals for orphans and men.
tally retarded children.

Her fight for freedows aud emsal
justice found cNpe threvay
the National Counet af Women,
Heppiy at work an waeal wetlare
and the Ce tL, the desetedt hee
energies towards belping others

During the next 15 years,
Milada worked tirelessly in the
prep: ion of important fegis.
tation for the Cacchoslovah
Parliament. She worked on the
laws regulating the work day to 8
hours, suppressing provatution,
protecting home workers. §
Testricting child labor... and
much other social legislation.



--- Page 118 ---
14-0000

I

Pe Sn os NI A mo ant CN Lp Tmt Fe te rim RL FN a aN SAR Pad ge on ole.
“
sam ne, Ss
.

+ ted the Women’s
6 Mbadmont Papalar with

Ss seecal wcitate geaups,
4 Herikiwa was known gn
“eet Doe he was al

txccutive Sceretary of the
Com tuplovak National Counc]
of Woghen, she waca member ot
the Taternationat Women's
Organization, uns, She travelled
te mans countries representing
the Crechostovakian women,
And thus she foresaw the threat
of the Hitler dhetatnrsbipy
greed and power

HoT seunvieesn dhot Heer cntd not be
Te oem sent Wate Hla at

shud pose,
PONG wat tanta polled

tens the horder inte
Mara Pah 1s, When the Germans
sab raped the beading democracy of
Mibade phdeed ty help destray the German

> techat
nd arms of former

eSerkory te belt the
Peet

aiters

“Uttinn to be used when the

She organized an underground thar
baffled the Germans, Instead of large
Meetings. she set Up a chain of emall
groups Only the head of each group
Anew the other members These group
heads would meet in different homes or
in a doctor's office. Thus. when the
Gestapo arrested a woman underground
worker. they would be unable to make
a mass arrest.

Phen resistance w
Comstanns citar pie

, god hating
and Le the partivans, he toed
Jews te escape the clatetes

Let up nia toes
weak oud estesteate dt
Hvtetatee

At the same time, Milada
helped to write a new consti-

Navis were destroyed. She was
1h constant contact, via secret
radho, with the Czechostor ak
severnmentin eile in Lon.
dons Thus abe qanmitted
the progres of her werk, vn
the post-war cumtituten,



--- Page 119 ---
14-0000

PY om mn Eth es
sme aan ton Tape te

Mitada and her husband were
: Separated, and she was tuken te
the Gostapo's investigations cen-
ter, Petubek Patios, Here, even
brave men broke under the ruth
les Qtivtionmy. Bur. though
she was questioned olten, she
was hot Inghtened. Her Atwen
— all hes = seemed wo logical te
. the Gestapo, that she did not be.

tray even one of her coworkers

in the resistance,

Vso hay
hy catch her

anne,

on the notes fer
Preands While k

Meret ty ed,

the propowd conaitution ia
wing the child gontbye, che
MC Neunister, whe bree farned the notes,

¢ Gestape questioned her, Seppe d her from one pres t
Ree them the stighest chee of
Haider's armies defeated braner

aewniate the ewape with Milas,

1) atether
teadeuce, Not unnt Von,

when
her escaped cr worker

and arrose! some of s dud thew

Though tereed ts wen
munition bactory und,
Rround, babar in
Morquite-intested f
and dean house for the
tape... Milada never
plained Her re atly
Wat a constant ante
te the Nan. Ber
and hope wa
Cncouragement tw he,
howe provers,



--- Page 120 ---
14-0000

i

Per eoeee:
nag
y

FUE Te

eR Perera, she geen ty nestle an walstars comb nie ait, any

Never permuted to get fob ait, satred bay her clea

Cal wap ound weer

Miladas neverttictess

Fefusedd te Reruekle ner

‘The miav months tn solitary
ement shattered: Miladas
ttn But when finally
Telowed te the prisen proper.
without regard for her own
tlety she bathed wad cared for
sek chery prisoners. Her un
Conuetable sprit was a shining
tNainple for ather les salwart

PEOOne ns to carr an

Alter a sear un the German cs
When leauny
Auman nehe a

MEMEO GAM she way Heed by the veterans
fe return to Crechosboakie, Milube ple

wb beset te contanse
nd wial welture. and to help the.

Btratly, teresteget ce foe
fer steed traad Pe tease
mat

fourt, she faves
Heath penates Bat he
Cleapeie net ate al

Gerurene’ feat ed pe

Wer starter ee uty

sente tee f trae

amt

Marcel

seo whe suffered umter the Nan


--- Page 121 ---
14-0000

H
'
‘

Returning home after $ horrible
dears of prisons and concentra.
Gon camps and torture cham.
bens... Milada was pyously
reunited with her imvahded hus
band and crown daughter. Both
had mirauloush lived through
the German Hranny,

Apprehensive of Caechoslovakia’s new:
won freedom and to guard EOE
another imperialistic powers conquest
of her country, Mibuhe surcesstally ran

for Parliament. Atter organuing a furl
for poll privoners. she introduced
a bill providing pensions for the fam.
dies of Navi sictims,

UDteheve an ttedom ated
mahty for oll Des that
Rete a tain

tht che
me ottad

Tom Bas

Ther tide that aan 5
_Ciehosbov this Karon
ve Ceara

Muna wast
Ow inastets

Pater suns af
eroment and SHthes sate
Ue promis to worker

studs
nfo te take aves

tally desteay the ryhiy eb tree |

The Communist prosecutor .
ts in a rage. He knows that .
Milada has bested hana, Furi-
ouds he sereame “You are
2 Haitor to the Pewples’ Dem-
ecracy of Crochestovahia.”

7H will Prove that Milada
Harakowa was paid: by the
Capitalists; a spy for the
Western powers; a0 war.
Monger: bembardment of

Running for reelection, Milada |
ampugned on a plattonn of
freentom of pres, freedom of the.
night to work, freedom of deen
bly, and all other individual
freedoms. She warned the
Peuple of the treachery of Stalin.
Prague was her aim: she Bes the are motisaved only
wanted desth fur women by the taterests of Russian
and children: she wanted the imperialism.

Germans ww rule Crechindo

vahia” There were many

wher mdicutuus charges.

The wial continuss .


--- Page 122 ---
14-0000

trots sealed

ponple had der

ak
pan them an
wets tent watad welfare

Vaton Scape through
tos te bir ate refused.

tated ntinte cabinet. and alter Raning contral of important labor unions aswell wy

vr thee ead Arey, the Commanists staged a coup” ty February of 1948, nath the a

hreat of
fe demeatatic government in Creche
the Crochostovaks lest their reedom,

Pecurarln Sauce Army, they succesfully overthrew thy

ithe wcond time an les than a decade,

shevakus, be

Vo suppress opposition and
Steurthen their grip on the
people, the Communion
Teagtat te uachtume arnaty
wathout warrants at legal
Sarge. Dhow ama ad tee
tor stra Bottar in the hearts
at all, ~

‘These in Parhament whe
had fought for human
tights and) swxtal welfare
were appalled hy the new
regime's tacts, Phey asked
Milada for adsice. She re.
pled, “LE have resigned. 1
shall not give iE have
chnen a strayht path, and
tae TD shall follow.’

Malate devs

Joss continued te tart

Commits At every

puttaniy she

peste: cny

ples Vettes
Gear,

abd
Cee ie these drive
watt power Both boven
Mietatonstiayy ab aeuetar

hate beled be

peace. atl pete pare

piers
te ‘i
a ¥ ‘
AAAS
Whet she retuvet te sompranin. the Ganmiiiits avedat her ay thon tenes dhe

Giendy warmed her to flee the county, Milada telused to fave Har telt phone converar
Sere listened ta Her servant was actually a spy. She was threatened and arrested



--- Page 123 ---
ST
14-0000

Since they were unable to get

evilence against her, the Com. The “fixed” judges sentenced her
munist: Secret Police brutally to death, AIL Czechoslovak
tortured an innocent: man, .

is
hornified. Vowave of revulsion
aweeps the ftee work Protest
wiectings are belt and: paitany
. Miected aeete te Stalin,

forced bunt te signa “contes:
seo? ehich would aupheate
AMilada Hovckav a,

The Communists did what the Nazis never dated te
fo On June 27h, 1900 Milde Horakosa way hangal,

Mreught her te
Mba beadquatte. que

eantent
Wr teacawngihy tar Ate hours
HUN astinad We tied

Sby wonkd tect bat
fev at nmi Daal
TN sbe wae shopeals and concent
mate a bese qomtestoan at gialt

fter sey months in pris
oa — beaten and tortured —
Mulada bravely faces the Gam:
mannty Featlosh. she con
dludey “Loppane the socalled
Peoples Democracy i the
J Crehedouak Republic. for 1
hold that it not be democratic.
fo hase worked against is. 2
Should the miracle eceus and
the court fad me noe guilty
and T be-reteased. 1 should
work against it, anew.”



--- Page 124 ---
14-0000

THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE EUROPE, INC.,, is a

group of private citizens who have drawn together to carry out concrete

. . . . '
and direct action to restore and strengthen man’s most valued possession— +

freedom,

The Committee has as its active allies numerous exiled democratic
leaders who have found haven in the United States from the Communist
tyranny of Eastern Europe. Radio Free Europe, of the National Committee
for a Free Europe, is setting up facilities that will enable these trusted
patriots to be heard again by their own people, Not onty docs Eastern
Europe hear the exiles’ impressions of the United States, but American
messages of hope and encouragement are transmitted, and, above all, the
yments forbid their enslaved peoples to hear.

truth which totalitarian gove

Freedom or the enslavement of men’s minds and souls, is the vital issue.
What shall we pass on to our children—their rightful heritage of freedom,
or the spiritual devastation of Communism? At this very moment the kind,
of world they will inheric hangs in the balance. The issue is for you to
decide, In the f conflict for the preservation of freedom, the National ,
Committee for a Free Europe offers every single citizen the opportunity to‘
throw in his weight.

NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE EUROPE, INC.
30f Empire State Building

350 Fifth Avenue

New York 1, N.Y.

were anette ce ett



--- Page 125 ---
14-0000

af

x

aK oO

fr, o.
ee

dovury let w tarot

SUBLCTa Report of mcting at State Mipartunt, Tocesty, January 23, 1952.
PRESOW: Miso lary Aucustine repreacating Ure J. 7. Ledch in his abocnce.
: Bre Marold C. Yodeler
Wre Catco land
is. J.tm Ganpell
Ure Tort lang. Redio Pree Yuropo, Hew Tork
ur. Charpentdar
Ure Robert Je Wore

Czer LoUe AAD :

Wis Augustine mportod thet the Council of Sree Crechoulovekia amt
the tational Coad.tee af Pree Czechoslovakia, e-sposed of 17 and 13 pessons
reorectively, had Signed an agreesent in New Yorks CLO, on Jasacry Wy 1952,
Which bear the signatures of Nesora. Heliich, (Licek, Letizich, atv) Zenkl.

(Cory af sha ape count is herenith attached).

Miso fiwru: ing advaned that fr, MLinul had represented ur. Fapnek
do oi ning the agreernnte Tho agreenmt, Mice Awustine poLited out, sets up
& provinionl mua crant af Ceechonloved asfaire camisting of to aduinlotratars =

one from each group. Nre Holirich representa the 17 af tha Council of Fave
Ceechoslovakia, and th. Mapmek will resresent the 13 af the ‘atiom) Co-alttee
of Freo Caochoslovikia, The rrovision:1 mnmirenrnt aiso consists of a oody of
2 persons ~ 1? from each side and which, His Augustine re;crted, might be
called a “curwiker boty".

Hise Aurpustine also presented ancthr docuaent which de @ protcsat af
the Council's 17 against we Co-si:teeta 13, inoisting on the exclus.on of Dre
Oousky from ary najor function. lowes r, at a suleequent mrcting of Morris
Subeo sit toe wath repreaetatives of both proupd, Im. “enkl cate-aricall;
advised tir:¢ he ani the Cordttes af 13 had no question waworver over the

ey) .
ve tog ‘


--- Page 126 ---
400000 ee TEIN RE tn EI an eN Pe Hele SESE nate sonar

inclugion ef Dy. Qousky, or ary other prroon, 29 one of the 12 repraocntatives
of to Hattoral Councll, who, togesucr with the 1? represantitives of the
" Mtiowl cantitue am to onery on the dizeuatonp Aeading to the formtton of
a p ranent tact: to ripresent Csoc!onluvak exiles. .
Further, le. Zend stesced that wien a final s-repmm had been agreed

to, An ks opiniun, tho ak war to bulding any ocfice dna unified ay anise
tion would te the umdlitnouess of ary Andivicual to a.cept the over-all
poovran to which the apreenost. tad bean accomied throigh democrutic procedures
Ayparintly, he aluo arvieed tt he cons ide zed this :ollay to a-ply to hiveelf
a9 woll og to any ctlcre. Agreeme:.t ea accomded on thio point ty the repro=
sentatives of the Count.) af Free Cuechoslovakine

. risa Auguptine also presented the moses which have bren adopted for
the dlacharre of the adainistmtion of Crochoaluvnidan affairs in exile. She
@alled the attention of the meting particularly to Item 93 and 2 of these

ruled vherein 14 43 stated th:t:
35 The Counedl aniche tAtiaal coal tee of Pree Cseci:calovakis mke

@vallpble to the provinicn:) ecuntotrtors the requisite fimncial resourocs.
5) the wrovistone. adczenlotreters deposit the fumils inde available

to thes 4n. a joint scermt witch thay handle JoldAly and prior te the cousatien

Of the provistoml aduinict.ction, they almll fotniuly account for the use of

sald furn,
After Ue meting itica Aupurtine mide avallelile tho Jollowing two

Liste of 12 pmsvons, fron osch group, in a:corance with the Sim arr oasnt
for the tion .
provisignal againistre e

» Buna Sia
Zenkd qabaniy Carty Feroutia
Ripia Franak clavik
Rocvara Beddrich

Blaho Latrtoh

Ddasin, injor

Tusek .fni le clase) Yowpe

faeir ‘Matiom] dewermt) Causky

Peleraverd froctasks

Wsnek

Fist


--- Page 127 ---
14-0000

-Je

At this t1no, iti.osucustine acvised, the Cascloslovals aru still
sceting dn separate iraga, Dut tht the more r Ly oxpected to tako place
wary chortly. Sho futher advised that fir tend ied annmurocd hie Coanttteots
inisdteninass to the tune of 2 to 43,003 titan Mh. Vedoler advised that
eo Dad pocezved no contumatien af the allc;ation that tho Zonk) conde
tad disposition of dnievendent Sums dn ovitscrlant.

Vio Aunwtine advised that N11 fs Subeasittce whl continue in
existences, amt tht 4¢ wlll te available fur artvioo ard acuistaree to the
Cecchoslovak proviaton2 a alnistinterd, and the bedy of che

Mize Auguuting also advised tht the now Sinaredal arman; oneite
were left to tha docision of Hcrits Eubco.slttoo, and thet mo Rew move in this
repard would be mdo by the fubconuittes until on accounting ef a1 funcs bad
been piven, ani that financial aid will be allocated on the mrits of tho case
at that tie.

i. Yodeler raised the question of the Individual etipomda, and
tho rm oting mas inforand that unless thore is goa further chungo of pulley,
these otiprits are contiraing cm! will contiue ag in the past.

The weeting wo toforme:: that tle swale Ceectoslovak Wukdle
Class party rojcusent:tives law: boon encluded from the provision. body of 2,
‘ami advined tat the cate lawlers Ue. Cv obla, tu Lely to reise a p.0d deal
Of noise about tc whole things Mba Aw ustine aw peusted tt, ag a mont of
the Miiphte of Mita, he wo more of less expecta! to otir uw the whole
bicrarchy. .

: lr. Wore yaise! tw i.sue se to the daution of ths previn.cmal
agree, ant questioned ua to whetin: ary tins Lislt Ind b-cn cet within
thich the scuinistratore and the boty of Sh would get: le their diffininces
end catablish a prment orpunistion, Wis ducusting relied that it sas

aa oe Cree EE en tee St eae eo


--- Page 128 ---
CR et mre cn RO Ss oS on a EE ER Kip ES ETO G ae ee

14-00000

whe

the opinion of Us lattovs) Cour Ol ths taton tet tila sous should not be
forved ot this tie, Wt rower dovelen ants wuld bu allawed to crutalizo,
and “hat ve sinc salt to ose wet actual progeca Lo mde.

RUST AY SE

Yiice Aucuntine reported that Mesere. Cafencu 6nu Yisvlaw hid net
and had retained earlicr views onthe type of orpanigation to bu cote: Lished

for the representation of fuwawatan arta tra in exile; heir acmesent eypenro
not to be within the reals of pocaibility at the present timo. Mi o Aucustine

ce ert te ee ene en eee ae ene pepe,

also rade known to the necting tho comtonts of a lettcr written ty itr. Carencu

to one of hin Sricais fn which ho ghirged tint U. Visalanu desired auly ono
political and mtioral boty which nhuuld repreacmt the Rusmuian ause abroad,
am! that this boty ahold bo the present Mato) Comittee, umdat it. Visolanuts
pecelileiy. ee Gatengaty Je .t yr loo advised thet Wo. Visodanu ds opposed to
. @ lasye tatiom) Coue!2y althouch ho wali agrue to setup <t opeclal comb.w long

caxmecd uf possam qutalw the Cowlttie. 2. Oacscu an whe other hind claisg
tit he arola an cya: dsation 4) exile within s wide Nuseworks which would
have & rovresentative character, and bo hoaded ty an elected chaisvan. ir. Calenea
dmiicated tht he es not opposed to the king's cause ami tint, in fact, be
Wohed to Gco the Aqal question titimtcly uu to Uot of the whols oxile
commity, Cacencu shirred tht Visalam ond his er up, by negotiating only
om tho tsais af the Xing?s a: proval, instead of reaching agrvoment pricr to

. the King'o arproval, Lvited or:.icion not only af theaelres, But places tte
King's position in Jeomanty. ,

Yes Aucustinw hervelf alo advised thst the meting; af Jumary 23
beturen Vinoiam: and Maloney wag mich ao Calenca tad fin ateds tiae, th
Tera’ toe the chin irandsiip, tadiecu wul; be the hazxtury claimnn, Sisolan
the oladivan, asal pvits.;o Oo. nou tho vice-chairman, Vivolanu had a.cu ofc red


--- Page 129 ---
14-0000

i - $ -

wnification of the. (wo groupe ona 7 to 5 tasig e@ Ue 1 aundor fran Visolunuls
Tmuninn Intioal Coat too, Mo reference 129 iad of the funls which bad been
one of te min bend of ountuntion bthe Brlite .

Mi-6 Aumotines advigod of a weting botemen Hr C. Se dacknon and
Concmal Prduvou itn ich, anong oer thing, the Guna] oondatned tmt he
we being excluded ima TMannian dtacwalum an NOT oireies, and qizat ianed
the edvisablliqy of genwing Yioolanu to London along with Gafencu. mudcecw
eleisa tint his rvs Farmnéan Leaue do having great succesa. The Gancral mo
inforend that the Levitation te ro abroad to Finodonu aul Cafencu had emnusted £
fowa the Puroprman sorezert Canferenre Ltoelf, and Unt, in CIt casw:-oatlons
with representitiees ef Bumrian grupo, thers hed rover bien any quiotion of
elinimting Madeocu,. “he importance af unity anon; oxiles ws pointed out to
Padescu, and he ves irforsed thst soont!ing Ind to te dons aleut the situation
of the Rumniano-tn-7 zile.

Miss Auntie advise! Sin menting it due to olizazetances, Visolacn
and Oatenm had fours tiswolves scloduled to fly an the saw plone to Londong
Ottenma lad proteste? 843 amaspennt bitteriy, on the pround. tat Visolam
would repregent thos olfietion a9 ano in which ho (Visofanu) had bon able to
tele Gutencu aleve, on th: Jom-r'g insistence.

. Cangbell rained the question aa to wat oan be done about this.
Te pointed cut that fn this Rumnian spltt Visolam considcre thet his friemio
are in tho State Departacnt, and gos to State fee advice ent ou ark, whercag
Cafencu Oerv’s in letters to Ctate, but carries hie csuse te HC'F. in Bow York,
there he tolisves his frienis to bo.

re Llog! ists sSected thot hn corsidtero ecm vory otringe::t action
ust be dono about this whele Mumnian aituations and tat unity sanwhoy ust
be schiewed, He Gayeoted that with the aude into office of Adatral iiller


--- Page 130 ---
14-0000

° wba

ao tho new Pwaicent of MM, &t might be the tim to take up the mttur again
with @ now prroonaiity fiesh on the scene, on. tht in guch o may it could

_ Gancelvably be posu ible to cet over the hup of tte present duploravle situstions

Mr. Carpboil azocnted thrato.
RAITIO ANE! ins

lm. Yodoler adviwed the accting that tte eri isl de wiles ropantiing
the Suture of the Baltie beonde-ita mupt otond, ani tet tt was out of the
quretio n that re ahowld becu Snvelved fn ay Seti propomals repaniing
Tyo tawrdonaty to tint arcs hia wo axNained to %. Lang, who tas hid sone
e@ctinite reocrvationgy an fT Urvadecots to tha Titic cuuitr lade

i. Vodelur pointed out tot be considered Ue Baltic paulo, hovever,
faust be raintaned and tnt to prow ed my with tho cinsolutics of thase parole
would lave @ mot serious effect on our Baltic friends, .

ire Canpuell mised the question as to uint abould be told the Bultis
@iplomta, and wat bad already tron told thet. After touuing this subject
arvund for sare ting 4% we ayreed Umt the Salts wuld bo tald simply tat the
Vaise of Am rica is going to acespt Pull responsibility for lwwccaste to their
country, and wiry aimply thet ZF had agreed that tiie ds the way it should to
Gonee

ROEM APADB

Mi.o Aurunting odyised Urt Ur. Laich wall ahurtly be tack from
Taree, asd could bo alle te x ort Southend to tire wethly af duvuloparate at
the Polish caxfcroand in Snyland, She advion tet Us Polish Socialists Ind
adopted @ brocd resolution wierein tbo princijal ef eaqperation with tho Polish
Political Council was a.cugiished, and wera Ue dvr Ind ben Lom open to
work with Milnla jegyic. .

Mipoiucustine advined tt Ir. Leki bad, canwery to the ori; inl
plan, fually been sont to the Conference of (20 Sebied Politics? council,


--- Page 131 ---
14-0000

i

hme

-J7~

DULL RS
Yiem.ty, it mos aged Ust tt ie. heoanrol's reurpanisat on plan

<_

C the Migoaen Matioml Gocil vas rosdy, 4 woul Uo pregonted at tho

‘nest tenis e

SUT Ins
ta August ing rivimend ta the Solaray: term, the aStuation

parties of the Tints tintane~in day and advined ef the anbiguitua La thin
etturtion, She indiated that in tds j;easerit situntions

1. There are tn existences
@) OH tho Soalaliat fidnys

(1) The po itiel-party onunis-tion:
ttm Seclalist Unien cf Central and astern Europe.

(2) the profe.laral-trade uncon organisation: :
the Intcrmtional Center of Trve Trade Unienistee
iy< zie.
and tiat
) Oa the Christian Dewmoratle bide there are:
(2) tae polite) posty ore katie:
the Cclotina (eeesutde tas af Centaal
tUrorte
(2) thn pratssatocaletaude wiian amanipationt
the Cenutyn] } uronran Federation of Cuvistian
Trmls Un.
She pointed ast tiat
2. ROG eiwas fhe.ci eupert and “recugn tian” to the Socluliets an the
peofeasioal an! trada wacy level through the Intermttonl Ce:ter of Pres
Tradp Unlonists in cxile aud has done 90 Gince Eoptectur IML. CFR gives
financial sx port a:d “recognition” to the Christian Denocratie element an
the politimleurty level threuh the Christian Peuocm de Union of Central

Furepe which £1 haa au: ported eince Jarusry, 1952


--- Page 132 ---
14-0000

Woes Auguctine adcvined that ,
3. 60 far ag che imum ‘the Soalalist (ion of Central and laptern burepe

3
{Fourded 4 Sunn, 1962) bso never a, proached 8:7. Lor my port and for
roomiition. In Cote r 1901 tha Contra) rurepean Pocrretion of Chrictian
Trae Undenp we Carped and Boon aftir Q) proachnl RET for ouporte

t.

on"

terse, ven 19 WINS repragenttiin of labar ond truce union affaire » sod

Peter te thin 8 rach, at Just prior to hig cocuiture for lurope, Leas

tte is fn Mhrls vdere bo lad reopen ity for tie Diba tintal Center &
Free trade tiiavata in Unite, atated Unt Aton hin danvoaion that the
Seylish Chrietian Trude ‘nies eure the ently Clirintian frace mie ef any pre-
war simiftoarce in the evutrics new hohine tho Iron Curtata ard that if
frartier Lrreatigation juctified thin view, he thourht aodest support ougit to
be exte:wtod abroad ta the Polish Christian Trade “intone, He auaktted 66 Little
imewledre of Christian Trade Unions.

Thet the Central puropean Pederation of Chrietian Trade Unions is cocpered
Cf axties residing in the United Stateo or Gurads ond pot alroad, which trues
sneer sonkey wrench into the situation. At time af the ancrosch to BE ef
the Ceristian Trude Union 7edrration their represents tive tao told of Dernex:'s
evisterce and his existence alroid, and of hin ned for statistics, informtian,
oat of To renia 4nt4ial vlew tint gu pet shocd be alruu! acd mot here. Ee
Statistica were Sorticating, but Sioniowles (SeurstarCemial af the Christian
Tenaatic ) wma active, amar tly otirring ip Aw siean Cathallc cirales ty
tasping on the then thot 10/7) allowed Sostalists to nongelise trace unicn
flslp. ( Giswis wrt »

Hise Aurpustine advised that ue do Imes hy a prucehed Ceorpe Midhue ef
Aw ricer Catholle Trude ‘nics ‘who clue, Lf anyrne we co not krar), ort that
he @ pore: tly etirred Sombue up quite o Lit, but Dc: atu comtactod Id. ‘ctnle,
@B the Crupade, who chrare! to save the situation, i ieninslon O; parently


--- Page 133 ---
14-0000

“9-0
renambered tho e/fect on NCIT. of attacks frpm certain Catholic circles.
KCFE was at one tine in bad situation vis-a-vis hierarchy.

: c
Mins Augustine su-med up Mr. Dennunts views in his letter of December 285

1951, as follows;

a) We should aid Polish Christian Trade Unions, but not
Central European Federation of Christian Trade Unions.

1. Another Chrictian Democrutig Fxile Trade Union international is
already recognized by Interrational Federation of Christian Refugea
Exiled Workers, not Confedcration of Christian Trade Unions.

2. Guestion of basic policy contends provably no Christian Trede
Onions af any significance (except Polish) in Eastern European countries
prior to Soviet occuyation. Mr. Dennen raiged.the qustion of why help
refugees establish orpanizations-in-exile which have no counterparts in
thelr om countries.

"5, another Polish Exile Christian Trade Union croup (Felixa Yicola jexyk)

recognized by CFic (French approval of JCCTU).

4


--- Page 134 ---
ene RA Ener Nn RE TAR

14-0000

The delegation of the Counchl and the tational Co-mi-tre-of Free ;
Crochoslovakia, awsre of the rrat importance for the Caocloslowk cause
of a united political deadership OF tho Canchoslovak denocrmtic exile, have .
dlocussed in a mader of motings complex of ; olitioal ant orya:ietionad
mattera and have agr-ed unaninasly on the follovingr:
2) the statutory or;ans 2 the Counci2 and tho Mationl Couitteo of
Free Csachoolovakta Fespectively itl memend all thotr -act ivities y
donuasy WW, 19524
2) affective the sare chy, a provisional troansber mrarenant of the
. alfairs of ¢ tho unitiod Caochoolovak dosocratie exile will be establisheds
3) simittancusly, 0 Lody will bo set up with the cuty to discuss
“and prepare, dn the tuols of the results of deliberations betes.cn the tu
@olsgations » the formilation af the political projrau and the orpanisation
Of the unified ceochcslovak desncratic exile, tho sald boty will be composed
of an egal mebcr of representatives of the Council and tho Fatioml Co mittee
of Pree Ceochoslomida respectively;
&) the Aunction af the delerations af the Council and the National
Cocikttce of Free Crochoslowalts rescectively will cease with the estalioh=
ment of the provisional mimrenent of the unified Ceechoslovak dewwemtic
oxile.

. Ths Lottig 7.9 Savery Wy We

Signed bya Moddrich, Lettrich,
YQinek, Zonk.


--- Page 135 ---
14-0000 “.
named en te NEAR eer A a bith AE ate heed ell aan ea ea mado

ae nee ne Arn ene Ae et ERR

. : —_
CONFI) NTIAL © SEGUALTY LNIURAATI 7 Aes He Cn
‘ DIPARTMENT OF STATE Py ery ae

O goer

Memorandum of Conversation

DATE: seclary 25, 1982

t

SUBJECT: question of AFL Broauonste to mi(Sitie sountries

4
PARTICIPANTS: Lithuanian Minister Povilas Zaueikie
wr, Anatol vinberga, Firat Seoretary of the Latvian Legation
Mr, Herold C, Vedeler - EE
xr, dlliard Allan - £8

COPIES TO: Po Kr. Sargeant
. nr, Devine
_ O1B/NY = Kr. Kober

S/P = ar. Joyee
Bee Kr, barbour

a: SE
© BL courenment rovervea Qrvice 16-6118

In accordence vith the conclusiona resonead at the seeting
ef mesers, Kohler, Devine anu Veaeler on January 18, an efrort .
baad been wace earlier this veek to ol) in the Lithuanian
Minister anc the Latvian Choryé d'affaires at the sane tine,
‘Stnoe the illnees of the latter creventea, 1t was finally
Necessary to heve the First Seoretary of the Latvian Logation
to come rather then Ar. Feldmana,

It was explained thst the visitors hd@ been asked to ocme
to the Depurtment so tit the mutter of Ealtio lenpusge broade
ecats mi,ht be Gisouseed in reerponre to truelr recent notes
(Lithuanian nete No. 2433 dated becexber 31, lvd1l; Latvian note
annumbered cuted Junuary 3, 1962, tnd satonian note No. 77¢
vated Janusry 8, 1952) ana "ered Pesregentatione on thie sudjeat,
“Mr. Vecel-r saiu tast tue provlem h:u been reconsidered frow
every etanuroint by all officers with uw ulrret inter st in it
and the vericua puinta raised vy the Baltio diploastio resreeenta-
tives hau been onrefully etucied, As a result of tiis review
the Depcrtnent could eee no otner courss but to reaf:ira its
Previous position, The Lep-rtment therefore h.d rernohed the
definite conclusion tust in the later-sts of the goat efficacious
overall effort so far as brosuo: «ting to the baltic countries
vith which Ageriocans sere connesteu was concermed, it snould be
@onfined to a ain,le operation in VOA,- The ressons for this
Conclusion vere revievea anu tno ;ainetakir, offorts of the

Dezartaent

. GOAFLDSMTIAL © SECUNITY LAP raaTLcn
1AN 2% 95.

cha Lerreie Tennis wn


--- Page 136 ---
14-0000 . . ae
fener Apu b SiMe ha ig OTE Sa tonne oh tea manne cet meme AS Bore cts
ot

_ : . ef

. " GONFID, IA. = SkUEAITY InFuk SIG - .

oe

Depurticnt to proceed fairly «nu in the best int-cesta of tho
Com-On struggle agrinnt Coxmiunisa in the ualtic countries were
stre:ned, It vas incicateu that alnce the ACPE 1.4 asced the.
Depertucnt for its opinion on the nuvienbllity of procevaing
with plans for KE: broadcasts, the vacnrtrant naa conveyed
these views to NUP: It was our unuerstanains treet NUPh had |
also ocowe to thls conclusion,

Minieter Zadelkis expressed his regrets an: tnosa of the
Baltic Fanels that tnis vas the uecision renensc, ie wha still
concerned thet the Ealtic exlle Lleauers woula neve no oprortuni=
ty to speak to their homwelancs and tht this denis] in view -of
the ayailebility of R¥FL facilities to exiles of the antellite

countries of eastern kuroye represented a onsn,e in U5 polioy
tor the Baltic states, ur. Vedeler stron,ly emphasized that
our policy. toward the Baltic countries remained ancnanyed nad
that mo political si:nificance wiatsoever coule justly be rend
into the Departaent's Geelre to ses the saltle lon. .sve ;ro;rags
earrliea only by Vua in the endesvor to make tis vroccoasting
activities for tho Baltic countries as forceful auc effective
ae pussible, It was suy,eated (in accorannuo: wits the posaie
balities pointea out by Mr. Aonler in the weethe, on Janu.ry 18)
tuat there voula be opzortunitics for beltle exziie iescera to

speak over VOA, 8

Kinieter Zadelkis agkeu want vrovision hie usefi snue OF
ipht be mace for the employment of persona alr. esy en, aged for
bY. Padio work and for the uge of Paulo muterls) already prepored
if the baltio Fanols, In Pesponse to direct questions 16 vas
{ Ou, ested that probavly something, Coulu Oe done to tace cate
iF of thease matters throuch dlacussions between BCri anc VYOA repre
* gentatives in New York, The .uestion oF coopurstion vLotweren Wua
and exile lesders ana beteven Von anc the Lultic ,enels was
ulecusced at some length, Vals ainoere Gealre t6 recelve aad
@oke use of helpful coments snu cuy,estiona, to the extent
that thease ai,ht fit into the planneu -ro, roma, “as reiterated,
“} It wae agreeu thant taese v plugs wu ations cour. seet oe
“| pursued further if sne baltic Fepresentntives toca then up
ii sareotly with the VeA to sew York, _

:
t

. A&A letter bh 4 also been sent to br, Kiev, actin, vonsul
General in chorge of Le,atiun at acy Yora, inforain,, kim of
/ Our vieh to cleouse this matter on the next eecasion when he

cones to sasuinyton.

EU4scs hcVedeler/al
danusry %8, 1952

Gob bekTlai © SMUALTY Jabcnaad..d


--- Page 137 ---
ARIES ARON Sak nS nal a Ae A ey mathe PN mR A

14-0000

bol

ar

ee . ~~ my “YY if
* SECRET ‘ Ww :
___ ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET , a
INSTRUCTIONS: Olticer designations should be used in the “TO” column. Under each comment 4 line should be drawn across sheet

and each comment numbered 19 correspond with the number in tho “TO” column, Each officer thould inital (check mark insufficrent)
tefato fycther routing, This Routing and Record Sheet should be roturned to Registry. ”

Yon will remember that, as
Gates Lloyd points out in his
transmittal slio that Lang agread
to tho use of facilities.

T take 1t that somebody digntt
do a very pood job of explaining to
the Executive Gomalttee of NCFE
frocisely what was wanted, and you
may wish to be certain that a litte
Preparatory work is done by NeCiuny

or others before a formal request

Will you send the enclosures back

to me. . TT .


--- Page 138 ---
14-0000

Reman Ry P2- b “rhe
Or pat Ore
ayer rearaen
, hc 1OKW ATE, 6X

Lap Dans, . Aon AT
Res. — Rowe oe a



--- Page 139 ---
14-00000

wore

PRC mpcsemeses

“ECRET . A
Secetly vie anes ER- 208236

en?

2h January 1952 -

NSMCHANDUM FOR: Deputy Director (Plans)
FROM : Deputy Director Cuntral Intelligence

SUBJECT 2: N.C.F.AE.

1, I attach a letter I have just received from
John Hughes, Chairman of the Executive Committee of NeCoF Be,
with regard to certain decisions of the Executive Committee
which he felt were of interest to their sponsors,

2. After you have read this, will you kindly pass

it on to Gates Lloyd and Tom Braden?

)
ai
—

Attachment (1) Letter to Mr. Dulles
from John Hughes dtd 18 Jan 52

(2 paces)

SECRET
Gecuuty tni> nance


--- Page 140 ---
14-0000

4

rene

ie

Innurry 18, 1962

Mr. ‘:llen W. Dulles
P, O. Box 1513
Main Post Office
Washington, D. C.

Deor Allent

At a mecting af the Executive Committee of the Board of N.C.F.F.
held on Jemury 3rd Lett, the wembers felt that two of the subjects
diecunsed at that tise should be called to your ettention so that you
might know the views of the Coumittee in the event these mattcra were

broupht befors you 24 & later date.

The first cerecrns 2 sugyection which epperently came informelly
from McCluny end otm-rs in Amcomfree, that 1f mesns could be fourd to
do s0, they be allowed +o use some of the R.P.L. facilities in Gerneny
for certein of their troedcasts. Since this catter was not brought up
as a formal request, 20 section wae teken by the Comittee, but the in-
dividual member: urzsinously exprecsed the opinion thut this would be
most Inadvisuble ani thut they would be opposed to the use of R.F.F.
fecilitiesa for thie gorpoee even if time and frequencies wers aveil-
eble, which 18 not s* €11 certrein. Since Ameomfrce is an orgenizetion
in which you have direct interest it seems cdvigsble to acqunint you
with our feelinge 1: tre gatter should you or. your organization be
épproeched by McClusy or others on this subject. Without going into
details at this time es to the reasons for our feeling.in the matter,
our muin concern 13 thet Amcomfree's targets sre entirely different
from those in which ve are intererted, ond from the standpoint of
operation from Germ-r #041 they ere far less likely to be agreeable to
BONN. We ere fearfrl of putting in Jeopardy 2 presently successful
operation and four t- five million dollsrs of ezuipu:nt by the intro-
duction of s project weich we fuel should be kept separate and apart.

The other me-tter which come up for forme] ection involved the
edvieshility of undertzking Poligh programing in Germany, and the
Executive Committce trentimously cyreed tht R.F.2. ehould proceed
vith the plens prezexted. In brief, such plens c21l for the origins-
tion of from three t< four tours deily of Poligh progriming from Munich
beginning on or about Mey 1, 1952, and the introduction of same 50 to
60 Poles into the city of Munich for work with Be F.E. to carry out

this schedule.

Since this is e xzJor step in the development of R.F.E. progrem-
ing end more particul-rly becsuse of the fortheening neygotictions be-
tween representatives of N.C.F.0., HICOCG, srt BOKH, it wos felt that
you should be formally sdviced of this decision. The Executive Com-
mittee also wanted ts go on record to the effect tant while they
retlized the riske involved, sffirg:tive action wes teken as & result
of opinions given by Messrs. Byroede, Kellermern trd Streuss of the
Geruzn Desx, Departa<rt of State, end by Mesers. Stone, Lewis and
Eoerner of HICOG. I= exswer to the specific cuestion "Would in your
Judgement the introduction of Polish broadcestirg with all of its



--- Page 141 ---
14-0000

| bm EG oe eM outa en wn

tae

Pege fz

Ur. Allen W. Dulles (continued)

political implications, in ceny way herm the current Munich operation
of P.P.F.-or the BONN contract negoti:tions in the eyes of the BOHN
governzent", we were assured by ull that 1t would not.

For your further information, the operuting officers of R.P.E.
in chargs of the project for this Polish programing, havu been directed

to proceed slowly in implementing the action of the Executive Committee

end wetch the situ:tion most cercfully until such time as Phenix and
Kewpner have had time to receive proper assurances that nogotiations

with ZOKU will progress setisfectorily.
; Sincerely, ,
| Ht Ve
vv

ICH PM


--- Page 142 ---
14-0000

/

me

NW neh © Depaereteneet meinem uarse

: a |_ Executive Rogist

im  eorrare _ ~~)
te wLTACI “ nv,
unt, Wheaton ve

Zh January 1652

MEMORANDUM FOR: Daputy Chief, FL/OPC
FROM 3: Deputy Director Central Intelligonce

SUBJECT 3 CRUSADE budget

Please see attached letter from Abbott Washburn

with his attached budget. I Amagine that the Project Review —

Comittee should go over the figures for the balance of the
‘fiseal year and for 1952=1953 as soon as possible.

Attachnent (1 w/1 attachment)

ele

be 59 ftaff ts
_ oful's? pare

y


--- Page 143 ---
14-0000

te

ce nm at OM

January 23, 1952

Desr Allen:

at the Grusede Board Moetiny: last Friday, C... reported in detail on our
meeting in Ed Sarrott's office.

This was followed by a cenernl discussion of the nature aad scope of the
1952 Grussde program. Briefly, there was agreemcnt thet the program in
192 skould be considerably reduced in scope, that the emphasis should be
taken off publicity and placed on fund-raising with the promotional period
being reduced fron two months to two or three weexs. . It was felt that a
direct mail campaign to owr present list of givers -~ plus a thorough
solicitation of corporntions -- would be desirable.

There was discussion also of a one-night house-to-house canvass, nation-wide,
on Constitution Day next September. Mr. Foole suggested that, in addition to
Eacio Free Surops, the 1952, Crusade might place euphasis on the newly formed
Free Europe University in Exile at Strasbourg, France. General Clay -
recomended that the Advertising Council's assistance in the new c:.mpaign

de sought at the earliest moment,

I have reported: the above to John Damewood -- elso your instructions on the
subnission of a budget. :

$450,000 was the estimated figure which we mentioned to you as adequate to
cover the entire operation. After careful ctudy and all possible paring,:
the total budget subnitted herewith amounts to $428,991... this to be
spresd over the eleven remeining months of 1952. :

Of this total, $222,270 would fall in the present fiscel year (5 months at
$44,454 per zonth).

The total budgeted figure is slightly more than a cuarter of the cost of tne
195. campaign. With tho ground work that has been laid during the past two
drives, it shoulé realize at least as muck as the campaign just completeds,
altrough this, cf course, is difficult to estinate.

We hava had further talks with the VOA people, and the "Crueader® supplenent
devoted to the Voice will a pear next week. They secued very pleased about
it. °

Best regards,

Sincerely,

few

ja R AAO aN Fo he



--- Page 144 ---
A = ~
14-0000 sa ste pce il wb Ea Ti
ne I nt

Yas

SECRET ‘

(When Filled tny

» Onsty
7a fe ou a :

DOCUMENT DISPOSITION

“PTE cress REFERRED TO THis FILE 13. TRANSFERACD TO
. _ : Al FILE NO.

SEF B87 ove seesree carrvene SECRET



--- Page 145 ---
NT te em SO A OI ae Ane ea Bly oR RE AY Mt EIA AE ti whee SEN remem ret weet Se sat EMT thsi Sosa a) en

14-0000 ~ ~ soe

° January 21, 1952

Dear ©.9.8

Following up our meeting, we ara going to name John Devine
to represent us in discussing firther plans for the Crisade of
Preedoa, .

As I understani it, all parties feal thet the Crusade should
be continued, that the next campaign should he of a low-pressure
ant short duration type, ant that joint efforte will be made to
find other useful activities that the Crusaders omn perform for the
total 'I.3. propaganda effort,

Te was qooi seeing you the other nizht, and mth “ason and I
enjoyei that long talk, Please rerenber -» to “in Miller and tell
hia I wish hia the ‘ost fn his difftonlt tit fascinating assigneent,

. All the best t» you, ”

Corital “, 0 ate ene
r Ww, Z
oct Mr, Wisner p-—
P - WY, Jevine
S/P ~ ar. Joyce

Elwart W. Barrett

P.S, As IT unierstand {t, tt 's tentatively rroposel that the two
individuals working with John Devine will be Jin Lasbie ani Toz Braden.

rere enter nantanaateatan,

“ir, C.D, Jackson,
National Cowafttee for a Free Furmpe, nc,, fr

350 Fifth Avemse — Reon IM,
New York 1, Bew Yor®,

2 SmI! ie Ad

PsEWRarrettraby


--- Page 146 ---
14-0000

cere mere em not nn seaman BS

7 : ; - Pa a aad
. n
. . . .
CON} DENTIAL RESTRICTED . FREE :

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS —Officer designations should be used in the “TO” eotamn, Under cach comment a line should be crawa
across sheet and cach cuninent numbered to correspond with the number im the “TO” columa, Bach officer should iaitial
(check mark insufficient) before further routing. This Record and Routing Sheet should be returned ty Registry.

ID/COLLECTIOS AND DISSPNINAITON BRANCH

FROM: ©

NOTE: ID/ED does nxt ret
tids document cn Mle.
dutorest in retent?
neted on this reutir
vA ll] be returned t>

{
VANS

thon oe Ades - v7
Uv

CONFIDINTIAL

a

424 51-9 FREE RESTRICTED

eo mete

an cts


--- Page 147 ---
14-0000

1NOM AuGoneulate, Strasbourg, Soe, -—- A

“10 | TA DHPARTMANE OF STATE, WASHINGTON,

. / . . an —_ “| . a “op Tyre IN THIS i SPACED
He baa atin $40,..,/11-1551 .
FORETEN SERVICE DESPATCH ‘ mh, OL. id.

reroll

Rey Hone, eo a ; peg1e

Ae
SUBJECT Pounding of "Lo Collage do 1"Europo libre? at Strasbourg by the Hatienal *
Comittee for a Free Rurope, . 5

. Oey ;
eee SF eg
do the Departurnt 49 asare, the Hattoaal Comittee for a Pree Burepe hao
founded at tho:Cadtean de Pourtales, Strasbourg Robertsau, "Le College de
LBurope Libre® (Callege af Free Easopo) in which students of nine differex®
mationalities, a1 of them from the Satellite countries, are leiged and fed,
All of the students are taking courses in the University of Strasbourg end
4m future there will be additiona) courses at the “College ds l"durepo Litre”
eondusted by professore-in-exile in the languages of the various countries
Fepresaented,, Tho purpose of the College 1s to train political leadors,
‘Goctors, lawyere, exgineers, ete., far services in the Satellite comtries r
when and if those comtries are ever liberated fram Sovict Russian domination, Cadgle -;
Se for there are co stuionts frin Russia or East Germany in tho College, rete:

Qn Novenber 12 Mr. Roudybush and I attended the oping cereaony of the

. Sollege, which was informal but ipressive; other persona attenfing included
Mr, C. D. Jackson, Presidmt of the Mational Committee for a Free Europe,

three officiale of the Council of Burope, Professor Robort Eedslob, Dean of .

tho Fasulty of Law at ths University of Strasbourg (representing the Yecter a “

ef the University, who was il1), persomnel from Hadio Free Burcps at Mmich, :

and the student body, Speeshes wore sade by Hr. Maleolm Davis, Dean of the am

Colleges, Monsieur Redalob, and Mr, C.D. Jackson,
There follow tables showing the distribution of the students by naticn- ue

alitios.and by agos, as of October 20, 1951, (8 men and 1 woman otudecte
have been enrallod aince then, bat their nationalities and ages are not insu) y
Hetionslity ia ones Totel 7
Cucchoslovak 20 2 4
Polish wm 5 29 :
Rumanian PY] 1 uy
Tagosiav nu 2 Ps)
Hungarian 7 t] 7
Lithuanian 3 1 4
garian 4 ° 4 A
Albanian 2 0 2 ts
latviaa 2 =) ~& <
Totals 76 1 a

Gitzrencafleg--————-——- -- ——--~ -
eee Sree) a mom 5 TT PRA Pamatscm tes s

cc Se INFOKMATION COPY



--- Page 148 ---
14-0000

a ae Tee

pee

| --

twee.

tT
FROM Ont AO,
Bis) THK DEPARTMONT UF STATE, WASHINGTON, i ee ea”
FaGwY
per : .
i *

‘ \

SUBJECT: a

2 Strasbourg 135

j

AS a 1 Zofah “
Ww an’) 9° o- s
- 20 2 2 4 ;
a 3 2 4 é
2 8 (+) 8 n
Eo) 3 Q 3
- 2h 6 ° 6 1
23 9 3 R N
2 8 0 8 a
37 R 1 3 °
28 u 2 3
29 4 ° 4
30 3 1 4
xn a 2 a
Totala % n 87
Average Age 25.5 2h.3
As of possible interest there are enclosed copies of the first two
pages of the interim report of the Comnittes on Amarda an! Plecexents to the
Chairman of the Board of Trustecs, ne ee erty is Bele iw
York, N. Y., which wae furnished to me confidentially by Hr. Esleoln Davie,
Tetons cena
Enclosure: As Stated
Distribution:
AmBnbsscy, Paris
|
1 -_—

fipateas ty --. SEI Paapanatecn oon

were meee wie CADDY

TTY “IN THIS SPACE

a ye



--- Page 149 ---
14-0000

FR

TO

RE

SU

To tho Chairmsa ef the Beard of Trustess,
The Free Earcpo University in Exile,
New York, H. Yo

the Ceuittes, having sent out 3530 application forms to iacividals
and organisations, first axumined applications duly completed by camtidates

for Streaboarg ant set acide those, cut ef 626 received, thet had bem filed

by porgens who tuned out to be ineligible, e.g. as being over 22 years of
age (with a-few auseptions), oF heaving university degrees ani novling

already
te finish eleohere, or wahing to otuty a subject pot taught at Suresbourg, !

mr not possessing qualifieations required by tos university, or mot kmnowlag
French to profit by the Strasbourg umiversity courses, or not having

encngr

refuges statas,. Candidatures wiich appeared eligiblo ware than stared eat
detwean the manbers of the Committee for peracnsl interview, aostiy in Paris,
vialte however being made for this purpose te Englend, Belgian, cermsny,
Geoovs, Spain, Italy, Turkey, and Switserland,

With applications and notes on interviews beforo it, the Commdttes then
held numerous meetings, at which the eases of ali eligible cantidstes ware

exanined snd dicsursed. Mr, Royall Tyler, as President of tho Assceistion
for tho College of Free Burops. also attended must of the aestings beid by

the Comittee and assisted it by his advice, ‘The records showed tast «

perventags of the eandidates. and especially ouno of tho sone brost sing
éid not wish primarily to go to Strasbourg bet hoped instoad to craps
then to remain in Paris (in most eases), er st sons

other university. Certain prebleus arising in this comection will be assist
with balow, together with resamendations,

Ralovtions Cer Sirestong

To date, €7 candidates wishing to go to Strasbourg hare boar accepted?
~76 nen and 1, wenen, § (Uote: 8 additional mn and 1 wasn have boon enrailed,

ca RESTRICTED Vieesatios Den

Carers ——+-45

eeeee7e lateifearwny
TOREION SERVICE DESPATCH —
uM: 7 aasiens {1.9 \ penne nee: Sane
THE DEVAKIMENT OF BEATE, WASHINGTON, . a 7
Foo; ee ?
asect: n
. 1
Baolocare to ©
despatea 236 fron Po
dusrises Sensi, A
c
2/15/2 ~Pfok T
eee 7” :
N
oa
N
¥
ce]

ts

©

eee B APA TIALS CABY



--- Page 150 ---
14-0000

. cece ee ome

: . _ RESTHACYED —

OT taveemeaten |
. VPORELON SERVICE DE SPATCH Z
FROM: apg ©
TO oun: DEPARTMENT OV SEAT, WASTING TON, Pee re ag
ei a
REF e
SUBZECT: x 7
Enclosure to .F 4
' despatch 136 fron © :
| American Consol, Po
a Strasbourg,
. 15/51 ~ pe 2

waking @ total, a9 of Mov, 12, 1951, of 8, men and 12 women). Notification
of nca-acceptumee is being arnt to 349 candidates, ‘The Committees has had in
Bind the edvance estimate that five women were to be accepted for Strasbourg,
and that five thenlogisal studente might be accepted for the Collage des 1
Cleres.,, However, ly one theviogical student has qualified for a echolarahipg
and suitale ts ean be anda to lodge as many as 10 or 11 womm, Fr
pessibly oven 19, (Hotes total accepted 12. as of Nov, 12), either in the 6
Stadsat Home for Cirle or in a pension (for the older girle). In view of the
quality of these wue candidates, the Comittes feels justified in selecting
@ wesber larger than that originally contemplated, and after consultation

with Mr. Datitt Peale and ir, Royall Tyler does so waenimously, —

. Tas grand total of male students already accepted for Scrasbourg, and
accordingly notified, is thus 76 te date, as against 100 originally con °
The Cemnittes hao thought it preferable to maintain a high quality, rather
thas to make filling a qasta the first consideration. especially as applica- |
tiene are still coming in and some promising applicants reuaia to be sea. ‘
Sinee the Pronch university year begins only in the first week of November,
@ goed many students wore away wien the application forms were sant cat pbrapel
thoir eddresses unimomm to snyone who could be reached, Arrangement cen be
wads t6 enter lato comers for the Strasbourg university courses, and so it |
ecees tise to allow for the probability that some high-quality candidates
: wil) still appear, none of when tould be accepted if the quota had been i ;
filled up in-a harry regardless of the advisability of maintaining a standard,’ °
‘ Applicants esn bo received and registered in the university as late as Nev, 215 :

It 1a of interest to note that all candidates oo far subuitted to deans
of fagalties at Strasbourg have been conaidered acceptable,

aercatan. ss

“3
~ oe I ‘ a — ---— oe
ws RSRICH@ OT Vetraaaticn tea

ere Ane Tie CARY


--- Page 151 ---
14-0000

5 ETS be arta \

YW January 1902

|

HIMOMARDUM VOR: = DBPUTY LIRECTON ( LANs) J
SUBSECT s Plana for talargement of the. Pree University in Frile

REPERTaT% 6 Letter fram Rozal Tyler to pnel of 15 Lacenbder 175)
‘
1. At a aseting at the [2C1's house, Vashington, 0D. ., on tunday
morning, 13 January 1752, “r. Royal Tyler diecussed with Foaors. he Wo

Mulleg, fH. ‘lates Lloyd anid Thozas W. Eraden, the present plans of tho
Trustees of the FIIE as presented at their eseting in Yew York last week.

2. Reyarding the administration of the tiniversity, ¥r. Tyler reported
that Hr. Mewitt C,. voole's resignation effective 31 March 1952 had been
formally eccepted by the Trustess and Ur. cevering ‘yson had bean elected
Vioe vrasident with full executive powers as of the present. Or. halcola
Devie haa not, sceording to Dr. tyson, proved an effective administrator
ani hao been relieved of all non-acadenic dutios as well os neabership on

the Awards Committee.

3. Pegarding the future expansion of the 'iniversity whieh Fr. Tyler
had reviewed at some lenrth in the referenced letter, the Trustees gave
conditional approval to doubling the nusber of etudents during the acae
Genito year of 1952-53. There are now 43 malo students living at the
eheteau and 13 woren boarding outaide. In addition, 31 students have
tesn awarded scholarships at other universities. Tr. Tyson estimates
that approximately 1/} of the % students at ‘obortsau wil: leave at the
end of thio acadexic year for various reasons, and the Trustees expect
to recruit about 35 stucents to restore the musber {2 residence to ap-
proxinzately 100. In addition, if money is obtained for the necessary
temporary housing, they propose to reeruit a1 additions] 10°, making 200
in rosidence at itotertscu. hey also sugrest increasing the scholarship
appointaents at other institutions to a total of £0.

&. Any such prorran would involve a capital outlay of $260,000 on
@ 100-ded dormitory and necessary study hall or euditorius. “r. tyler
understood that the present kitenen and other facilities will serve a

total of 20° residents.
Se ¥re Tyler


--- Page 152 ---
14-0000

_ Se Mee Tyler expressed concern, in which those present oonsurred,
that the University was making plans for expansion without i:ving definite
inforaation. regurding the munber of acoeptable students who would be
available in future years. Sf the several hundred applicants who were
rejected last year, there wero fez, if any, who would have been adaitted
wider any cireumstances.- It was agreed that a survey should imeadiately
be nade to deterning with as much accuracy. ao possible how many otudents
Gan be expected to bo available for the University in the next fow years.

It was recomended that Dr. Tyzon get in touch with Hr. Lavrenoe Dawson of

the Departmant of State regarding the twumber and acedeate calibor of
esespees currently coming through the Iron Curtain.

6. Jt wae understood that Dr. tyson wold forward to Washington
in the near future detailed estiastes covering:

@ Capital outlay required for the proposed expansion.

be The operating budget of 1952-£3 on the basia of 200
studenta.

(In this coansetion, it ehbould be noted that Fr. ¢. P. Jackson has just
returned froa a trip to visit the officials of the Ford Foundation which
he wade for the purpose of proposing that the Foundaticn take over the
FUIE. The Foundation 4e giving thig serlous consideration bat Mr. dackeon
was roported unvilling to estinate how successful his trip had been.)

7. Pr. Tyler urged that a decision be reached vith regard to capital
iaprovenent at Robertsau by the first of Yebruary. If delayed beyond that
date, the miversity will be at the mercy of French contractore working
on an exergency schedule to nzet the opening date for the expanded
University next Fall.

8 Sowever, befare any conclusions can be arrived at, it would
appear most essential to carry ext the survey of available candidates
referred to in paragraph 5. above. lurthersore, Dr. Tyson is arranging
to bring his dotatled plans to washington on 22 January, after which it
will be possitie to maka a sure detailed report as to the costs involved.
At thie scooting, the potnt raieed by Dn/P regarding the insreased dangers
of penetration by Conmmists will be discusccd.

B. Oa?FS LLOYD
Deputy Chief
rayebolovical Staff Division

DCPY/MGL rnd

Distributions ;
Addressee © Originals PY/CIC - ay DCPY - ly RI 2



--- Page 153 ---
14-0000

The &f Copy “f SECREP-
dorunent-—~. bt

dated 23 UF a .
which vas rekove’ froa this

file, 4s filed in tha RI

TOP SECRET CONTROL SECTION
1305 "L" Bldg.



--- Page 154 ---
14-0000

a

SECRET

(then Filted Int

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT x CCCUMENT d . COCUMENT TOENTIFICATION

ih. Darrekl 5 “ht FILE Wo.
han? fon. Yr 2e, 7 S74 —

© bone asics efe. bt,

‘S- ANALYST @. GATE Processed

DOCUMENT OtsPOSITION

12. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE 19. TRANSFERRED TO
RU FILE 4O.

PERTINENT INFORMATIO

FILE THIS FORM IN FILE NO,

$OO% BED cee cocerece covtenes SECRET



--- Page 155 ---
mentite eee eek cee Rite! gett 1 tte

14-0000
cra SRNR et Dn a, + in en A

SECREI

~“ORMATION

“27 Jamasry 1952

HEtORANOOM FOR: Mr. John levine
: : Departaant of State

SUBS ECT s “Mempandoa of Conversation of Heotiag at Ar. Parrott'a
Hore on Sovanber 20, 1951 to discuss USIE and O10
Rolationmips

1. Your senorandun of comorsation Of Novenbor 20, 1951, uaa
nontioned te ae by Mr. Dulles tia morning with particular roforeieo
ta parngraph 2 of the emnelucions.

2. Hr» Dulles does ant believe that tho menting was quite co
_ Gefinite on this point as you indicate, and I sugeeat, therefore,
an aeandnent a9 follewes

%2. That posalbilitios for toning dm the Crone
for Preedas to a somsvhat leas hishepressure and ape: -
tecular empaiga be carefully explored ty all concsmed.*

THOMAS BW. BRAPER

PY-ClO: THB: ah

Orig - Addreases

1 oe + M/m/P (ur. Hulick)
les-MAs

lees?

loc = a9

Beas

SECRE:


--- Page 156 ---
14-0000

pesmi SECRET

MATCH,

partners fey EDM Stade

=
oe

oy
Een
:
nN

Woury us, ign?

SUL CTs Keport an lavish jor Confer nce as outlined Wy Kiss lay
Auguuting at January 9, 1%? meting with State.

Frou Red. Boor

Mics Augustine advised that the flavikein jer Conference hod been —

placed on the Aranda, 80 8 result of Hr. fodolerts co sent (mee at a

necting during Peoecb: tr, 1952) to the ef ect that At would bs dentrable
to cive encowwsrennt ond wore) esu,port to the Slavikeiajer ercupe

” Miss Aupuptine oxmlained that Fayy bid received sone encouragezent
from EE when (durizg January 1957) he initially broached his plan for the
eotablishing af an overall intr tional prouping of exiles frea central
and Tastern Fustope, Howver, when St bomne clear to hE that Iayy'e group
waa to bo formed on exclusively political party Lincs, and would be domiuated
ty Agrarian (Peasant) perty loaders and ting, in affect, a duplication of
dhe Intermations] Peasant Unton and other auch orantsations already Jn
existence who are alreacy receiving KIT. ouport, that it could not, thorefere,
be brondly rejresentative, HUT, therefore, incicated to Magy thst it cuuld
Rot provide flrarcial su port for an organization eet vam such a basis. tayo
reaction to bh tte policy = consequently atreng amd critical.

At about this game tise the Glavkieln jer croup (mo knum as tho
Centyal and Fastern yurops an Conference) began to em ree ani to b cote active.
Tt tan composed efricdally of the so~unlled “bureaucmts", “diplonte's and
*nonpartisan personalitica® which wore so despised ty Racy and his colleagues
froa the Agrarian portices and oth r political party leadcre who took Cieir cus
fro the Peapant Party polit ioiars. Thi mem crew boven actuslly to mot
and to perform gamilve wort. ©

Benne |


--- Page 157 ---
14-0000

vane
e2e

A; parently, ag tho result of the excrrence of the Slavikekajer
Conference, a2 an erbrye but functioning body, the tay group sprang into
action, and loaving the planning and organizational ctare behind, launched
itself filly inte a big prosa conference Gnd wich fanfare. This Hary croup, i
Swit to confuse an already confustiy: oituation further, 1g iionn as the Contrale
Tastern Turonsin fo nittce, Ite Aug: tine advised. _ .

Hern: was disqileted by this alxst simultaneous exorrence of tvo
potentially competing orpanisations ami aide tt clear to beth proups that

firancial syrort ms out ef the qusstlon wrtil @ uerper or soe clear and
acceptable agreernnt betwen the two grnne, which would bar the Lr coupeting
with each other, should be effected, tha Clavikthjer Caufurence, Hiss
Augustine indleated, arrecd to occk no large anvunt of publicity for a tine
in order that the unfortunate and undesirable aspect of comebition might
be played deem ae much as porothle in the hope that a mrpor or acceptable
acreerent might be fortheonin:.

After its initial plunce into the publicity spotlight, the hary
Comittee scaned to becora corplctely quisscent, while the Slavieinjer
Cenference bereame increasinrly active, performing some renuinely useful work.

Ki-sAucustins inforrnd tle mreting that mcrr hed paid for the
Doulet an cepertations, entitled "IMeen mreden is Being nuslaved", and
that Prank eright, HUT Creve Officer, taving spoken in Miris with Chester
Fillians of the U.", kt ston to the 0.N., wo ured that thts booklet and
ita exposition a” the subject of cenertiticns be civo us mich publicity as
posible in the minority presse af the U.0., especially tho ¥ preco, the
labor preas, and the prea of othr natlomlity crouse thru Central~
Fast-rn luropean, oe that thin would bo riven the aspect of a brosdly~becua


--- Page 158 ---
14-0000

-j-
protest, not mrely the ;rotcot of s few Central and Lustern i wopean oxilede
In this wy members of our U.S, Mission would be enazled to cite before the
vere Assomly tho protest which ceportations have elicited frou the U.5. -
ninority provs, quoting articlea, otc., which have more of @ propaganda

degact than the bcoklet iteelf. ;
Originally, tise Aurpustine pointed out, the Slavitein jor Contesence

had arproached MPR with a proposal thet NCI arrange and finsice & luncheon
oa dinner to wich various mpriecntatives of influential Am rican organiza=
tions, labor, church, ecucutdoial, elces would La Luvited, and at which the
exiles would have an op,ostimity to resent the facts and the ly views rogard-
Ing deportations. 71 had at fleet agreed to this, in princze, Wise
Auguatine acvised, but in view ef the protble recrimiations fram the Kacy
grou (which would, in.fact, have sony baeis af justification) and also in
view at the proparanca ajpruach oupeated by Killia:e, the Co-mitue had
dropped tits idea and eau working instea: along the Lincs au: gested by the
Yok. Kiceion, ;

Wig Augustine acced that in the alsence of @ mrper, cr an acreaxcnt,
regarding division of ficlcs of competiticn (the Bary Comittee, ecncentrating
on lon=range planning and post~liberation problosgs the Slavix-lajer con
ference focusing ite efforte upon the i-nediate problems confronting exiles
in the proUberution period) PUT Ind stored clear of providing financial
guppart on any continuing og 1.

‘re Busbour ing.tred ca to tho prospects for eerpor, am! whetner it
fad bem sado clear to all calle crogs involved thit the withboldirg of NCFE
Surport wa predicated uwvon the lack of any willed and brouwdly representative

eroupings

J



--- Page 159 ---
14-00000

Nowe

Idiuy Aupwtine advised of two rovent conversations she hud tad
with Bidziauias, and caid chit won prevoed uy him for the reason wy
the lunchecn plan had bun dropped, she Ind at Sirot tried to put this on
& practical basis and on Lr. Wright's Maris conversations and the con
Bequent chance of tactica. NMowever, when proaced Surth ry, ani told by
Sideitaula of the rumors of drastié chingea of Wri: policy, etes, which
would attend the abandonment cf this plan, Miss Augustine advised that
gentleran unofficially that, alone wth the practici] reasons, we tad been
motivated by a deuire to avoid the inevitable recrintuations froa Macy, and
that the lack of a oerger or satisfactory agroonent betwen the two croup=
ingp would continue to prevent ow mt rial auyport of their activities on
ary consintent or permuont tesis, Wuid\u-untine acied that vury recently
SidsUmulaw had Lnforaud ier briefly of a meting of the lary Couiites
hold within the list fow ye. Thin mutin; was attended ty, anag others,
Vioolam, ClisVawas an! Ook, who ieve sat an the fena betwen these
two croupa and luve attsnded the stings af bot groups. Sidsiimukes
bolieree that agreommnt to divide flelus of corgetitius, rather thou @

{

Berger, Us shaping ups



--- Page 160 ---
14-0000

Ay

Tae

SEGRE f

SEOUL baton. tered

In reply refer to (-) 11)
8 .
ll danaary 1952

Mre C.D. Jackson
National Comm'ttee for a Free Furepe, Ins.
110 West 57th rtrest

Now York 19, Hew York

Doar C. Des

_ AS promised at our last nesting, hore is the text for a new
paragraph 3 of the Himites of the Meeting Held in Washington on
Us Doeesiber 1951. This was dictated by Cliver £. Hadwood.

*3. dackoon advised that he had a tentative date to
eall on the Ford Foundation people in 7asadena on January Sth.
Braden advised that 1t would be appropriete at thet tine to
Rake a strong pitch on the Iron Curtain refugee problem with
the idea that the government was teskling this problem tut
needed eubstantial help frea private agencies, and that if
Ford would give a sizable cun.to UCPZ, which it in turn could
fara out to IRC, it would help to get the bal) rolling on a
major peyohological warfarc problen. FEraden stressed that
private initiative was extresely important that if a private
agency acted now, it would epeed ap the governmental machinery.
Ho algo said that the maxinus estinated governncntal contrie
butica teward this probloa was. not expected to be more than

balf the cost.

®Braden also advised that IRC had agreed with David
Martin for Martin to step dow fron his post as Lxecutive
Dircctor and that the Committee was considering the appoint-
mont of a well-known university president to essuze the job.
Be said that Martin had agreed to step oxt of the pisture
altogether if the Committee wished hin te do so but that in
any case his role from now on would be nizor.

*I% was also agreed that this discussion of refugees and
TRO could include the plan worked up by Parle and Lolbesre to
turn over to IRC SCPE *non-produstive exiles at a cost to SCFB

of approxiastely 81,000 a heed.*
Sincerely yours,

dha L. Denewood
DCPY/NOL sm), SEGRE

Distributions
Addresses ~ Originals DCPY ~ 11 PY/Rxi ~ 12 PY/tIN 2 1. bY ©


--- Page 161 ---
14-0000

get

CUNY CO ys ee

wiper:
fee tre“. , Polboure

is. J. 7. Leich
Tron: 2.7. Wore

TOWELT: Napart of motin: at State fopirtuunt, Medweday, Janmry 9, 19.25
peg tela Busey Awantino, Mh. fateco lod ft. malworth Barbour,
THT ve, madd ce Fedo, it. dol Gagiall, Mr. “home Geciagel,

Mire Nouirt Je Home.

FOC Ince y Ayu ting oer oened the tho York c{fice at te meting
an the 7200 OC we. John i’. Loich, uiw iy in !uropo atic:alag tho
Tien Noversct Confercemeces

Ce CLOe An .
KR ws reealled tio’ at ths meting a Veen 7 26, 1981, disamslon

ef the Ceuchealoval: problem tnd cntied on a note af optininn, Mins Aqustineg
edvised that this opticion had en oblitemted dus to cartain unfertumte
Ctromotanees which hid developed Sn nerotintiond botmen the Croc) slow:
Councdl mijority of 17 am) the fork) ainority of 13. Mise Augustine ine
dleated that one of the prizcipal etusbling blouls fn tho Caech aitantion
io the queation of the co-oqul cminansidy dn the new setup of teo serscng,
ome a pointed frum exch mixape She further avviged thet a doy af 00 persons
Clivided egmlly betwen the tro a peg crags vould aot oc an od hes com
wits-e to outablish a now Couchoolovak miical Cousell, and Unt, whereas
the 13 wished to appoint fir. Tarik ag ono Gf Ue tay diinmn, they Ind ot
the gare ting oxpresued thedr opinion tle:t m. Cowky mould net be a-ce;table
te thea ap the othr co-;wlnirmn, or indeed, txt ho slauld mot emreise any
rajor fimction. Such an ult saatum @ peared umccr: table to the 17 who oom
tented thit megotiations could not be carried on under these «ircucatanced.
Upon receipt of this news, Mis Aurunting painted out, ir. Palbeare
of STE advised the Ceechooloak dalemtion th.t de would place -he whole
Froblea before the Board of Dinctors of HIT. This as done, anda

JAN 15 1952 opthEl

3
wearers TIE


--- Page 162 ---
14-0000

-2-
gubcoznittec was aryodnted to exaiino the situations thio co.nittce io com
posed of lire Y, a, Dolbeare, Dr. Levering Tyeon and Yr. Praak altachu. tho
subeco-nittce vos formed by the Burd of Lirectorg that, should the Cxcchow
plovake fail te evercone their diiferences by the end of Jamary, 411 payssnts
to the Crechoolevak katieral Council would cosse an of that tise. tho Boord
had agrcedy however, that a credit of £25,000, appropriated te the Council,
would remain with it and could bo used for su; port duriny the course of the
following month. It wao corsicercd tint these funds wulé act ag a hedge
apuinot other outside Sunde to vidch Tr, Zenkl appears to have access.

She subcosni:tie net on January O with Mecre. Lettrich, Heidrich
and Osuskg, at which time tho princinle ef the cowequal cimirzansiip a; pears ;
to have bren dropped in favor of a oyoten af mifererd, including Messrs.
Fapanek and Heddrich - one ‘rum ech croup. iis Austins adviped thit the
gubsommd’ tee waa to govt on Jenuasy 10 with Dr. Zenkl and cumany, and on
Friday with tho deleration frou beth croups. wise Augustine advised that af
the three members of the subco mittee only kr. Altachul a:peared to carry
any optinion as to the outcune of the negotiations. Ki:s 4ugustine informed ,
tha meeting of ir. Dolbeare's opi:.ion that, should repotistions fails:

@) all financial ties would ceaze with orpanised Ceechoslovak
exile groups,

bd) ECYE would be obliged to select individuals as acviserd in CC
variow functional camicities. .

Vics Augustine mde rererunce to a [2-pare Ceecheelowak momorandun
Which hud recently been presented on the whole cituation of Ceechoulovalda,
past amt preset. She advised thit Lecers. Causky and Franck had not signed ;
tho docuvent and that MCT ts analysis of tie meaorandus ind bean unfavorable.

by. Vedolir interjectod that should current negutiations fail. -_
Some considsration should be given to allotting fimncial ald to beth tho



--- Page 163 ---
14-0000 ~
le eke “mE Sink Priel mnemnanses as + ee RRA eI TY UE
ee er ne tne nem Me A aN ro Sm te

Czechoslovak croups in the controversy.
ee Mr, Barbour int.rposed that should the negotiationa indeed fail,
and we be faced with a Ceechoslovak situstion in which there would be no-
Czechoslovak Council, the whole situation of the National Councils and NCFE
micht well need to be reviered. He pointer out that the NCKE was based wry
much on the National Gourcil idea, and that it is constituted. to work on this
basis. Therefore, should this concept fail, it might be expedicnt to lave a
“system af some kind of national panel whose rockers would be appointed by MCFB
; to work on the problem of their respective mationalities (presurably within -
: the dictates and neods of American Foreign policy). Mr. Barbour advised tiat
euch persons would have.to be chosen on tho basis of choir ability to work
togethur, thus avoiding the i:suce of political strife and partisan intorests.
lm. Moore surrested that ihe meeting might wish to coraider the pro~

iradiately :
cedure which should’ follow in the wake of the possible breakdown of Csechoslovak

necotiations.

Mr. Lloyd proposed that the matter be referred to Vashington for con~
sideration by his cffice and the State Departacrt before the Ceechoslovaks
were formlly advised of the drastic action conto-plated by KCFF'e Beard of
Directors and the subco.miite. There was general aprverent that ihis should
de the case.

BALTIC BRCADCAS7S
Miss Aurustine reviewed the situation of the Baltics panels in New
3 . York as regards broecessts ty Tadio Free Furope. She advised that the Baltic
comtries would be renresented at the Luropean Lovezrnt Conference by heads of
the Hew York Beltis panels, and opecifically - essre. Massens, Sidsikausine
and Vabter ~ and that Unus funds had been fcund to marry cut the original plan
of sending a representative fren-each Baltic country to the Lovencnt Conference.


--- Page 164 ---
cas ree MES pete ete im LEE 2 NETL ata Sane’ Niet nat ena

“Le

Ure Vedeler Lvticated tint he cermide red thin wove to te fortumte
| end alpropste, in view of the upheavel which haa occurred in the rater of
* the Mnltie twrosdo-sta. Ho dndieated hig inlief that Lf FCT da to continue,
At Sn neconpary, tit sone farm of indio Free Furgwe broadcast to Baltic:
\ courte Leo be considered. Ste »rivised that the Maltic cow.trins conoidured there
‘ad bren dincr!-Lation againet thet, and they feel Wat it is only through RFE
broadcasts that they can really speak to thoir om peoples he advised that he
Cconaid:red the ronernl situstion most recrettable.

Mise Augustine Indleated that in New York there was considerable hopa
that ence the Baltic broadcast qucetion ms straightened out, such situations
be avoided in the future, ag i$ haa been zest exbarrauaing to a1] concorned,

- pad has placed the cved faith of WCrk toasrde the Balte in Jeopardy.
ur. Barbour advined that se rust consider the Paltic broadiasts to
be currently ruled cut. Nowovr, he adviecd furtiur that tne miter wiil be
taken up on the baais of the forral protests ledjed with the State Lepartmnt
vy the Daltte ddplontic weolons in tide cowtrye He infermed tht . ¢ uhole
Situation Ind becos confused duc to the unfortumte light in which the Yoice
Of Americas vroadcutts hed ve: thrown, 23 @ result of imdio Free Turope's
activitied, Me mde refereace to the Crusade for Precven on behalf ef fale
Free Soropo, and indicated that the Crugac: in this instance ind cone a great
deal to etir up the publicts mind tn faver of #1, to the diacrecit of the
Voice of Amrim, Firally, he advis.', ho-sver, that the write af the ease
Yor breadcssts to Saltiec countrica by RFI. would be reconsidered.
RUYANTAs
Mics Augustine advised that tiers wis not a great ceal to re,ort on
the Ruunian aituation, but tht i. Cafency had recs lived advice that ir.
" Vinclars would acct with bin prior to the latterte dejarture to attend the ”

0000-71


--- Page 165 ---
ines tenet Oe a TS
cee ce emer nar sre rman ner etme 1S

14-0000

Furoypean Movenent Conference. It wag hod that the neeting would actually
take places but that assurances could not be Foruscoaines Honever, St Gvened
reasons) le thet vr. Visolanu mirht mate the nove dafor: coli to London where
he would have further conuultstions with the King. Me.sroe Visolanu and
Cafeng were resorted to ave core to gom uncle arma weto for tho purpose
af reaching an und rsta:ding between the two facttorg. Advice was piven
thet Concral Radeacu woul! be breusht into the anoultations evetually.
lar. Muore adv wed of the o inion held ty the Mationwl Cows.
division of ATE that the Mustang phould avoid bring Jk. Sing Ute the
: negotiations, and rather th:t on agrecsont dn the form of a fait accu
should be presented to the Kirg for his approvals :
ir. Carvpbell int: rjectcd thet ho had an appointzent at that tiro
with ur. Viusotam, and that dn the li ht of this infomation, he would advise
tht centlenan net to try to pull "ary conte:y.lated echenes which mirht dis=
rupt the efforta oo far taken". Hr. "arbour requested that 4r. Visolanu be
inforacd, in strong term, to avoid further intrigue or unnecevsary protracted

@lscu.aions. In cthe: wonls “read hig thu riot act".

HUNGARIAN AMSA LS:

Hina Aupwtine advised tre arsting that it had Leen necessary to rake
som: drastic changes anang the Jaupardan personel workis for Raclo Free Furope
in Hea York, as thelr output ws considered to be imdeqate. She advised that

efforts wert belng uadn to reestablish the Jnyarian dak on a sere effective
barise

BUIGAD IAN AFA Dee
Mio Aurustine advised th.t mr. Dinitroy is departing for Furepe te

join the Furopean bovezent Conferunce, and that he uns being oblirped to cow
to HUF heedipartere to pick up his check for the purpose of Uy. trip.


--- Page 166 ---
Fae

iy. Dsrbeur advinec tm’ he hed mst with re Dinitrov and had given
the duljarian wi impression tht Etato did not coraider hla conduct of affair
to te in the state of perfiction whitch the centlemn hiwelf so cli. Myre
Barbour further advised that he recugniged che feoling against Dinitrev asong
othore working on Tulparian a‘faire, and that he underetands the tapds for this
eriticisn, jewever, te acvised toet ho dose conmld&r Dlaltrey to be the
Yonrvgentative of an important peasant elenw:t Li Nulgarda, aii that he did
not consider tids ‘fect | whould te dgncrale .

tics Awcwtine advised that there appeared to br sane difficulty with
Mr. Ghipovig gaorré, a fact which in retsoding his arrival in thls cou-try.
She further advisec of the neod for a Guorwi on tie Julgarion Natieral council,
dn order to deal with tho poli: ical oltuaticn which haa developed Shores

The mecting revelved o visit froa ir. keckcacel w.0 4.viged tmt ho
wae working on a new plan fur the reioru of the Bulgarian !atiora] Coulttes
Be advised that Me expected to have tha report ready at thw tine of the next
Emeting and requested thit the nenbera of the meeting consider the Bulgarian
question in the saurtins, and should they have ary specific ideas which thoy
should wish te present, they should contact hia in the interval, He ecvised
that he wao a:tegting to draw up a plan whereby mamborolip in the Bulgarian
Covalttve would be estahlished on an olective tesis, am! au rested that this
Bight be a good tine to teach then some of Us coneepta ef democratle procedure.

Lt. Bartow advised of his interno in the julgurtan political lendor
lan 2B lushanor, iy: surresied th.t vom consideration bo , ivan to bringing
this san inte Pulgerian oxlle as faire.

EUV as h Cs tts
Ir. Vedaley acvisod that 1c") should corsider the Slavia jor

Conference orrariestion within tho Lint ef its omn activities and purycoes.

0000-71


--- Page 167 ---
. ate
\

(1-60 Augustine outlined the histary or the Glavik-imjer Conference
and the conditions witch are ourrently existing ther in, A copy of les
Aupustine'e report will shortly fo:low tiie re;ort of the eting with State).

In ruply to Mie Auguetineta statencnt that sho understvoc lr. vodeler
to Deilevé 147% should ¢ive ew ort to the Slaviitajor Confurence, Ur. Vedaler
advised that he considered this eu; pert should take the :orm of assistance to
special profecta, but thut he did not scivocate tat sivistance should be given ,
to Lin Conference on an ableout bas lo. :

Yr, Sarvour advised cf his a>proval of this proccdure, and requested
that precautions be taken in order that lacy not be aroused.

POLIBN AUT? Ds

ire Aupuotine advised there wa little to report on Polish affalra,
other than to advise of a cable which had been rocoived in New York to the
ei fect that Cererel Anders had solicited the aid of Count vacaynski to sesist in
the forimtion of the Polish Council of hational imity.

Ww. Yedeler advised tint he hnd spoken to ir. Joyce resarding 4 can~
versation which the latter ms presumed to have had with the British in Lendéen
on cooperation with tho U.S, in exile aifairs,

Mr. Parbour dndicated that he also had a report of Hr. Joyce's dis=
Cusaions with the Forvign 0.fice, am! that the former had found little Arit'sh
desire to becom involved in the m:ters of exiled ;roups. He su-rested that
the British coreid:red this to Le 4n oxtrewly casplicated and undesirable

Situation which they hud wished to aveld,
is. Barbour acvised that in view of our am record of Invalvencnt and

dissppeintesrts in thin policy, w were hintly in a poultion to advise the
British that wy ehould follow our exaqile, However, he indicated that within
the noxt few months the Lepartmunt will return to further discussions of this
matter with the British, and indiosted $iat he had hopes of achloving a greater

degree of cooperation and cvordimation of policies. Le
(The next ovetin: will take place on January 73rd.)

0000-71


--- Page 168 ---
14-0000

, SECR

Security INES aN

° 9 January 1952

MEMORARDUM ORs KA. ROSTHT P, JOYCE
Policy Planning Staff

Bepartasnt of State
SPIT s Redio Yveo Zurope Operations

REFERENCES Kenorandua dated 15 Noveabor 1951 fron
T. BH. £. Heabitt to Robert Hooker

1. Regarding the project mentioned in tha referenced eonorandun
to transfer aporovinately 160 Polish exiles to Portugal for tho
purpose of conducting folish prograns froa that country, Hr. Robert 8.
Lang, Director of facio Free turope, has advioed ua that on .

3 January 1952, tse Zeard of Lircotas of the National Committee
for a Free furcoe, Ins. Cectded that at loast for the present,

40 would be aivisable to ¢o all rolish programing in Munich. He
Stated that ca fir. C. 5. Jackson's last trip toe Portugal, the
authorities thare acvised hin that. ary Polioh oxiles brought in
under the above-noutioned cirousstances would have to live under
conditions approximating "house arrest,” since the Portugese
goverment would not tolerate their circulating freely within the

Country.

2. Later Fr. Ssencer Phenix stated that he and Mr. 6
Thomas believed that sone fev Poles could de brought in without
euch drastic actio: by the Portucese authorities. Hs also oxpressed
Goncern that the short wave communications between Munich and Lisboa
were not 100K asticfactory for transmitting the Polish prograss,
which are then relayed out of Lisben to Poland. Ne felt thas
programaing in Portugal would be the bast way to handle the probdles
but edeitted that apprexisately 100 people would be nseded, and,
under the elrowstances, he egroed that it was batter to keep tha
eatire program staff all in ons place.

3. We are asking

cad
ial
>
“


--- Page 169 ---
14-0000

fa

SECRET

SECU ¢ bind womasivad

._- 3e We are asking Mr. Lang to heep us posted on any future
plane that cay devalop to eend any of these people te Portugal

eo that vo may advise the Nopartasnt of State in advance ef any
gach projeste

He Oates Lloyd

DCPY/HOLsal -

Distributions
Addressee - Original and 1
DoPY -
oro -1
RI -2



--- Page 170 ---
14-0000

wr MOVE Phe _ 4
. Suny Ins : ,

OuGATION \
SéEpey

In reply refer tos W-/7 lb &
8
January 9, 1952

Mr, Frederic R, “olbeare :
350 Fifth Aveme a !
New York, Kew York~ .

Dear Freds \

I am enclosing, for your confidential information, a
translation of a letter received by tho /ustrian Minister in
Washington, which has been brought to the attention of our
friends, In discussing thic matter the Austrian Enbasry
pointed out that Austria was an occupied country in which were
stationed, amng others, Soviet troope and expressed the hope
that MCFE would retrain from taking any action thich night
put Austria in an embarrassing position.

I am confident that we can count upon your cooperation
in rraventing the development of any situation which would
embarrase the Austrian Covernment.

Sincerely,

Travie A. Abery

Attachment 1
4s stated above

ect Miss Viccellio ~~ °


--- Page 171 ---
14-0000

S January 1952

Dear Abbotts

Thank you for reminding me that Fd McHale may soon
be available. As you say, I know him, tnougn slightly,
bat I have always heard excellent things about hin.

I have made an attempt to find out who expreased
interest in him to Tom Myers but cannot do so. Perhaps,
therefore, you would pass this note on to Tom and ask him
to let ne know sometime soon who expressed the interest.
That would help ne ascertain whether we will want to try
to bring him down here.

My very best wishes to you for the New Year.
Sincerely,

Mr. Abbott Washburn

National Comuittee for a Free Europe
808 + 7th Avenuo

Bew York, New York

PY-CIO: TWB: eh

Orig ~ Addressee

l ec - FY/Exec Asst.
l ce - PY

lice - clo”

2c -

pd 1761

fo ates ae


--- Page 172 ---
Ah NR = nt a RRR ee TE ot ete

ne ee ee

Crd Kochi hob Lv fersoe an
etanead in thes hentfan iperotin ”
a Xtrmud 5 Vil Merntern's a
On hen oe
Ln C Cone) wht res
EES wth
Care,io onl, mid, ”
A) one thew, sO Qo Qeam



--- Page 173 ---
14-0000
weectewe * am

. seunmesehtns Seman ncernsbneste anes

grea tent etn EO aca eevon ip men taht

es emerge ER

seme

ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

column. Under each comment a line shoutd Be drawn acress sheet

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in the “TO”
Each officer should initial (chock mark insuttcrent)

and each comment numbered to correspond with the nuriter in the "TO" column.
before further routing. This Routing and Record Steet should be roturnod to Rogistry.

orrtces's
{NI FIALS:

Fes vegom 1"? SECRET


--- Page 174 ---
ceca coment ee ane Pen a naar oo

14-0000

a)

Decester 19, 1951

Dear Tom:

A@ menticned to you last Friday, our mutual Sriend Ed McHale
has done a goed Jod hore on the Now York City Crusade
canpaign in spite of numorous handicaps ant obstaclos,

1 The present clewn-up operations will de conrleted next month,

end in view of the somewhat uncertain future of the Crusade
I have had a iittle talk with Ed so that he enn be thinking
about moving to anothor assignment.

at the tine Ed Joined us, Tom Myera indicated thst your shop
had expressed ccensiderable interest in his. Would you be
g00d enough, Tom, to see whether euch interest still exists
or whether there are any other olota that nicht be filled
by soneone of his. ability and forcefulnese,

Many thonka,
Yours,

Abate

©

oh

er

ee



--- Page 175 ---
14-0000
a et

PUNCLASSHFIEO COM C} CONFIDENTIAL Ch sterner

a ___RROUTING AND RECORD SHEET ae Poa

FROM Sere - i neg" as - : .
ee ce | - ;

Wad

OMncens | COMMENTS [Number pork comment ts show trom shom
WATIALS | my whom Ovew 0 ne arriat solvmn after aoth comment}

PLEASE INITIAL AFTER REVIEWING

DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTLLATE POLDER.

RETURN TO ff - a6) _.

as.
1P/ARD Re GE—58 | t | .
INTERAAL

o SECRET oO CONFIDENTIAL 0 use ony

2 hove 610% tonne

aid

CSET ompocSET qorey



--- Page 176 ---
14-00000

3 dune 1952

MEMORANDU! FOR CHOP, INTURRARIUGAL ORGANI ZATIO“S .

SUBIES Ts Preparation ax Distribution of « Eessletter in
the uorbian Language by lx, Lazer Rudiivejovich.

1. This of ice is interested in a projent of Lactiituting
te, Lazar Hadivojevich, a baneficlary of the UCF:, to prepare
(mimsograph) and diotclbute a sooll nevaletter in tue Serbian
language, among the former Serbian Officer Hrheoners of nar, who
: were detcincd in the cump at St. vuhaun 1 Pong:a, in motria, of
é which osmp ly, Radtvojovich was the chief, elected iy tne members
j of the camp, About 300~400 menbera of this cump are rom in the
: United States, having emigrated xaior th: provisiias of the
Displaced Persons Act. —

2. aside from bolsterins the aorale of these peo le und
assisting then to adjust thamacives to their new surrurdings,
the newslottor 19 calculated to mike it possible for i. Hadi yoJevich
to maintain contact with then so that this office azy oc in a posle
tion to know their addresses ani be informed of their whereabouts
at «ll times. Por your informsti-a, this office believes th.t, under
certain circunstences in tho future, this group or amino of it
might be uscful, emt desires to see it aint.in ita ties through

Mr, Radivojevich.

3. ‘Tho novsletter would haw no political chir.cter thutso-
ever, It would contin svoisl an! personal. news of iterest to ths
group} hew arrivals of former colleaguess news of tie therecbouts and
doings of mabers of the group; ceestions und ansvers fcr tha enigre=

. tion; something about the history .! custons of tac Unitdd St:.tea,
and such other items x3 eight heap thea orient and edjost themiclvos

in their now surroundings.
4. Tho Doputy for 51/PC has presented this project to
Mr. Campdell of the State Depsrtaem um secured his approval,

5. te believe tht. project xSould be Iapleasr.ted entor tho

sponsorship of tho NCF..: end, to wxia end, we re uest yx: to be
good onouyh to take the matter ap with them, ‘This office vill bo gl.i to


--- Page 177 ---
14-0000

ae

cooperate with the HC7Z with a view to establishing means for control ©
of the contonts of the nenalettor,

6. 1 set up this project Ur, Kadivojevich would nocd a typo=
writer with Cyrillic letters, a hand presa snd a masthead for the
per, which would represent a totul investacnt of epproximtely |
$193, fe figures that he could then print his newsletter twice a
wenth, about 400 coples of each odition, for a monthly amount of $160.

G:ATIAN MH. YATIMVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, SB


--- Page 178 ---
14-0000

™ STORET

SECURITY IHFCQMATION

26 Juno 1952

MELOKALUN FOR: Chief, 1O/irTre

SUBJECTs Staniclaus Ockiorka

1. Walter Pforsholmer called mo to say that a Congrosunan
with whan ho is in touch had asked whather we wore taking on a
Mr. Stanislaus Oskierka. He was informed by the Congreemnan
that Ton Myers told him that tiere was no job for him in HCcrE
put tuat ho might be able to net a job in CLA in Wasnington.

2. This is tho kind of thing Myera snouldntt do, and I
think he should be called on it.

3. I find, incidentally, that Oskicrka has not requected
employment through Myers to John Suiclds and I will tell
Mr. Pforzheimer that he s:.ould cieck with CIA Personnel.

TH BRADEN |

Chief i
International Organizations Division

(0: THB/eh

Orig - Addressee

l ce - Hr. Frorzheimer
1 ce - ClO

2 ce - HI

SECRET


--- Page 179 ---
14-0000

SECRET

26 duno 1H2

SGRA SUM Pale De PPR ra CePA NPR OLDS ok

Ant & Ey

Rotar$ J, Sacre

Le on 2 Jura 1952 you tod me of your interview with Robert
Je “a0en seul of hig cetevonees on hte dirrlenal frou NCTE, “re Moore
wis Sjecunsed from kCTY on security srounds and his disieda al was

_finitiated by thin Agenay,

2. ‘ubeaq-ently Moore interviewed 2421 Percee in few York for a
dob iu tye American Committee -n United Furene but there eas none
evailalie, ‘urtor the cource‘af thiy intervied, oore, thayth not
ee van an employe of Ci’, dicilpad canurity insfersation
PIA velatiouships, and our seeirlty peorla have been
nothficd of this Lact,

THONAS Ve St UEN
Chief
Internptimal organinationus “iviston

C193 TH /nkes
Miatribetionr:
Orlge © Addrsasad
lee e C:5

Zee o Tift are
2G¢e o BI

SECRET


--- Page 180 ---
14-0000

oe SECRET

SFCURTY rRMATION

25 June 1952

ORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
_ SUBJECT: Complaint of Yugoslav Counselor

1. Wally Barbour told me today that the Counselor of the
Yugoslav Exbassy had called upon him to complain about the presence
of Yugoslav delegates at the NCFE Williamoburg Conference and the
signing of tho Williagsburg statement by Yugoslav delegates. {

2. Mr. Barbour said that the Counselor prefaced his reaarks
with a statement that he knew Nr. Barbour would reply that he had
no influence over NCFE and no connection with it. Mrs Barbour sald
that that was what he had said and that his statanent was received
‘by the Counselor with a polite shrug.

3. Barbour did not seen unduly worried, but I told him that
we would shortly ask him for a review of State policy in rem@ect
to the national councils and exiles with whos HCFE is dealing and
he said ‘he would welcome the opportunity to make auch a reviay.

TOMAS W. BRADEX
Chief
International Orgmisationa Division
C01 TWB/eh
Orig = DDCE (thru ADFC & DD/P)
1 co = EE - (rinsed & C/10 F foley 4 declengers dated oy Poera(acenhee x
Lee - wm Newey Lane sey Ri, -
leo GO
200 -

SECRET


--- Page 181 ---
14-00000 .
. Pee ate an AE ATR SEIS RENE che mh NE Senna rN a AAC NS pr ie Finke nln ONE Le gt eS AMES Sonn

y : | egfes |

SLUR tesco oe % 5
June 1952

MEHORAKDUM FCR+ Chief, I0 Diviaion

SUBJECT: Current NCFZ Disoussione with Ruamien National
Peasant Party Neabera

REFERENCE? Memorandum to Chief, IO Division, Sutjects: 8£ Division
Plan for Rumanian Enigre Organization, dated 23 May 1952

1. In a telerhone conversation with Mr. Prichett cn 23 June,
Mr. Dolbeare informed us that the NCFE discussions with members of the
Rumanian National Feasant Farty had been held with the eaisres by pairs
rather than in a croup sa planned. On bhednesday, Sime 18, Altechule held

nestinrs as followss

Rautu ard Bunescu
Botosani and Radovan
Ghilezan and Venetu (did not attend)

> 2. A meeting is scheduled for this week with Popa and Blam. Meetings
between Ghilezan and Rautu and between Botosani and Venetu have been arranged.

3. According to Mr. Dolbeare, the National Peasants have been asked
by HCFB to formulate a plen for a new comittes. Kr. Iblveare did not :
indicate whether KCFR surgested the form outlined in the SE Division Alans i

k. The errangements for the discussions with the National Peasants
differ, as follows, from those agreed on by CIA and Mr. Leich in the dise
cussion of the implenentation of the SE Plans .

ae A ‘Yal meeting of tle National Peasants, Listed in para-
, @Feph 3 b of the Yes ‘vas suzrested in the Plane The general aeeting was :
+ yequested for the specific purpose of brLaging National Feasants of both
groups tocether and emphasising perty unity. ‘

te It appcare that neither Crihan nor Mamuila has teen incluced
in the discuseionse .

Ce The addition of Rautu to the discussiong is sot opposed,
however the addition of Venctu is.



--- Page 182 ---
ee AN eee ETDS An any

14-0000
cee ee nee anne ern, we mine Ae AE I NE A EORTMNES ste tment matt eMa ot Sedeelien SS, oe

See

ots,
oot

cr

S. It 1a requested that MCFE be informed that the discussions wore
not carried out in accorance with the original plan nor th the agreanent
between CIA and NCFBe It 19 furthor requested that the folloning section
be taken by NCFE.to rectify actions taken so fars

ae That CIA be informed prior to, not after the event, when
substitutions, chances, or additions cre made to the accented plans.

- be That NCFE inform us promptly of action taken in connection
ad with thie current plan.

Ge Thst NCFE errange, ac soon as possible, to mest with Popa,
Bianu and Crihan. :

d. That HCYE forestall formal meetings, outlined in paragraph
2 above, betweon the members of the Yew York groupe

@. That NCYE send letters to the following Hational Peasants,
Popa, Bianu, Crinan, Ghilezsn, « Hanuila, Rautu, binescu, Fotocant and
Radovan indicating that a general meeting of the National Feasante will : af
be hald in the near future to discuss party responaioiiity in forming an
emicro orgarisation. The KCFE officer conduoting tho meeting should to
briefed on the SE Division Plen by an officer of this division, .

GRATIAN M. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Coordination, 6B


--- Page 183 ---
14-0000

wen

23 June 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, WE

SUBJECT: Debriofing of Harry Sperling by
L, do Neufville

1, L. de Neufville recently cabled that H. Sperling, who
is to be relieved as Chief of RFk information gathering in
Munich, waa talking freely of his removal and making comments
about hia replacement.

- 2. De Neufville suggested that Sperling be sent back to
Washington for a debriefing. For many reasons, including our
relations with NCFE, we would prefer it to be done in the field.

3. I therefore suggest that de Neufville be allowed to do
this for us and would apprectate your approval of my sending him
Ss.

the attached message.
‘ Chief

International Organizations Division

Attachment 1
As stated above,

a


--- Page 184 ---
i bicunty Ni

id
SECRET

10: GEARING

Regarding Sperling. His debriefing for many reasons
should not be done here, Would appreciate your doing with
objeot of getting as completo a story as possible but with
special attention tos

1. Method of programming, control exercised in Munich
and control of Munich by New York in as detailed form

as possible.
(2. What emigre groups are favored if any.

3. What relations are with ow’ people, British and
Germanse

4. What 18 set-up of news gathering?
5. What security procedures are followed in Munich.
6. What has been or te being done to deternine

effectivenoss of prograns from all angles (1)
technical, (2) content, (3) audience reaction, eto.

SECRET


--- Page 185 ---
yeonn00

UNCLASSIFIED RESTRICTLO 4 ADENTIAL SECRET
2, SPELT WALA CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND UU ITO!

CENTRAL INTILLICENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP Sony

INITIALS

INITIALS: Dare

EPUTY DIRECTOR un | srry

(1) arerovat, : CO trronmation ( stonature

QD action (D pieccr remy () aerurn
(comment (7 Pacranation of repy (CC pisraren
(CO concurrence CO recommenoarion Om

REMARKS: .DDCI has asked to see copy of the paper

we have for use in the event something of this

nature happens.

JSE

UNCLASSIFIED

CONFIDENTIAL RESTRICTED

WOOO. 8 coveznaear mintion comics



--- Page 186 ---
14-0000

- an) “{
. SeCMe TY RENEE TE i.
i —* ah dune 1982

i
1

HEORANDUM FOR) DEPUTY MATCDR NF CHNTIAL LATICES
“UBIECTs Propoesd Statexant oa BCFE

1. Hore 1s wy proposal for the fins] draft of the HCrE
emergency statement. It 1c the result of changes cugzested in
my own cocond draft by Frank Wimmer, yourcelf end Spencer Phenix.

2. Hote that not all of the changeoo suggested by you have
been ~depted. All changes wore considered by kiener, Phenix end
mysolf, and I would te glad to tell you the coments that wero
made and the reasons why wo felt the attaciment could be approved.

DiOvAS J, BRADEY
Caief
International Crean zations Division
& Attachmonta
Final statexent and
, Drafte 3, 4a 5
4
i
i
i (20s 1WB/eh
= addressca

1 ec = DD/Y ( thru arrc)

1 eo + 10/mMc

1 ese CO

2co-


--- Page 187 ---
14-0000

PROPOSED STATIYMENT

cr

Tne National Committee for a Freo Furope is an organi zation of
private American citizens whose purpose is to encourage the spread
of frecdom behind the Iron Curtain in Europe. It is a maabersaip
corporation, chartered under the laws of the State of New York.

In spreading the doctrine of freedom and combatting Soviet
totalitarianian, the Qmultteo operates radio atations wileh piores
the Iron Gurtain; in close cooperation with the French authorities
and the Univorsity gf Strasbourg, it operates on educational edntre
at Strasbourg fer young men and women who have escaped froa behind
the Iron Curtain; it attempts by other means than radio to carry
messages of hope and of tho poscibility of eventual liberation to
the nations wiich are now enslaved; it conducts studies of tho lays,
customs and cultures of theso nations as they existed prior to
Soviet occupation; and-it docuncnts the changes which have been
Amposed by the Soviet s0 that if the time sould come when the
people rise against their conquerors, they may more easily ostab-
lish contimity with their past.

In all of thie work the Comiittes draws information and support
from many sources -- from thoso who have escaped and wio must reaain
anonymous for fear of roprisals on their families at home, fres those
in this country who wish to work voluntarily for the cause of freedon
abroad, from the American people at large, and from goverment agen-
cles which, in the American tradition, give all possible aid to
private citisens engaged in a worthwhile public cmse.

Fand raising for the Committee ia done by a subsidiary, the
Crusade for Freecom which, in the course of raising money, also
helps to keep before the Ancrican people and people throughout the
world the noed for spreading tho idea of froedom. For example, the
Freedom Bell, which now rings regularly over the olty of Berlin, was
the gift of sixteen million Anericans who contributed to the Crusade
for Freedon. All in all, signatures and voluntary donations fron
Bore than twenty-five million Americans have coma to the Crusade for
Freedom to date. Generous contributions have alco been made to tha
Committee by private foundations; and at the request of Governacnt
agencies, certain specific research and other projects have been
undertaken and carried on with the assistance of funds provided by

the departsents or agencies concerned.

A Board of Directors consicting of proainent American citisens
from all walks of life pass upon the policies and supervise tho



--- Page 188 ---
14-0000

ope rations of tho Comnitteo. Tis work of the Comittee is carricd
forvard under the direction of its Frasident, Rear Adxiral Harold B.

. Miller, U:d Retired, who is on leave of absence from the Amorican.
Fetroleum Institute. On March 1, 1952, he succeeded Hr. C. D. Jackson,
who has returned to resume hic position with TIHE-LIFE, Inc.



--- Page 189 ---
14-0000

CONFIDENTIAL - & rity Information
(Attachment)
June 25, 1952
MEMORANDA . \
TOs "ry Braden
FROM: Jesse MacKnigh:
SUBJECT: 1952 Crusade for Freedom

Please see that the attached memo

gets to Mr. Walsh through secure ohannels,

Attachments
Memo to Wskh froa
Macknight eta. 6/23/52

Copy of this Mass for
ur. Bradea



--- Page 190 ---
14-0000

dune cf, 19

ip, Kienara aalsh

Sundicrs 1gi¢ Crusace tor Frevdon

en revicwee und the
us of our opinions

Your xexcrerius of June 1 has
following co:wentic represent a cons

asa fund raisi
dea culstantisl

te the use of iu’S ara
S nutnecs of weliveriny the
the Iron curtains

i.

fe G = The idca of a ressace bused
Pan ime thene is satisfactory
ch the precise te:

ze
cere is a:reenent cn
Lailoons as a syroe

, . lek Ge - cf a tallocn

Le - the gift idea as part cof a Lalloeen

corsicered undesirnt loe

errr mar ent tes RE tn te!

cake a Leen NIE RN, see



--- Page 191 ---
14-0000

~ SECRET

Scuriy INFORMATION ;
17 June 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mrs. Braden, PY/1I0
SUBJECT: Radio Free Europe

1. For your information the following report on Radio Freo Europe

Hungarian broadcasts was received here recently, although the informa-"°~ ~~
tion was obtained last Marchs :

“a, Radio Free Europe broadcasts from MUNICH, Germany,
are more popular than the Voice of America programs and its
news coverare is considered both current and based on authen-
tic sources, However, its commentaries on foreign politics
are severely criticised and allegedly the general opinion in
Hungary is that whoever writes this program has not the
slightest idea either of the conditions in Hungary or of the

general needs of the people.

"b. There are also opjections to the program of News
Briefs (ROVAT ADASOK). This propram is considered a nuisance
and isn't even listened to by those for whom it is intendeds
By scheduling 15 and 30 minute proprams specifically veamed
to different segments of the population, such as: the women's
program, the church program, the farner's program, book and
movie reviews, etc., Radio Free Europe reduces its listening
audience to those wno mirht be interested in tre specific
program, while the majority o: the listeners are forced either
to cease listening to their radios or change to another broad~
castin; station, As a result, Radio Free Europe has beon losing
its audience and the decline is especially noticeahle during
the progran of Nows Briefs when the majority of the listeners
allegedly change over to the BAC program.

"ec, The worners are particularly interested in political
news and are in an excellent position to spread the news
throughout the factories, Again ths BAC appears to be the
most popular station. Informant loarned of the fate of ono
Imre HORVATH, & proup leawier in a Textile Mill in SZZGiD,
HORVATH passed on some news conserming the activities of the
"Political Police? of SZeGED which he had eriginally heard
on ona of these foreirn broaucasts, This resulted in HOAVATH
bein imediately transferred to DUNAPENTElRand ats "yroup”
was disbanded.

Se ciaateaiaieeetaaliaieieen tencimbeceeteaciaenth beret cea ae a Ce eRe et cnt Ree ee nS Coe one

- SECRET 8 ---- . en . ee

Steuart IFCRMATION



--- Page 192 ---
ste cease Se a Md MEI ARE MANS ERS he Feet SES

14-0000

. SRET

7 SECURITY INFORMATION

“c=

"d, The necessity for special prograas beamed at the
youth of Hungary is vory acute. The youth of today which
has passed tte L6th yeur of age docs not listen to children's
prorrans any: loner but js interested in broadcasts on the H ?
subject of anti-Commnist ideolozies, This ia the ao roup 1
that tho Communists are ospocially interestud in and on whose
lucation {n the Comnunist apirit special emphasis is placed. :
All of thie azo froup, without oxcention, attends Communist
Party schools and Marxist seminars and also reccives pro=
military training. To ald in this thorough indoctrination
in Marxism -a9-presionted to them, special nowspipors and
mavazinos full of Communist ideolopical aatorial are being
published, It da thereforo hirhly desirable that speclal
Pronrams aimed ut this youth group be prepared so that thoy
will bo able to judve for themselves the true conditions in
comparison to the propagunda that is fed to them by the

Communist regime of Hungary."
~ The comment o: the field accomaunying this report statoss

"An effort is being made to ascertuin the basis of the above critique

of foreisn radio broadcasts by asking Informant if this critique repre-

senta his ow opinions or the opinions of one or more friends or casual

contacts, and whathor it is an observation or the precrang which were

heard during his short visit in suDAPEST or based on a longer period of

time, Inasauch ug Informant cannot be contacted directly, we have no :

assurance that this information will be forthcoming in the near future, t

hee and it ig.deemed bost to submit the above critique as is, tor the time
he
GEORGE “we ISZ
“(

EE/PC/R/Gt/rep
Distribution:
1,2 = Addressee
3els = ES/PC/H
5,6 = RI/FI

dent LY 26 ene PSS
eS 1) | ee

SECURITY HAFORMATION



--- Page 193 ---
14-0000

17 June 1952

MPZORANDUM FORG Ai. TOPTRT i. JOYCE
Yolicy Flanning <taff
Departaont of State

SUAJECTs Vespaaion V, Fella -

1. With reference to your note of 2 Juno trananitting
various papers rerarding the orployment of Vospasian V. Tolla
by the Mid-Rurepean Studios Conter, this matter wma taken up -
sith Adutral Miller on 13 June.

2. I agreo with Mr. Campbell that Dr. Pella hao recoived
unfair treatsant by the Fund and that if 16 wag not tho intention
of the Kid-Eurgpaan St:dies Omter to provide rewmnerntion for
hie services, no promises to hin cliould have been made in tho
first plees. We have asked the Fund to reconeider its deci alon
ar] to try to maka some arrancesents for employiny hin.

3. We aro avaiting an mevor from tne Fund and shall inform
you of ite deol sion.

THOMAS W. BRADEN

10/TOHE Cs ES/eh

Distribution:

Orig & 1 - Addressee (thru ADPC)
os 2 Go.
ee = Io/puc

1
2
200 - 8



--- Page 194 ---
14-0000

BILL:

My opinion on this matter is the same as
Campbell's: that Pella has not fotten a
square deal from NCFS,

Rave talked to Mary Newsom (kaxt acting chief
of Rumanian deak, PC) on this and she 1) agrees
that Pella should fret renuneration for hése .
work and 2) thinke that his background {a 0.K.

Also talked to Wilson Ptitchett. He doesn't
want to rive an o.k. on this, unless and uatil
a name check has been done,

Questions Do wa meet tha "auspense”® and get
& name cheak or do we go ahaad, I'd be in wl

favor of the\latter---and of interno, Dyck ra

afterwards,
2 oo aor 8



--- Page 195 ---
14-0000

meee

—, SECRET _
SECRET
. ROU1,NG AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations shout be used in the "TO" culumn, Undor oach comment a line should be drawn across shest
and each comment numberod to corraigond ath the numbar inthe "TO" column, Each officer should inital (check mark insufficisnt)
before further touting. This Routing and Recwd Shoot should be returned to Rogistry.

So a |
walsh be PPO t0.4 J bygoes: 7
paper dhathr, rp
Plow fom pg
nl Kae Mes tl, fob-to
bre AAbenel Kernel ware
6. Coma hinr “Ue other, at
uy

ho fe row & th Ett bi0
Aut tr ited

ae. > pals

Piet ‘

a oy wtiln Gon pu ‘ :

d ne
boncedtsd b Zeb,
F tasel lorf is cel
‘ * Le Tike hon b~
‘the oe fs @ ak ote
ee ek belle haw
Fad io th tp Cale.

Phobos 4
haabeh 1c atic: Antes 25

eal
hoa Ee

« a
J dey Feat es

© eorcaensnt peretmas Soren ’
te ¢; Ayo RO &

w/t 3
rf atk t fae

‘ORM NO. 81-10
CB 1900 .



--- Page 196 ---
14-00000

June 13, 19% Way nueatlle?

; Neno tor: Admiral iller
#
, _ Frome Richerd Walch
E Subject: Crusade Cor Preedon Compaiun
b
& T have studied very carcfuliy the plan for the fund raising carpadyn this '
4 berics of discussicna have been held sath : c

fall subritted by Fred fatth,
the staff of Crusade for Presizt, end the follovinis conclusions aro the

i consensus of all who hove etudicd the propesed prorrens

: First, it ds fot that because of the natlonevide acecptinee of the Crusade

: and its recognized success curin; the pist to years it would bu a mistaice

to substitute the Minus foe Prec: don glopan for Cranade for Freeda. Tho ‘
Advertising Council concurs with us in our reluctance to use the wmrd "Dince"

for scversl substantial reagsne. Foremost anonz them is the fact that our 1

' drive for funds will cnd oa Qeeewber Mth, and tho iarch of Olas, which
tho Advortisin, Council will .lec scsist on, will ecart chout January lste
Another inportant frctor to be ecnsidercd is the difficulty of sclliny a

nai slogan, cuch ag jimes for rrecdo:, to « public which has alncn
tributed $3,500,000 te support trusuie for Frecdea, Freedom Bell, ‘nds of -
Freedon, iiadio Free Europe and wudio Free Asiae :

rot only loscs th: effect of tho last two
rusade gor Freedom, but alao

a The Dines for Freedon progran
: eanpaigns which gave aceeptargze t- the name
' takes No apparent thougntef th. future of the ariateation. ‘yhat her-pens.
in 1953? Do wo start frew ser: avein with some conpletcly nv tional y

tesa? Dy changing emphasis cvery yoar we butld up no ecntinuing and ine
ereasin acceptance of the Crusaic for Preedon.

: Another danger inherent in the plen is the drive for 10,009,000 simaturese
Even with the Precdom Trein cad Preedon Bull, whieh people could see, hear,

’ touch and ring, 16,000,000 eivreturce were WUbatied. It 13 hirhly daprobable
ry could cceure 40,000, % amtores with nothing more tangible than

Ta dontt like Cormwnten™ strtosente

t

‘ Except for the Dimes for Freedom elaran and the usual outline of state and
loesl organizitions, the plan its<lf docs not lend Liself wm exceautinie
Purhans the ract diffierlt « tion would be thit of the tricks with the
proposed hu, iP eroccecouitey tre dd be extremly hard to
operate and coor dinztee mudd esuce at difficultics, pore

: ticularly crossing the ncrthern ‘Ltiest. “Ic esuld mt depend on any truck
holding ua a schedule neross the ckotes, Nebraska, or half a dozen other

states turing the blizzard scisars

Another factor to be considered is thit every tum in the country would not
‘be virited.

The idea of having the trucks esaverz. on achinetaa is one which £ think
should be siven a preat deal cf ecesiderstion. J neve no deot tut that
thu Department of State and srcerficelly the Yolec of arcrie. would protcst
vigorously to aay a2proach that rirht bu mue to Conere3sse



--- Page 197 ---
14-0000

freee

of

“ic have camo up with another idea which we feel would lend itself to the
mrcatest possible psycholo,ical warfare usayice It would also cnable us to
coordinate our caupaimn wit? the objectives and progran of the Voice of
Ancricae

Tying in tho previous accon.clishcnts of the Crusnde, namely, facilitics
for Radio Frce Europe, the Freedom Bell and the balloon aperetion, we fecl

» that ve could distribute through our ctate and local orcvanizations nillions

of thin paper leaflets, cuc.. as those uscd in the ‘Mnds of Freedom operations
Thezo would carry a messaze based on the Christmas thee of peace on earth,
wood Will to men; the Frecdo bell would be printed at the top, and bencath
the forcign lanquaz @ MESTAYCE would be spaca at the bottom for pcrzonal
signatures and addresses. And the si:maturcs would be pronuoted throughout

“the country on tho bacis that these nessnces of good will would be tlm

in balloons bohind the Iron Curtain during the Christmas ccason. The basic
approach to tho Ancrican pacple would be that thir contributions to thin
yoarts campaign would not only go to purchace balloons thit ‘sould carry
their personal mesaaze behind the Iron Curtain (we now havo’ stored in iunich
55,000 unmarked P-20 balloons and 5,000 balloons marked ‘“lolnese"), but
somid also go to improve and increase the facilitics of Radio Free Europe

and Radio Free Asia.

The focal point of this carpaiim would be a balloon itcclf. | “ic have 20,000
Fe20 balloons in Minneapolis. These ballvong could be dictributcd through
state chairmen to citics and toxns where they could be inflated and placed
in front of city hall or public square. Buncath the balloons, receptacles
srould be placed where both the leaflets and contributions could be collected.
For example, cach city cumaittce could letter its balloon to.rcad "Prom the

Citizcns of Pooria, Illinois, U.S.A."

Actually, none of these balloons zould be shipped to Europe, but the Jcaflote
could be airemailed to New York on December 15th and be forwarded to Hunich

to arrive before Christmas Day.

Another possibility to be considcred ig the "gift" fron Amerizen people idea.
We now have in tunich 100,000 razor blades, 75,000 needles, 150,000 cakes of
sowp and 100,000 zippers. These might & included in the balleons. I think
this idea has much to commend it. For one thing, this would jive soncthing
besides words to the pesples behind the Iron Curtain who are likchr to ret
fed up on too many mess2%c3 which tell then to keep thcir chins up. Svcondly,
it provides an cxecllent wey of countering Red proparanda against the ballow
operation; Radio Free Europe will then be able to a ask, "Jon't your masters
want you to reccive gifts? Don't they want you to as nk why. it is so difficult
to get razor blades in your country and why the {rec world has enoucth of

then that it can send then to you?" j

I presume that the qucstion vill be raised es to what the Communists rould
do with advanee knowledge of the opcration. I fccl that the arnccr to this

“Lics in the joint operstion of both RFE and VOL, continuclly rcportiny during ~

4%

thé month of the-Crusade—of— the greaturtve_throughoet-amerien “te-sesure



--- Page 198 ---
14-0000

fo these messazes of friendship and hope for the peoples behind the Iron Curtains
By thus taking the offensive and putting the Communists on notice that this
is a great exprvssion of w.inimity on the part of the American people —

any attempt on the part of the Communists to deprecate or interfere with

the program would lend itself to psychological warfare usc, This coincides
with General Clay's statement in his lettcr of February ljth to the various .

state chairmen.

We aré not underestimating the magnitude of such an operation here or abrocd.
7 a To rain the naxinun psychological benefit, at least 100,000 balloons choul
: “be used. It could be a hard-hitting demonstration of the effectiveness of

E the Crusade for Frocdotis

Every nenbcr of the Crusade staff, includin; the ficld organization, hopes
that this idoa may be approved. Sccing the balloons in their hore towns and
knowing that their messages could reach the peoples behind-the Iron Curtain
should inspire millions of Amcricans to supper’ the eompaign financially and
vould serve to renind then constantly throughout the campaisn of the tre=
mendous accomplishnents achieved during the last two ycars as a result of
tholr personal contributions. .

ia

UM

HO ee bd ©

cs It is most important that we secure positive and unaltcrable clearance of
this idea within the next ten dayse .
. . : ’



--- Page 199 ---
14-0000

s

- QP yy. 7
nn FOnEL
SECURITY INFORMATION

22 June 1952 ©

MEMORIA POR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBIECTs: NCFE-CFA ;

1. I am attaching tvo mazoranda having to do with HCFE on
wbich Lt fe unnecessary for you to take action. ‘They point never
theiess to the inevitable difficulties we have in dealing with large
and neecesarily soneshat autonanous organisations such as HCFZ and
CYA. tears, as you know, charged by directive with exercising
contro. over theses organizations, and tho memoranda indicate that
Balntaiaing this control io a diffloult day-toeday job requiring
conxiderable tact and detersination as well as efficicncy and a
higs spirit of cooperation. In both NGFE and CFA there is a pride
in independence which ought to -be encouragod, but there is also a
eense of irritation wlth having to inform anyone in Washington about
anytaiag end the tendoncy to regard anyone below the level of Ganeral
faith and youreelf (and with NCFE, Mr. imer) as in tue way.

2. with NCFE, this irritation probably goes back to ano ther
era. £91 Fead the history, thos operation at that tina was a back-
stoping operation pure and simple, and {i taink it was not an
efficest ones certainly it had no respect in New York. ie have
wortsd hard to resolve past tansles, to make our relationsnips
orderiy ent clean, and’eventually to move to the pciat at wich it
may be possible te do moro than backstop. I do not mesn that wa
have sny iaprecsion that it is possitle to run these large organiza-
tions from sashington, but 1 have nad in mind to build too kind of
Division and to get the kind of people uho would of their ow
ebilities and efficiency de respected in « manner whieh would enable
them to sive guidance and real help in the field of ideas and poliay

and wo are getting some very good people to
think wo are well equipred to handle the diffi-
culties.wich the mewranda indicate, providing we have firm backing
froa the mill. fhe necessity of getting this backing leads re to

er mt) ee
cee ene nner nnn mie a ai alamo MO

ets CdD Fee = nan ne wt

ask-you to review hore the recent Valentine incident.

SECRET



--- Page 200 ---
14-0000

SECRET

> 2.

“hy On 10 June, Alan Valentine remarked to Emtons Brom that
you had agreed that I should bo rebuked for my letter to him of
22 May. ‘Tris was an unsolicited coment from Valentine, and Brow.

made no reply.

5s. 1 have gone over the reoord of letters to and from Valentine
since ho assumed hia duties and I have sloo.carofully gone over the- .
record of all the activities which CFA has undertaken on witch liaison,
Dackstopping and poliqy guidance from us were involved, and I find to
my own satisfaction that we nave done an offeastive job for Valentins.
I find memoranda and records indicating that 1 have on oeveral occa-
sions, asin the letter to which he referred, asked for his coment
and criticiom and assured him that my sole purpose was to be helpful
to him in doing hia job. I would be glad to go over these records
with you. Despite this, however, Valentine has told mo that noither —
Brow nor I are high level enourh for him te talk to and that in tha
future he will get his policy guidance directly from you or froa
General Smith.

6. At my express suggestion Valentine bogan writing letters to
you. I realised that he was a ciffMoult person and I knew that writing
to you and receiving letters frax you would give him the sense of
importance that he wantéd. When ho wrote you, however, to protest my
appointment of Eanons Brown as “xeoutive Officer of tha 19 Division
and to suggest to you personnel arrangements in 10 that should, in
the first instance at least, and in any spirit of friendly ecoperation
have been made to ne, 1% soared to me that I ought to be fairly firm.

- I do not think my letter in reply was in error. Fven if it was, I
think you should have backed me up on it. If I make mistakes, you
ean fire mee Until you do fire ne, you ought to back me. Aa matters
Row stand, you have put me in a position where, in degling with the
eituation I have tried to outline above, I siall have greater diffi-
culty than before.

7. I have thought about all of this earefully and feel it right
to tell you that I think you let me dom.

THOMAS HW. BRADES
Chief
International Organisations Division

2 Attachnents _
2 Memos for the Record
dtd 12-June 1952. _ 7



--- Page 201 ---
14-0000

anette oe

Fee

10 June 1952

MRNOVANDUM FORg ASSISTANT DURFCTOR FOR POLICY oor! IMATION

_--—-APIDMEIGHs Mr, Bick Peang
7 Operations Dividl on

SUBJ™CTs M3 50 Trananitters

1, This is to confira our conversation to the effect
that both PPFILLAR and TITONIC are Interested in the KB §0
mobile transmitting o,.ipment., Hoth feel that they can
we that e-uipment profitably in their radio operation,

be shall need a little tine to reach a judgment as to which
of these projects should receive the euipment and to

| determine its best utilisation,

2. We should like to rewest that this equipment te
transferred to the [0 Division for later deterzination ap
to whether it may best be utilised by "TPILLAR or TPTONIC,

3. It 4a or understarding that this will be transferred
to us without reimburserent ard that this will not involve
the IO lAvision in the soecalled 4 50 project which has
been dizenssed at length with ky, Lindsey and others of your
staff,

THUS NV, BRADEE
Chief
International Organizations Livision

fo/esBrbhy
Degree
rig ~ Addressee
~ I0/Ex0 .
t - CTO. .
-2<RE . woes an woe

sapegenoteds
ee



--- Page 202 ---
14-0000

HE:

yo SECRET

SSCS INFORMATION

5 Juno 1952

ANDUN SOs DEPUTY DEUIOR (PLANS)

“4
SUBJRCT: Truman Sreech to American Action Committes
a Against Mass Deportationy in Romania :

1. May I urge you to read the attached comuentary by IVE
on President Truman's statement tho other day to the iHomanian
oxiles, which was the subject of considurabie concern to fk and

to VOA.

2. Please note the manner in which RFF handled tais job.
Tao President spoke words which RFE has for months urped that
Ait be allowed to speak. Because the Fresident had departed from
his text, it was not possible to give R°E any ruidance to say
they should play the President's words strongly or that they
should play thea down. The State Department at first gave orders
to the Voice to play the speech up, and only later was this
countermanded. Neantime, however, IGT, acting without cuidance
from us, broadcast the attached which I think sight woll te chown
to Mr. Joyce snd others in State as an example of RFE responsibility
THOLAS We FAADEN

and judgment.
Chief

Attachment International Organizations Division

CIO: IWB/eh

Orig - Addressee (thru ADFC)
1 cc - lo/moNC

l ce - clo

2 cc = 8



--- Page 203 ---
14-0000

SECRET.

h June 1952

YEROWANDUL HOI: DEPUTY UTkECIOR (PLAS)
SUWECTA ~ Project TPIONIC

1. On 18 April 1952 the Project ieview Comittee recommended
to the DCL approval of Froject TPiONIC calling for tho payment of
£438,991 to the Crucade for Freedom for 1953. As a ridor to its
recommondation for approval of the project, the Gorlttee made the
followlny provision: that a consulting fina be employed by CIA at”
a consultant's fee to investigate the Crusade operation, both from
tae standpoint of substance and administration with particular
attention to cost.

2. Tis provico was mado at the instance of Mr. Heddon, Insvector
General. I argued at this meeting that since tho Crusade itself was
a fund-raising agency and employed another fund-raising agency to help
St, the employment of a third Nnd-ratsing agency ay convul tant was
comparable to placing an advorticing contract with H. W. Ayer and
then placing another contract with Young % kubican to investigate
i. W. Ayer's conduct under the contract. Mr. Heddon inalsted in
response that this was reasonable business practice and his view

carried the day.

3. Several weeks aro, with all the tact that I could muster,
I conveyed to Admiral Filler, the President of CTH, my intention to
employ the firm of Harold Oram or some other funderaising a,ency or
Andividual whom he aight care to siggest as a consultant to mo and
tae Crusade operation. Admiral Miller said he would like time to

trink about this.

4. With kindly intent but considerable firmness, Adniral iiiller
told me on 3 June that after thinking it over he had decided that if
this step were taken he would resign as President of NCFE. We went
on to say that he had taken this job at our request and because he
had been told that we placed confidence in him to run an efficient
operation. He had worked hard trying to make the operation efficient;
he had particularly noted that the Crusade was not run according to



--- Page 204 ---
14-0000

fae

“my

SECRET -

his standards of efficiency; he had made sevoral changes in tho
Crusade and was about to make moro; he had himself employed people
whom he rogarded as expert who were responsible to him to give hin
advice on tho Crusade problem -and ho simply could not tolorate a
system of ingpection which was not responsible to him; if wo had

: any lack of confidenco in him as an officient manager, ho would be

clad to return to nis formor employment imiedLately.

5. Wo discusced the whole problem in friendly terme for sano
ton minutes and it was apparent that nothing I could say would alter
his poaition. I therefore-- ceased to press hin.

6. May I have a decision as to whether higher authority wishes
to take this up with Admiral Miller or whether tho FRC wishos to
y

strike its instructions to mo.
the Wie BRADEN ; ‘

Chlef
International Organizations Division

CIO: TWB/eh

Orig ~ Addressce (thru ADPC)
1 ce - I0/i0NTC

1 ce ~ ClO

2 ce - RT

1 cc - PRC file

“SECRET


--- Page 205 ---
14-0008

.
e
: ,
} "The BD Copy of TOP SECRET
OND document of .
\ ai dated. OF 2
. - Which vee reaoved from. this
+ _ file, is filed in the RI
1305 "L" Bldg.
\ _


--- Page 206 ---
14-00000

. U . at
~ ye ..
2a:
Saewity istoisa cp .
2 duns 1952
. - ° a
? OAT AD LA UPAT One
Seneticin o kos oricecaly cutiigs, ta the
call: cite
he ponte a of Zi dary
"0 fron Cf1G cat €
Le sTelTT consti tiat the wre,ciale race by th, al) herert
houle voroive favira le eoscaderabicn Ly cite lLehaldlitation work
ani. the se: decoigular activities of t.cco wa & hofugee Com ittees
are ea hichly faster. ntel reang od cuba th
anon uiLillielence «.t :
tee various oi re mre .
@e However, UTeTIT cuce not teliave taunt thie sea:
uncertaken uy At. overt Atarlca orcrdcnations the ful lew
meatens vor WoelTl4e rest °
. (a) The Preneh pablde ac a wads * alratis t t
PArcricanc 4n Trance, would
Scronee dn Prene:. eurectiec alls
(b) shen. 2 larco &-crlenn er LA Dy
uniertale 2 7 wund alice (of Inverser
am the freer de Guit Lice bE GO a WIth
he oo, deol! Sal te, Ube Th is vce
lieved that there gvorise. tal : co ele
’ faversd expsie.int wehbe +
wad Pporen 2. itt choiar
ge orewal cf ta orscent ire wide:
have an aaverse effect cn lta ! tanbts pelevioni wit. 4
Ferel m Ofysiee, arc rh i vell jus erclise CiA"s ox. pec tien with
the Preneh Intel. CO LErviciiy fet oy Gav Perle 6
prevent aiten to te cltatin woriigcsien kh rabam@loes in.race
fer cpurat. ULe
(c) It da om _vollewad tuet an imu ‘cmus Prench Cuis atice
Sina Getter ccltien tian a Acr can wear & osal 3
partie. les precios: rec dieu in fracny oe t.
ship aos urdty te & -Fe tave cut dn brace AL cencut the



--- Page 207 ---
14-0000

sting =
St ecnpete an. &
Preneh cov. rmeent ba. alscacy carne.
dsabiens - aeviry dn view of tou
Drax Coy ani its famresccia; in
Michdy Ait ds &ilewai tat fel
dn owinre aflairs in France three y
ani should exten! Ue te inch

Jcetives ant be
eck te omxrt

ancure that it: cetions ami -clici
fre crly cosordinaiced :
ecutrel over «x.
fersng in freneh dumistie af

usin: a

we-1rt/re/c B/pl

Distribaticn:
Criz. = Addressee

ot bt tl,

POSH analysts EE -_ ee
2 oe. ,


--- Page 208 ---
14-0000

asernneet seme tS tnt Sn LA,

~ SECRET ot

Security Information

MAY 245 1952

MEMORANDUM POIs DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)

SuBJECTs Request by NCFE for Gearing

1. Messrs. ‘Wer and Sreden mat with me on 22 May for
discussion of the above subject,

2. Taking into account the need of NCFE for a political advisor,
the qualifications and personality of Gearing, and the availability

of qualified personnel, the following course of action was fully

_@iecussed and sdopted.

& Mr. Braden will attomt to recruit Bolte to serve
initially with NCFE as political edvisor and join the Agency
at some later date.

b,  Geering will retum to iieadquarters later thia year
and assume the duties of the Lubor Lesk in the IO Division.

In coordination with WZ, Mr. Braden will follow up with Gearing,
possibly in connection with a trip to Europe in the near future.

90. Richard Aldrich will replace Gearing in Peris. Mr. Miller,

who already has had one tentative conversation with Aldrich, will
follow in coordination with We.

berate £ Hitleg
fer

KILSOURNE JOHNSTON
Assistent Director for
Policy Coordination

oe

DADPC/GEM/mgb
27 May 1952

Distribution:

Addressee - Orige
clo-1

CWE - 1

Ri/FE - 2

BDADPG-="2:

og SERET

Security Information


--- Page 209 ---
cee I AO on a ble LCL Aad ee iecinh enamine Soe

14-0000

aT SECHE | en
Seley iNEGH

27 May 1952

« ROBERT P. JOYCE
icy Planning Staff
partment of State

. MTHORANDOM

SUBJECTS . ° tatemerits by Ronald D. Jeancon, KFE, London

REFFRENCES uy memoranda to you dated 23 April 1952

1. Cn 23 April 1952 I wrote vou stating that ad-iral Niller
was poing to discuss with tionald D. Jeancon statements accredited 1
to Jeancon which appeared In an interview in tie ‘London Daily
Worker, and that I would let you know the results of this conversa-
tion.

2. Admiral Miller, after an interview with Jeancon, informs
me that a corresconcent for the sorker interviewed Jcancon and that
ch was completely

subseqiently a" ry appeared in wo
unfactual, the fast of the interview be used as a peg on weich
to hang Jeancon, and RFE.

3. The charges nade arainet Jeancon have therefore bean
dropoed.

TiClAS we BLADE

Carbon cozy of atove returned by

: State - Mr. Joyce on June with
: cocment:
- ” .
2 ce : s . “why did he get sixed up witn a Daily
. worker nan? Such naivete ankes one
wonder atout «is usefulness.

aPJ


--- Page 210 ---
14-0000 - ae
- ne re ARN at NL ne a 6 Se RNA EEN Ae te Cae ct,

Seeeruy g
paaat ion | .
vivid

wooed bacon! ne

oS ; 23 Avril 1992

MFMORANPUM FOR: 47%. iOPERT P. JOYCE -
Folicy Flanning Statt : .
Derartasent of State
. . e
SULJECI: Statements by Konald D. Jeancon, RFE, London
REFERENCE: Letter ¥ April 1/52 Robert &. Hooker, Jre tv
a : Robert Fe Joyea | ~

1. Frank Wimmer paces] on to ine the note from Bob Hooker
about the artiele in the Daily Worker on Wednesday, April 2,
quoting Mr. Jeancon.

2. I had‘ learned of ir. Jeancon's outburst within a few —
days after he made it and I pag.ad the information fh at once
to Admiral itillee of 5 + Adntbral ulller was greatly disturbed
Ly deancents remarks and corrotorated Hooker's sugyestion that
he had done this type of thing Leflore.

er pronisec lo rut the Jeancon affair idgh

escent taip sbroad. le wiil discuss the
one contemplates diaiisclay hin, I
sult «2 Ad.iral ci-lerts conversation
on as T set word.

3. Adadral Ui
on his arerda Lor h
ineldent with Jeane:
will let you basu the
with Jeancon at

le
5
Th

7
"
i
o)

tr
asi
re

1
Enclosure :
Reference letur and
newspaper clippince
OrTwa/en

Cortes i % 2 = Addressee

Cony 3 - F (thes ADPC)

dors 4 - a5 .

cry 5 21 er hot
, Cory 6 + ext . eo
. Pil frye Oe ae

: ary
: p= aa _


--- Page 211 ---
14-0000

prem ee ne EN

- SECRLA

In voply refer tot for -2 dq
8
22 May 1952 &

Tear Leonard:

Tn order to continue our prectice of putting thinge on paper,
3 want to tell you by this note that I have beon instructed ty tho
Trvcter to hire the eorvices of Harold Oram as a Nod-raising
consaltant’ on the Crusede for Freedom. At some tine in the acar
Nature I hope you will pemlt Nelson Aicander to bring Gren az
yoursalf, or anyone olop with whoa you cary to deal, tovether to
Ciscess moans ty which we ean Misia tis requ resent.

Ta addition, I have been instricted to notify you that after
tiia year's prograa, the Cruseds for Freedon budget gnould ba mbde=
stemtially cut.

You will gather fram the forepoing that, like yourself, va
have been giving caroful conpiceration here to the whole Crusads
Preeres and we have some ideas about strongthening tne Crusade
that I personally feel Oras is by all meens the beet nan to pot
ints effect. I have azkod deloon to outline thesa to you and get
your thoughts. Frovidec you ares, I sould like to pet atarted
Wh Cran on tits particular job, a part of the Crusade progres <<
#3 Bai sin will explain to you, right aay.

Sincerely,

Qliver F, Hadwood
Cos Teak

Orig = Addressee
1 ec ~ 19.%08

Ree K/Pae
leeo- &
20°88


--- Page 212 ---
14-0000

SPhtart aa seul

a2 may 12 +

MYMORANDUM POR) SPECTAL AESTSTANT FOR TREPPCTIGH AND REPORTS
euesects Suspension of Falleon Operations by Order of DCI

1. The Crusade for Preeden proposed lainching about 60,000
balloons toward Hungary during Faster Week, 1752, each carrying a
traditional Huncarian Faster Groeting togather with a package of
sSearce household articles auch aa rasor blades, needles, soap, sippers,
bextllon cubes, vitazin pilis, ote. This project was known as
Operation Easter Bunz."

2. At their soeting on Priday, 7 March 1%2, the Project Review

Cosaitteo withheld approval of this project pending discussion with
the Lirestor of two unresolved p inter

@. Approval by the Pritish of launchings froa their fone
of Austria. o4

b. The question of including packaged itens with the
Easter Croetings.

3. On or about Tuesday, 11 Hareh, [r/? telephoned to T. W. Braden,
CIG, in the teaporary absence of Davy, ant advised substantially as

follevss
®meratlon Easter Puany ia off by the personal decision of
DCI. This decioton to cancel has teer reached for an entirely
new reason that you can find in an article on the 5rd pare of
teday'a TY YORE TIMES ,*

Phe article cited by on/p vas a report of continued Commun! st
eccusations that Cerm Warfare was being vagel ty UN foresee in Korea.

4. The Crusade people tn New Yors wore atvised that thetr project
was cancelled and no further aaplification of Tcl's ruling vas received.

@. GTS LLOYD
Depsty Chief
Payebologioal Staff Division
DCPY/edLenl
Distribwtions

actreseee = Crigteals C10 © 1g CPY = 2) DCT oly RI eB



--- Page 213 ---
14-0000

3 ahd
Sea Ona eee

21 May 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEFUTY PLRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIOENGR -
SUBJECTs Proposed Etatement on NCVE

I focl that Attachment 4, the statement handed to us by
Admiral Hiller, is apologetic in tono and I have drafted Attach-
mont B which I believe is nore positive and would be a better
preas release for HCFE in the wnhoped for event that a press
release is called for.

SIOMAS W. BRADEN
Ciief
2 Attachnante -International Crgant sations Division

CLO: TwB/eh a

Orig + DDct (thru DD/P)
lec = 10/MiMC

1 co = ClO . 4
2cc- ,


--- Page 214 ---
POPOSED STATINENT
(Draft fh, 20 Hay 1952)

Tus National Committes for a Pree Europe 48 an organ sation of
Szeriean citieons whose purpose is to encourage the spread of fracdoa
in isrope. It fea memberehip corporation, chartered under tho lays :
of tia State of Hew York.

Is ite attezpt to spread tke doctrine of freedom and conesquently
to ooabat Soviot totalitarianics, the Gomittee operates radio stations
wie pleree the Iron Ourtains it operates a univerdity at Strasbourg
for young men and women who have escaped fron behind the Iron Curtainy
1% ettesrts by other means tian radio to carry messages of hope and
og toe possibility of oventual liberation to the nations wich are now
@ndigveds it conducts studies of the laws, customs and cultures of
these nations as they existed prior to Soviet occupation; and it
tomments the changes whieh havo been lazoeed by the Soviet a that
if the tine snould come when the people rice against their conmerors,
they gay more easily establish continuity with their past.

In ell of this work tho Ovarlittee drava information end support
fron many sources <- fron those who have oscaped and who mst renain
anonyacus for fear of roprisala on their familios at howe, from those
iz teis country who wish to work voluntarily for the cause of freedaa
eroef, frou the Axerican people at large, and fras goverment agencios
«te, in the Azorican tradition, give all possible sid to private citisens

ezgazged in s public cense.

SECRET


--- Page 215 ---
14-0000

SECREY
o2e

und raising for the Osmaittes is dane by a mbsidlary, the
Crusade for Freodom which, in the course of raising money, also halps
to keep before the American people and people throughout the world the
need for spreading tho idea of freedom. Por oxsaple, tho Freedom £011,
which now ringo regularly over the City of berlin, was the gift of
sixteen rAlifen Jmericane who contributed to the Crusade for Frecdon.
4ll fn all, signatures and voluntary donations fron more than temty-five
nillion Asericans have came to the Crusade for Proedon to date, Generous
contributions hava also been made to the Comittee hy private focaiations,
and payrents have been received from interusted govermsent agencies for
which the Comaittes has underteken epecial projects.

A Board of Directors consisting of proninent American ei ti sens
fron all walke of life detenaine the polteios and supervise the spera-

tions of the Comittee.


--- Page 216 ---
14-0000 oo

my

ae “~\  SONEIDENTIAL =
Security Information
. ; ER=-2=8556
\ . 30 April 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations
FROMs Deputy Director Central Intelligence

" Attached is the proposed statement to be issued by
NCFE in the event that their cover is blown. I am not
: very happy with it and suggest that we try to improve ite ,

I have sent a copy to Frank Wisner.

} Encle

CONFIDENTIAL
Security talormetion



--- Page 217 ---
eterna RS at RNS

14-0000

Set Atel a ;
eT Loe =~ y

SICUANY INFORMATION

19 May 1952

: MEMORANDUM FOR: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR POLICY OOORDINATION

sane SUBJECT: National Committee for a Free Europe

i 1. I am naturally disturbed by the report which has reached

: me ag to your attitude on the National Committee for a Free Europe,

: as expressed to the Inspector General at a meeting last week which
I was unable to attend because of absence from the city.

2. This attitude, as described to me, was that you knew very
little about NCFE but that you had the general impression that it
was rather loosely handled from an administrative and policy control
standpoint. I do not wish to go into the histcry of NCFE control by
CIA and be accused of casting aspersions on its nandling in the past.
I do think, however, that your allegations may te correct so far as
the past is concerned.

3. As of the present, however, I want you to know that
Mr. Durkee and I, with very able assistance from members of
Mr. Durkee's staff, are doing our level best to set up agreed upon
procedures for administrative, financial and policy control and
reporting. With the best objectivity I can muster, I think that
your responsibility over the National Committee for a Free Europe

is now being ably discharged,

lk. I would Like at your convenience to go over the new
L arrangements that have been made and to bring you completely up
to date on the activities of the Committee, as well as to get your

J\ instructions as to a system of making such periodic reports to you

in the future. This briefing mght well take the form of a prelin-

_ inary budget review and I sugrest that the division heads of NCFE
night be brought down to make progress reports to you in the briefing
room. I am hopeful that after such a meeting you will feel not only
conversant with the present arrangements and activities of the
Comittee but that they will, with modifications you may wish to

Lerare ha
ok


--- Page 218 ---
14-0000

eT rm mr We eet Pee RD A EL aah Dor anna leche

set weer ee a

7 orga ~

sugeost, havo your full approval, and that consequently you will
wisn to mako some statoment at an early staff meeting indicating
your satisfaction with these plans. Otherwise, I very much fear
that the prevalont attitude within OPC wich is one of general
sdissatisfaction with NCPE based largely on inadequate understanding
of what the Committee is doing may prejudice the work that with your
concurrence I brought BLll Durkee here to do.

Tuna (Gusher

THOMAS W. BRADEN -
Chief o.
International Organizations Division

CIO: 1WB/eh

Orig - Addressee
1 ce = 10/TONC
1 cc = CIO

2 cc - RE


--- Page 219 ---
14-0000

a

at ~ SECRET
~ Security tnformatton a hy

19 Hay 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR

You will be interested in the attached letter froa
Matthew Wol] resigning from NCFE. We wore forewarned

ef this some weeks ago by Jay and others.
We will te in touch with NCPS with respect to the

form of their answer if they docide to make onde

ALLEN W. DULLES
Enel.

ec: D/P
c/I0o-—

SECRET


--- Page 220 ---
14-0000

FREE TRADE UN
Labor Leasue for +
Box 65, Radio City
New York 1%, .. Ye

May 13, 1952

Adairal 2. BR, Miller, Presie

Netlonal Gon1 ttee for Irae
120 West S7th Street ©
New York City

Burne, Mee

Dear Admiral Millers

Your Coi:ittes has decided that "its Interest and wrk
lie in labor relations chiefly in Sarope and not Ll: the
United State :,”

Wa disagree wlth your palley wite) we ary convimed is
wrong» :

You have translated your new selicy into aetion by dise
missing our active ropresentative, iienry Kirsch, whose work
had won your ow: es well ag ceneral iesrty acclata and brought
ereat credit to your orpaniza ht add that thig
disaissal cae after an ayreexent in “aris by your fomer
President, aad now VicesChairran «ith oar Suropean reoresene
tative, Irving Yrow, sic your ow: survpawi recreseutative,
Leon Da:zron, to have ie Kireen: suabor vivisiones

Furtiemore, we bad been essimd ty Hr, Lerlo Uiat ‘ire
Kirsen woule not bo disaissed without © civing usa an
osvortunity to study snceifie co:sla nis and cause for said
discharges This prontse hag likewise not been kepte

Tn view of the above, there’ cs; be no voint in ny cone
tinuing nerbdersiiin in your body, i, therefore, horewith
tender my resipnation to take efrect iridlatelye

Sincerely yours,

SiGHFD

MATT80 VOLL, Chairman
Interuntionnl Labor Relations
Come and Free Trada Union
Vomuittes, AFL

eters

ee


--- Page 221 ---
14-0000

MOZONANDUM TOs CHIEF, IQ

\
SUBJECTs | Albanian Students at the Free Europe University
” REFERENCES Secret Momorandum dated 2h April 1952 to Deputy Chief,
- |. SE/PC from Chief, 10, subject: Future of Strasbourg’

Free Europe Univereity Students

1. We approciate receiving the informtion on the two Albanian
: students now attending the Free Europe University at Strasbourg which
: was forwarded in references

' 2 We have now received a re;ort from the ficld which indicates
that Koste Xhajanka is connected with the Albanian Legation in Paris.

! 3+ We would like very much to know the background of this man's

1 acceptance at the Free Europe Univereity, including how and where his

, application was madcy whether hie acceptance was on the basis of his
scholastic record alone or on the basis of recommendations; if the
latter, whose; and any other details available. It would be appreciated
if you could inquire into this matter for use .

4. Since requesting that favorable consideration be given to
i the application of Ramis Qira, we have received a roport which in-
dicate that he too has becn connected with the Albanian IS. It is
requested that steps be taken to ensure that his application be dis-
approved.

5. It has also been reported that a Kalem Goleml, also covertly
employed by the Albanian Legation in Faris, has applied for admission
to the Free Europe University.

6. All of these reports anpear to indicate that an effort is
being made by the Albanian Government to place their agents in the
Free Europe University. If this is true, no doubt other satellite
countries will follow the same policye It is sugested that the
authorities of Free Europe Univercity be warned and advised to screen
carefully the students being admitted and to refuse admission to

people about whom there is any question.

Mi Chan.

Folicy Coordination, SE

Seeurity in creation


--- Page 222 ---
14-0000

~ SECRET

Sscuriiy Information ep tet toy

MSMERANDU: FOR: CHIEF, Id

SUBJLCT: Albanian Deak of RFs
-REFSRL CLA Secrot Venorandua dated 1 April 19b2, to Sr. Caupbell,
EL, from kr. Narcy, EE, same gubjoct. (Attachcd) .

1. It my be that tr. Dostt was avare that there was little
possibility that either lr, Skenli or kr. Chokrvsd ‘would be willing
te Becone head of the Albanian Desk of RFE and thit he hoped hie
thant choice of ene of the Jakovas would therefore be acccpted.
Rovever, we do not consider that this ie any proof that tor, Dostd

has scli out to Zoge

&e im. Dosti is rethis oasily influenced and has been imressed
ty the Jakovag and their position in emigre circles in iew York City.
Consequently, there is no doubt he would like tv be in the position of
sponsoring the Jakovas and we believe he sinceroly felt one of then
would make a good head for tha Albanian Desk of RFis

2. te acreo with E:/State that no consideration should be riven

to eXering either Jakova a rosition with RIE and with their desert; tion
of the couple; our attitude has been made known to RIL on several
ocoasions during the past six months.

GRATIAN MW. YATS.VITGH
Deputy for Folicy Coordination, SE



--- Page 223 ---
14-0000

tee van tern

1k May 1952

EMOFANDUM FOR: DEPUTY ASUICTAN? DIKECTOR FOR TOLICY COORDINATION

Radio Free Kurupe

The followine may be helpful in today's briefing of br. Hedden.

1, RFE is presently breadeasting about. 135 hours a week to
Alania, Bulpardia, Ruminta, Foland, Hungaria, and Czechozlovatia,

2. To date approximately £4,500,000 have been Anvected in
eavital radio facilities including housing. About 319,040,060 have
teen erent in radio operatioas to cate over and above capital costs,

3. About 1h people are presently emmloyced in Munich ard’ 226 |
are precently errloyed in Fortuzal at the relay facility.

a. A technical onerating survey of these facilities was
recently conducted by Mestinvheuse radio and technical experts.
They evaluated as excellent both the facilities and the operating
program. A cony of thdy renert is uttached,

of broadcasts from a psycholorical
erable, a3 far as can be determined
wits interviews with escapeas, State Vepartment officials Leiind the
Surtain, and Soviet attacks including jamming, RFE has aleo veen
surveyed by a key official of tne Fsyehological stratezy Zoard with
tte conclusion that it 1s one of the most effective U.s, psycholegical
warfare efforts and should witaut que-tion ke continued,

e. The risk teken to invest several million dollars in
capital facilities in Germiny ic a calculated one -~ fully recognized
ard discussed, at length at a recent PEC meeting. It is considered
a rezsona>le risk under the cirez-ctances. The understardings
reached with representatives of the German povernment are considered
t? ce as good as can be worked out at thie time.

4. Mr. Willia> Durkee, Chief of the National Con-ittces cranch/I0,
plecs to mike an inspection trir to kurope leaving May 23 to visit
ATE facilities. On his return it is exrected that we will have
atéitional first hand inforr.tlon to rerart to yous

BHONS 6. BROWN
vo Executive Officer
- ~' International Organizations Division

ae ee


--- Page 224 ---
14-0000

\
1
\

KEPORAHDUM JULI AR. KOBEAT +. JOT Ce
sO Vollay i Lanatog stat?
Departaant of State

SUBJECTs OComuniat Infiltration of hrs , °

AFVERENCEs Confidential “exorandus dated 2h October fran
Al Freqnaa to yoy Kohlor

1. On 2 Movember 1951 you ou {ld ua of certain charges you
had heard that RFE was being inslitrated.

2. ‘Similar charges Lave been nade ty others We therefore
ested NCFE to investigate theese echarceo and we also tamed then
over to our om “acurity Offiesrs. I as sttaciing fer your infor-
matiod a letter wilch eantains the rusults of tha imveatigation
mato by 3Cr%. You will obesrve taat the specific charges made
against Incenieur Hollk and Kristing Kanlerova are not answered
but we believe the enclose consti utes an snever to the general
charge of infiltration of tie Cesexoslovairlan desk, as the major ’
ficures involved are dealt with fally.

3. If, subsequently, our om investigation in wied fiali»
and Renlerova will bo dealt with brings to Licht any new facta
or foila to corroborate any of the facto stated im the enclomire,
wo will take sctlon imwdiately and vllt also keep you infomad.

Fea 6, bY SER

- ots (er. Cotter)
= a0
-@


--- Page 225 ---
14-00000

10 May 1952

“ MEMDRANDIM FOR? I0/NIC ~ Miss Stern

SUBJECTs Memorandun on Reorganization of Buigarian
National Committee dated April 23, 1952

1. I om disturbed by the fact indicated in this memorandun
that the State Department, namely Carpbell, is attempting to lay
dom the lina almost to the precise language which Admiral Miller
uses with the political refugees.

. 2. It seems to me at some tins cr oliur Liat eimevody will

have to tell Campbell that widle itis the State Department's

job to make policy, the only way NCFE can possibly conform to

Campbell's ideas is to appoint Cambell to deal with exiles and
_ ask him wheather he wants a jobs .

3. I have a feeling that this is going to come to a head

one of these days and I wish you would bulld up a little flies
on Campbell and his efforts in this direction.

THOMAS W. BRADEN
Caiet
International Organisations Division

‘Attachment
Subjeet mamo.
C108 TWB/eh

Orig - Addressce
2 ce - clo


--- Page 226 ---
14-00000

oe remanence i aan

SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION

9 May 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division

SUBJECT s letters of Ur. C. D. Jackson Concerning
Possible Comiunist Disturbances Among

Hungarian Enicres.
REFERENCEt Your nonorandun, above subject, 25 April 1952.

1. In compliance with your request, the allegations
contained in Ur. Jackson's letters pertaining to Az Enbor
and Ferenc OSndér have been forwarded to the F3I.

2. On the Hennyey case, it has been ascertained that
the files of this Office contain considerable data relative
to Hennyey's backgrown and activities. There is no infor
mation of a derogatory nature in these files, however, to
explain a refusal to issue a visa. Mo record appears of
inforsation being furnished either to the State Departaont.
or to tho Imaiigration and Naturalization Service by CIA on
Hennyey. OSO is now in process of preparing a reply toa
query from the Imnizration and Naturalization Service on
hin. OSO is, therefore, at a loss to offer an explanation
of Hennyey's visa difficulties.

soul
‘

LYMAN B. KIRKPATRICK
Assistant Director
Special Operations

SEGRE


--- Page 227 ---
1400000 oo _ poets eA HE Sn eR ESD i FEY A SRT,

A-A/F7

GE ho

u. NeW. May 7, 1982

Washinviow 26, Dea,

MEMORASDUN OF CONV CASATION : \

PREBANT4” Mre Ws Je Scripps, Detroit News _ H
Dre Allan 7 :
Mr. Norberg A
Mr. Korns :

after arrenging au sppointmont through his cousin, Senator Moody,
tr. Scripps called on the Director to discusa his proposal for a ”
Sypiendship Balloon Lift." Certain materials relating to this proposal
had previouely been transmitted to the Director by rir, Allen Dulles,

In reply to questioning, fr. Scripos asserted that he was well
acquainted with the SCFfs winds of Freedom canpatgn, in wich he had
participated, but that he had not discussed his present proposal with
NCKice ie said he had talked to many American business men, wno ware
sll enthusiastic and were prepared to donate the variety of products
which he proposes should be included in the payloads, He said that his
father was an ardent supporter of the project, along with a Ar, Fleteher,
Vice ?ragident of the Caterpillar Tractor Company and Ur. Harnett.

Hr. Fleteher spent some time in Russia, he said, hen asked whether
Caterpillar was in the balloon businesa, ir. Scripps said noe

Uther nanes mentioned by Mr. Scripps as being familiar with nis ,
proposal included Nick Naradi, identified as an exeninister of the
Eungarian Governzent; Frank Jewitt of General lis (which holds a
balloon research contract with the Uffice of Naval ‘tesearch), who has
given hia a letter to an admiral; an Admiral <illers and a Mr. “rank
of CIA. (see dbulow) Hr. Scripps also mentioned a ‘Psychological squipe
ment Development Office Iecstsd in the old Post Uffice building,

(800 below)

Mr. Scripps vas troubled by security probleas, It was apm rent
that he felt he had obtainod confidential information from certain governe
ment sources which he could not disclose, At tne sane time, he stated
that in crder to work out his proposal in any detail, he would need
access to information presently denied him, fherefore, ne suggested
that he be cleared for security by tne appropriate agencye

As a result, it proved ispossible to nail down the technical
aspects of Mr. Scripos’ proposal, In his formal presentation, he had
@oscribed a balloon capable of carrying a 10-pound payloed andi costing
$5. In big conversation, he sentioned a vehicle capable of carrying
300 to 800 pounds, together with a stagrored release mechanisme-without



--- Page 228 ---
14-0000 .
ee pa ee SO SO Nan, FEMA UR SO AA ERE OE wks Sa mina tte mmtatien wa

price. To questions as to whothor either type was in existence, tre
Scripps replied that ho waa bound by confidences, In general, however,
he did not foresee any technical barriorse -

. . L

. When asked how he would finance his proposal, tir. Scrippa said
that ho would begin with private contributions, with the thought that
eventually the program would be taken over by tha govegnaant. tle 1.
strega.on the need for early organization (cogs fund raising, balloon
stockpiling, crow training, selection of leunching sites) in orier
Operations could ba started imuedtately followin; s decision as to
desirability, He atated that 90 days would be eufficient to prepare '
for operetions, once he got the "green light".

De, Allen expressed his personal interest in the proposal, but -
Peminded Hr, Scripps that Poi's field was strategic rather than opera=
tional, and that in an opérational proposal of such complexity, PCB
could only give the matter s cursury review, Therefore, Lr, Allen stated
hie intention to forward the propusal to the Psycholovical vperations
Coordireting Committea, whicn wos the proper body to give the project
tho detailed screening to which it was entitled. Ur, Allen also suge
gested that Hr, Scrippa see C. D. Jacksan, .

Mr. Norberg then augrested that as an edditional aid ir, Scripps
prepare a brief but fairly specific description of what he personally
was prepared to do, along with an outline of tie organization which would
be nesded to carry out the project. Hr. Scripps saic that he wuld do
#0 within tho noxt wiek.

COMMANE

-doe Frenk, when asked about Hr. Seripos, said he had met hin several
tines between Deceuber 1950 and February, 1951. Juring this perianal of
early planning for balloon operations, Franx aaid that Seripps proved
quite helpful by quieting curtain private unt:usiasts, in addition to
maintaining a discreet silence hinself, rrank aid cot know for a fact
thet Mr, Scripps participated ia the Auguat operation, but judged that
it was likely. Ia Frank's ovinion, Scripvs is a capavle person with
waluable connections in the business world and sufficient financial
independence two be aole to devote most of his tiga to good works, Frank
thinks it would te a good ides to nave him cleared as a consultants

The Paychological :quipsent Development Uffice acntioned by Are
feripps' is believed to be the Physical Security eratpecat agency, a
military develoosent agency oncrated by the air Force under an USD
charter, Its director is Col, H. M. Coy, This apcncy is prepared te
talk with anyone who has been cleared for security; otherwise individuals
are asked to approach the services firsts

Distributions
Dr, Allen .
Xr. Cheraan 4
Wr, Horverg
Mr, Gates Lloyd
CWAKorns ms


--- Page 229 ---
14-0000

7 May 1952

seeemess ao AT Ree

HEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director, Plans

re yRoms Deputy Director Central Intelligence

i 1. In the course of a long conversation with C, D. Jackson
and John Hughes on Thureday evenin;, 1 May, they raised a number
of questions about NCPE, inaleding the question ‘a8 to whether
Gearing could de made available for their work. Confidentially,
they feel that Miller who ts excelicnt on tho adzinistrative side
will be badly in necd of someone at nis rixht hand who knows the
political situation in £urope and the type of thing that cannot
be learned by a few trips or a few bouks.

2. I tld thea that the dearing problem wos difficult, that
wo were considering {t and hoped to come up with some anaver in

the near futures.

ccs Mp. Braden (/



--- Page 230 ---
14-0000

6 Nay 1952 ; wi

MEMORANDUM FOR: INTZRNATICUAL ORGANLUATIC'S DIVISION : i
ATTENTION? Mr. Thoman Braden
SUPJECT: Lialson with NCFE

1. This nemorandun will confirm the discussion between Fr. Thanar
Braden, Chief, 10D, Kr, “William Durkee, LOD and ir. Prichett of SE/PC,
on Thursday, 1 May, wherein it wos agreed that shortly after Admiral
Miller's return from Europe en or about 7 Hay, ir. Braden «ould work
out with NCYE the details of establishing linited liaison between the
Chiofs of tho Albanian, Eulvarian, and Inumanian Branches of Su/FC, and
their opposite numbers at the New York office of NCFZ. The above ‘
errangement would be only @ complenent to the main liaison ckarnel with
NCEE which will remain through itr. Join Leich, [ft would, Lowever, oxpedlte
action in situations where minor guidance is required in catters relating
to the handling of the Albanian, Bulyarian and zunanien Committees and
where a precipitate unilateral decision on the part of the CFE deak
officer concerned might affect adversely ClA plans or operations.

2. It was penerally ayreed that to establish the relationship
only the following need ce arranzeds

@. A orief covert introductory meeting between tre respective
country desk Chiefs during which the SE/I'C Branch Chief could oute
line, in as far as was aporopriate, the cins of the CIA program
and after which mutual difficulties could be discussed end joint.
courses of action determined.

b. Establishment of an energency link threugh a sterile ClA
telephone which would permit secure liatson in special cituations,

e. Institution of e system of prepering detatled Memoranda of
Conversation Yor i'r. Zraden's office in every instance where there
was contact between an NCrE desk officer and his SE, FC opposite minber,

3. Should any assistance be required from SE/FC in establishing
this relationship Mr. Prichett, SE/PC/PO (Extension 3971) -my be called.

Qt Y Ueto

TR! 2. YATSEVITCH
Deputy for rolicy Coorcination, SE


--- Page 231 ---
14-0000

~ SECPET
Seersity Inds deg
‘6 My 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: ¢./10

; SUBJECT: Termination of Guntract between Nr. Henry FP. Landowsks.
and the National Con‘tteo fer a Freo Luroze,

lL. It would be appreciated if Ic would assist thie division by
requesting from the National Comittee for a Free Europe an agreemant
terminating the contract betwen the NCFE and Ur, Henry F. Landowski,
signed 1 Uctorer 1991. ur. Londawski'a exployment with CIA Le being
terminated ond it is deelrod that for recsene of administmtive regularity
and coonaiderations of socurity his contract with NCE aleo be terminated...

2. In working out the phimsing of the termination agreensnt it is
desirable tint the following points be included:

a. The contract being terminated is that siged 1 Cetober
195] hy Ur. Landowaki on the one hand and gr, Spenoer I‘nenix for
the HUE,

be. It should be etated that the contract is being termin-
’ ated "by mutual agreament® and that all benefits and oblig+ticns
devolving upon the two parties ere cancelled.

ce, 1t de very deuirable that this docunent ala bo signed
by Ur, Pheaix, who simmed the original contract agreement for
the NCFE.

3. Lf threa oopies of this termination agrcemunt signed oy the NUFE
are returned to this office wa will have dr. Landoweki sign and retum
a copy for tle SCE files,

&. It ie cur understanding that there is oniz one contract betwecn
Ur. handowahi ond the NCFL, namoly that of 1 October 1951. ir. Landowski
assures us that thie is tha only contract he haa signed with tae LCL,
However, it is possible tmt there oay do a alsuncerstantling on tiles point
by BCFL. Therefore it might be wall to ask As if thoy dDelicve ur. Landowski


--- Page 232 ---
14-0000

sO A SEGPET
Securit, informe +4

any othor written obligutions to then and if 00, specificuily to
ail euch in tle termination agreement.

GRATIAN Mf, YATSEVITCH
Deputy for Policy Cocrdination,SE

~ SECPET

Security Information


--- Page 233 ---
14-0000

:
:
i
‘
:

wr

vo

- ~  MEREGT ITS

Me CamMpncnin & COMPANY

Inc umeee aren
Forty Worth Street
New Youk 13.N-Y.

April 28, 1952

Dear Frank,

I fount the attached memorandum of real tnterest.as pro- Py
viding a clear-cut explanation of u matter relating to B.C.F.E.
which you sre doubtless asked about from time to tims. It oc-
curred to ms thet you might like to have this as covering the
basic policy used in the selection and employment of ezile
personnel fer verious branches, particularly for the work of
Radio Free Europe, To my mird it provides an answer to in-
quirles which come to us and others as to how end why such
personnel is chogen.

Since Hin Miller 1s awey ami won't be back for several
woeks I am tekirg the liberty of sending this copy to you in
his absence. He ené others at 57th Street read it before he
went awey and endorsed it.

With perecnel regards,
Sincerely,

i


--- Page 234 ---
14-0000

A.

NCFE EXIL2 Piss Duuthl SELECTION IN HELATION TO
(1) 2X2 POLITICS,

(2) RPE HADAUCAST PULISY, AND

(3) kX%2iisL CK ITICISM

WIe-

LEE OUICTONY HISTORY

Fornative Sta,

At ita inception, the National Comdtvee for a Free Europe
belteved that its Iron Curtain broadcasting operation, Kadio Free
Europe, could and sheila te developed and pursued through the mediwn
of "National Councils® or “Committees of Liberation" composed of
exile groupe from the target comtries. It was considered that
prominent exile leaders ai personalities of eacn nationality group
could express to their captive countrymen, entirely without American
advice and guidance, tie messege of hope wniecn CFS proposed to send.
This concept waa not fu:filled, kxperience in attexpting to weld a-
talented, dedicated group of exiles into a non-partisas broadcasting
operation early denonstrate< that without Azerican control the mission
of KFE would be lost is t:« fungle of extle-world politics, It soon
becaze evident that the leacership among the exiles was neither suffie
elently strong nor persczally willing to rise above tiie political cross
currents, factional rivalries, and splinter-group weaknesses character-
istically reminiscent of the political affairs of all Lastern -uropean

countries, These factors nilitated against tne original plan of pernitting


--- Page 235 ---
14-00000

exiles, through their loosely oryanized Councils or Comiuittees, to
wholly develop, manage, and contrcl RFE broadcasting. .

Since the advent of RFb was tne most important developzent
affecting the exiles wiich iad occurred since their flirht fro: home,
ther quickly understood and applauded its implications and potential
effect on their futures, Tnrourh this instrument they could once
again become prominent and powerful in the affairs of the horelands
once sore they could contend for place and power,

Sslection of personnel for the purpose at hand quickly vecane
a@ political football of rival leaders, personalities, and groups.
Rishtists, Leftists, Centrists, Labor Blements, and Splinter-groups
argued with us for advancement of their particular personal or political
views, Sponsorship of their own adherents as RFE exployees through whoa
such views would be broadcast to their captive countrymen beeane the
pattern of thei: pseudo cooperation, This pattern was followed ‘to such
an extent that ordinary progress and sensible development of our basic
parpose of truly free broadcasts under exile control soon appeared to
be not only impracticable, but dangerous. For exacple, the National
Councils Division atleapted to inaugurate broadcasts to Czechoslovakia
wader the auspices of a Gzechostovek National Council. The Gounet2 was
gud is sade up of exile personalities of differiny political views and
parties. Its factions proceeded to engage in endless disputes and ire
reconcilatle claims for control of seript production and propran ‘content.

Slovek "Separatists™ arguing for the total independence of Slovakia

-2-



--- Page 236 ---
14-0000

*

sought that objective, wnile Czecha desired opposite views to be aired
—" and advocated the rebirth of pre-war Creshoslovakia. bach group eponaored
and insisted upon employment of its own more or less qualified adherents
upon the assucption that its special views would te thereby expressed ©
to the captive Czecioslovak audience of RFb, Similar activities were
pursued by Hungarians, Fulgarians, and Poles until the futility of per-
mitting the exile Councils to control the destiny and broadcasting
—_ policies of RFE was made clear beyond refutation. I[t becane tragically
obvious that uncontrolled exile-world Councils and professional poll~
ticians could not agree on personzel selection or program content.

‘In spite of every effort to induce harmony in and obtain proper
cooperation from the "Councils", "Comaittees", and individuals, RFL was
confronted with an inpasse. The alternative ti.eory and present policy
of American selection of non-political exile personnel was the only way
out. It has worked. Technically qualified personrel produce properly
oriented propracs «- and have beer, doing so with docuzented success
since July, 1950. Disappointed exile politicians, professional exile
camp followers, disturbed American special pleaders, and alarned Comxmnist

Agents all screaz, snipe and snivel -- but Rrb programs are doing the job.

NCFE-RFB records of this stare can be supplied by Frederic HK,

Dolbeare, Vice-President, National Councils Division, and Robert E. Lang,

Director, RFE, The current policy has the couplete endorsement of these

‘ officers and of the Board of Directors of NCFE.

-3- -


--- Page 237 ---
| orn iT nn HE ak Tet a Ra tate g me ms cpthateoisinion aE ALA Tala ne meee Bem meee
Seaiememarntctan ssn iascsedniminiin noe
“ . go ta poe eas

B, Development Stage

Upon the collapse of the oriyinal concept of broadcasting under
; exile auspices, RFE necessarily utilized some exile »ersonnel endorsed
and recormended by the leaders of the varlous nationality ;roups. As
\ technical radio facllities cane Into Leing, exiies with radio background
: or writing talent were required for the production of prograns, Thia
\ involved using individuals euinently qualified ty experience to do a
radio job of script writing, announcing, acting, etc. without regard
for the fact that such individuals wight be at odds with one or another
political faction or leader of an exile "Council". It also involved
elimination of proven inefficient, inept or unworthy individuals without ,
regard for their exile "Council" sponsorship. In either instance crite

fdeism of RFE was predictable and indeed was always forthcoming <= often

in virulent and dishonest fors.

The day to dey operation of KFE developed new techniques and

long range plana wich made it i: possible to e:ploy non-entities of no
. Political color or conviction. The best people to produce programs in

harmony with NCFL-RFE purposes and policies necessarily were persons
known in their own countries for their views on domestic political af-
fairs and their anti-Communist activities. Hard-hitting propayanda
required hard-hitting personalities whose known association with RFE
and its prograzs would add validity and sigaifieance for our captive - . “y
audiences, Gradually, therefore, the nationality desks of RFE at New :

vat

York and Municn were staffed with testeu, qualified exiles wo iad been


--- Page 238 ---
oe pe came eaten me ere BL pect TL a ne 1 et eR AE OA Sr A Ry Sr he = = te Fle NNR wae RS hanna he eel oan Fe ree ly
— q

ddontified publicly with doneotic political philosophies at issuo in
their own countries. Many, in fact most of the ataff people ure con-
troversial fieures axonp tiolr own countrymen in exactly the sane way
that prominent Americans are controversial in our political arena, Many
dadeed aro members of the Counolls, but are wen of sufficient stature ,
to ive thetr primary aliegiance to the non-partisan policy of RFE, The

decisive factor ia that there be no controversy or question about their

anti-Commniat convictions and records,

At this point, it imst be noted that our target countries have

been subject to repetitive political ferment prior to and following . .

World war II, as well as the successive occupations of Nagai and Communist
Arnios,

The temper of the tines, therefore, in which these exiles have
lived for the past fifteen years nas been one of excitexent, bitterness,
.Tecrimination, rivalries, and personal turaoil -- all steraing fro. both
domestic and foreign strug: les for power, The times have prodyged a
bunper crop of refugee traitors, collaborators, sand opportunists and at
the sane time have developed pure Western style democrats, true national .
patriots, and unselfish honest wen, The exile who stood by placidly -
through the era is not «uch raod, however talented, as a nilitant messen- : , t
"ger of nope via RFL; exiles wno were honorably active in public affairs aa

‘at hore and who had radio talent were, therefore, the only kind of

personne) suitable for RF: purposes,

As the necessity for Azerican operational control of rationality

desks teca-e self-evident, the only feasible personnel policy was to

-5-



--- Page 239 ---
14-0000

employ properly qualified individuals, regardless of exile politics.
In the execution of tuis policy individuals w o were useless were
eliminated without regard ‘or political sponsors. This process still
goev on. Sintlarly, talented exile personalities recruited fro. any
source were employed wherever needed. This process etill foes on,

Both processes are in vorue with a healthy disregard tor exile political
nuances-and protests, Neither proccss iy satisfactory to self. styled :
exile ‘Yeadors, since it follows that the eppotntment of an individual
aponsored by one faction aa a representative of its views inevitably
will evoke howls of rage and oriticia: fro:. the opposite faction. This

io an accepted fact of exile life, tie save to live with it and get on

with the job.

Cc. Sunmary
: Our formative and development experiences evolved the present

and continuing exile personnel policies of KFL, Exile desk employees,

whether at New York or Munich, must respond to three tests:

(a) Security clggrance,
(>) Endorsement of technical proficiency, .
(o) Sufficient stature to eliminate exile partisan

interests from prograx content,

-U-
, CRITSRLA AND METHODS OF PkxSONIEL SELECTION

A Re eritment —— Ceneral Frinciples

The best source of exile personnel is referral by "non-

professional" exiles the.selves, Anong all nationalities there are

ob


--- Page 240 ---
14-0000

many talented refugees who need employwent and ko can supply RFE
need for script writers, actcrs, announcers, etc, Accordingly, desk
staffing has been accomplished by exanining the qualifications of duly
recomended individuals, whether the recormendationa come frou political
personalities or otherwise, Seleotion is based on tho ability of the
individual to fill a need efficiently in turning out or participating
dn planned: progra:s,. Reeruitzent is deternined unly by ideolorical
security, independence of exile politics, and personal ability, - This

4a not to say that many individual exiles having decided personal con=
victions and well-known political records ure not employed, but a 7 .
positive statement is made that those exile employees now produce

RFk progra:s refleot the policies and guidance of RFE rather than pros

motion of partiuan objectives and personalities,

Recruitzent -- Detailed Procedures

The personnel corplenent of each RFE nationality desk is
founded on a hard core of dependable individuals, usually two or three
people, including the chief of tha desk, “Dependability” is established
hy exhaustive inquiry at all available sources to establish tie desire
ability, reliability, technical proficiency and security of the working

core of the desk. Sources used are?

(a) Exile political personalities in the United States,
(b) Exile references of hign standing and known ine
partiality in tre United States and Overseas,
(¢) Overseas contacts and personal knowled¢e of our
American representative in Lurope (Royall Tyler-Paris),
(d) Checks and balances of our political advisor at
Munich (W.8. Griffith),


--- Page 241 ---
14-00000

c,

(e) . British Brondcastiny Corporation, where applicable,
(£) Voice of Anericn, where applicable,
(g) Special confidetiai sources,

These testy haviny been applied, confidence ia plaq jin these
initial personalities, and particularly in the Desk Chicf, to carry
forward recruitment of additional personnel ao needed in collaboration
with the American Director of HPL (Robert E, Lang, New York) and his
aseociate officials, The leadiny personalities of each desk know what
ia expected of them and.aince they respond to the established criteria,
the resulting full personne coxplenent 1s a group of exiles who, not-

withstanding their personal political views, are suitable and capable

‘ program production poople. They geet our basic requirement of daily

production of truly free and. properly constructed propaganda broadcasts

capable of evoking the widest possible audience response in our tar; et
countries, |

In brief, the mission of RFE be:ng conceived as a marketing
problen, the best available saleszen are procured, trained, and utilized

to sell the warket.

Recruitment -- Special Security Measures

Since RFE, although a private enterprise, is by extension a
collateral instrument of American national policy, special precaution
is exercised to insure the ideoloyical security of all employees, in-
eludiny exiles, In the case of exile personnel specifically, the

-8-



--- Page 242 ---
14-0000

D,

edditional approval of the Personnel Director of NCFE La required before
ecployzent either at New York-or-Munich, Thus, even if a proposed
exile euployee meets all the described criteria, he may not be employed

sithout tide ultimate approval,.

\

Me . .

The Personnel Director of NCFL utiltges appropriate and de~ :

2

pendable sources of inforiration to determine the acceptability of ;
personnel fro:. e security standpoint. liis sourcea are investigative in

nature and are coneluoiva au to the ideolorical record and security’
acceptability of the proposed employee, In doubtful cases the Personnel
Director consults with the Vice-President in Charge of the National
Councils Division and with the Director of Nadio Free Luropo, These
trree officers of NCFL jointly follow a policy of rejecting candidates
about whom there ia'the olightest doubt. It is to be clearly understood
that in making dectoions of this kind the conflietiny: interests and
frantic representatiions of politicallyenini-i exile leaders and groups

are ignored, Acceptance or rejection of ca.uidates is wholly based on

Adeological security and talent value. . op

Sumary i
, (1) All nationality desks of RFA at New York and Mu:ich are
staffed by individuals who have passed all tests described above,
(2) All prozrarcs produced aid aired by the nationality desks

are checked aid scrutinized by American supervisory personnel for ideolog»

ical content, audience acceptance and conformity to basic NCFE-ilFE policies,

(3) These conditions have been pro; ressively in force since

July, 1950.

Yee teen eecun on,

-Jeo ° ca


--- Page 243 ---
14-0000

A.

ur
RFE POLICY (UIDMICE FOR PLISONNEL

\
The propramo aired by AFE are not left to whim or chance, All

programs and tho ‘personnel responsible for them are controlled by a
written policy manual, The manual sets forth in minute detail the
position and policy of ik on every topic beased t.. our target countries,
The marual is the daily puidance of a1] employees, both American and
Exile; deviation from its rules is not parinitted. Continuous scrutiny
of manuscripts and rosultant broadcasts 4a naintalned by Anerican en~

Ployees to insure that there are no deviations,

The policy manual of RFE represents the considered views of
the responsible officials, including the Board ef ULrectors, of NCFE,
It 4s a statement of the principles and purposes of KUFE expressed in
operational form, It 1s considered and naintained as strictly cor-

fidential document, but 1t is of course available for examination by any

proper authority,

The policy manual is in strict conformity with current American

national policies as evidenced by tne following quotation fro. Article

Ones

“As a non-rovernnental radio station respoisible to
the millions of American citizens who suppory it,
RFE cannot take a line contrary to Unitea States
Government policy or to tne beliefe of tne Averican
peoplo reflected in the Constitutio:: of tie United
States and in American Institutions.".

-10-


--- Page 244 ---
14-0000

The above quotation is understocd by exile personnel par= .
ticularly to be a solemn injunction apainat ideolo; ical prograa content
wnich in any way violates the letter and spirit of American policy and
ideals, It isa guarantee to the-American people and to our captive
listeners ‘that RFE and the men who sake ity programs are uncompromisingly

opposed to the Communiat regines now in power in Soviet Russia and the

satellite countries. . sO oo

B. RFE Policy Defined by Handbook (Direct Quotations)

1. The purpose of RFL is to contribute to the liberation of
the Nations imprisoned behind the Iron Curtain by sustainin; their .
morale and stimulating in then a spirit of non-cooperation with the
Soviet-dominated regines by which they are, for the tize being, ruled.

2. The central characteristic of RFE is that it is the ine -
strunent d men who are engaped in fighting for freedom and justice,
As such, it encourages resistance to every tyrant, great and small, in
the countries it addresses, Its speakers speak -= as men of good will
whe seek to contribute to the elinination of old enmities and the
; building of an enduriny European decocratic order.

3. Asa free forum in w.ich exiles speak to tueir own poeple -

RFE is particularly dedicated to argumenta by wi.ich exiles seex to

persuade their listeners of all devourin, arpitions of Soviet

Inperialisn, the cruelty and unworkability of Communist institutions,

-he-


--- Page 245 ---
14-0000

and the proven advantages of the democratic way of life for the worker,

and the peasant, the administrator, and the business and professional

strata of society,
4. ‘RF, takes counsel with exile leaders and is respectful

of their views, but its policy is not designed to further the aspira-

tions of 8.y single exile leader or party.

5. RFE policy is further based upon acceptance of tre prin-
eiple that each of the liberated peoples shall be free to deternine
for itself the political and socia] institutions under which it will -

live once it has been liberated,
6. Finally, the followinr summary in the nature of a apecific

limitation on progran content is quoted:

"It is indispensable that all concerned grasp clearly
that RFE is a multi-national station established to
contribute to tle liberation of all the peoples it
addresses, and not merely of one of those peoples.
RFE policy is therefore commanded by the limitation
that nothing may be sald over its facilities to one
national audience which will destroy the confidence
in RFE of its other audiences or which is likely to
induce any of its audtences to prefer communist rule
to a liberation which wight apnear to promise dorina-
tion by a neirhboring people,"

ee ne mente na at nk an A Pal aan ciate SS ant ty are ae ate


--- Page 246 ---
14-0000 2
ce ee en ceca na A AAD St DEO TE Ree RE EEE ARN RE RUE RE chan oo Dien RN

SSOURTY INFCEMATION

HMEMORARDUM FOK: ASSISTANT DIRICTOR FOR POLICY COOhDINATIO,
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
DEPUTY DIRECTOR CLNTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBILOTs Proposed RCFE Support on the Exile Orgont med
Refugee Ald Committee in France

REFERENCES Letter Dated 20 Merch 1952 from Mare to wide,
. Enclosing 27 Janusry 1952 Report on the ixile
Orgunized Kefugee Aid Committee in Frances
from hoger L. bull.

1. The reference, recently forwarded to us by NCE, recommends
NCFE support for organised refugee relief committees in Paris. As
a followup, Mine Mary Augustine, of NCFL's New York staff, 1a _
currently surveying refuges organizations in Western Europe, When .
the resulta of this survey have been given to us, we plan--in
conjunction with the interested area desks--to prepare a study
with recomendations concerning the utilization of exile committeos

in Europe.

2. In the meantine, the reference is forwarded for your
information.

THOMAS Vv. BRADER
Chief
International Organizations Division

Attachment 2
4s stated above

Distributions
adirospecs = original
C10 =i
10/PoNIC = 1
RI -2

ie

va

cA



--- Page 247 ---
14-0000

SECRET :

SECURITY INTARMAT) AN

_
20 April 1952
MEMDRANDOM POKs Ka. IMENTS. JOYCR
. rolley flananing Staff
bepartaent of State

SUBJ CTs Pature Balloon Operation

‘le Attached Le a copy of a letter fren Min Nillor in

which he wug,ects tne Leouasity of coming to a dofinits deale

gion in reupect t a future balloon operation.

2. Will you atvise mo-as to (a) whether you wich to
havo a balloon operction in Aupust or at cry subsequent date,
and (bt) utether you want us to oct apide furris ana roterials
now for a future balloon operation at some unspeakiied tine?

TIAS We BRADEN
Giilek
Intemational Organisations Division

Attacdment
Ltr fron Kin Hiller
Cth lL tper o2 ¢

CIO: THB: eh
Orig & 1 - Addressee
lee - 10/MxIC

lec - co
2 ce -

SECRET



--- Page 248 ---
14-0000

In reply refer tor WW 20/6
28 April 1952

Dear Spenoort

Here io a brief of the material that is wanted in
reapect to the alave labor issua. .

Mis is of great importance, as you can well imagino,
bat for your information wo find ourselves in something of
a dox on this because having pressed for the hearings, it
is essential to gather good evidence and not be embarrassed
by something we have fought to obtain.

I hope, therefore, that you will give 1t your top con-
sideration and let me know'if you can some up with anything.
In addition to the kinds of evidence listed hore, you will
note that private organisations may testify.

Sincerely,

Oliver E. Hadwood

Enclosures oa
@ Memoranda 1h Apr 52

ClO: TWEreh

Orig - Spencer Phenix .
lice - IO Ro.

1 ce ~ 10/TNMC

2cc- Ow —-

2cec- HN an .



--- Page 249 ---
14-0000

BEE Peo

~ ~
SECRET
SFCURLTY INFORMATION

Us April 1952

MEORANDUM
SUNECTs Gathering Evidence on Slave Labor Issuo ~ to be presented

Ucosoc Hearings

A, Type of evidence that is dosireds

Be

20

3.

he

Scholarly studics « Lews, administrative regulations shoving
0 do jure and de facto application of laws pertaining to
labors —

Documentary avidence = Pussoo, identity cards, ration cards,
r @ papers, etc. Amything indicating tho place, name of
camp, administrative documenta, etc, Photostatic copies
accepted 1f the original 4e unavailable for retention, Seals,

stumps, and signatares desirable,
Tostimoniol

a. Written teotimmy - probably in the form of mnswera to a
questiomaire, These testimonials may be either:

(1) Ancnymous. (As few as posaible)

(2) Authorized use of the namo, either confidentially,
for release only before the court, where many scasios
will be closed to the public, or the neza may be
reloased to the public,

bo Tepe recordings = Some excellent testimonials could perhaps
be tape recorded,

@- Statistical form = The bulk of this testimnial can also
be reduced to a statistical form, .

da, No heareay testinony is wanted,

Witnasses ~ A few of these should be presented by each groups
fowover, the vitnesses should be nost carefully chosen to ine
eure that they are really gmuine, really ware in a concentrae
tion camp, andnot in som internment or intermaiiate camp, and
that they spent a considorable aromt of time there, without
having boan convicted by due process of lew, Furthommore, .
these witnesses should beam of high calidor, highly literate,
capable of presenting thelr story clearly, and stamding up to
close cress-exminstion, without having to alter their story,


--- Page 250 ---
14-0000

at

~ SECRLT
URL IY INFORMATION

a2a

‘B. Principal targets to hit: Stato is especially anxious that wo esaist

vy roaching those persons, and those arcag hardest to reach, and on
which there exists tho least evidmeo, .

L [ndividvelas “Tho poroms that pros’ tho groatest intcrest
‘aro clviliana, who have bem in Soviet Concentration Casa
fines 6 Jast war, Soldiers are considered secondary ovidence,
as with than ima dftornco mst bo made and cloarly dram between

PY compe, end concentration canps, where soldiers md civilians
both were put to work st hard labor, ‘Well imow persons who
have testified before should not be used, Tho effort must cone»
.centrate on now ovidaice of noscnt dates

2. Areass In order to ostablish clearly tha the concmmtration camp
Torms an integral part of the Sorvlet Commmist political and
economic system, it in vital to prove conclusively the oxistmee
of concentration camps in all countrics witch have fallm under
Soviet. domination. Thus evidmee is especially neodod on the

following areas:

Poland

Baltic nations

East Gemany

Hungary ,

Rumania .
Bulgaria . .
Albania

Ching

N. Korea

Russia (Material on Rusala, if gathered,
should bo of very recent date.)

The areas in which to operate most successfully, are the followings

Sweden (Zalts, Poles, Russians)

Germany (A121 kinds)

Trieste area (Central Turopean refugees)

Northern Greece (Bulgarians, Runmims)

Yugoslavia??? (Thay have evidmce = will they cooperate 7)

Eustem Turkey???

Iran (Reportedly, there are a good nwiber of escapes, from
Soviet Russia, These night be Azerbaijani, Ammantans,
Georgians, -uven Persians, providing an ont rely new
source of evidence.)

Hong Ki

Formosa (Reportedly a groups of former inmates hore)

S. Korea (N. Korean Pw's, Chinese P./'s = might locate existence

ef camps in Korea end Ctiina).

Japan (Former Pul's., Soma wore in Siberian Slave Labor caps,

Co Orgmizsstions which should do the wrks These orgmisations need not
have any special qualifications just s0 long as they aro boa fide
orgmisations, State recommends that wo try to get a diversity of

erenre *


--- Page 251 ---
14-0000

Dd.

Sur
SECURITY INFORMATION

eje

such orgenizations to present evidmco, Twnty different organt=
rations would be an optimum to aim for, They should represmt diffore
et intereats, such as labor groups, veterma orgmisations, emigre
orgmirations, church groups, end several of thas should havo an

international charactors
Your capabilities: What type of organisations do you have that could

org=zise interrogation teams, draw up lists of porsons to intorview
ana ‘gp out ant gither the naverial for presetation to the hearings?

what areas could the organizationo you have in mind, work in?
that national groupe could they concmtrate om?

Boa mach operations) support would thay require fron ua? (Honey,

inteLiigaca

Bow lsrgeare thelr capabilities: types of material that thay can
present, how thoroughly can thoy be expected. to cover tho fiald
ey oo mn aiee How many former inmates can they contact? 1007
2007

Do they have U. S. State Department representatives in their arcas
to witch they can tum, who wuld asoist them in complying with all
tre regulations and requirenonts, which must be mat to be accepted
by the Zecnomic and Social Council as a groupwtich will prosant
tactizeny. (It might bo best if we obtained a sort of form appli>
cetion, wich wo could disseminate to the field, where necessary.)

The choosing of the organisation mat be done at an carly dates
septic ications were to be in on the Met of March, but State is
ortedn that if they aresumitted without mdve dalay (by nid-tiay)

taoy wold be acootele


--- Page 252 ---
14-0000

25 April 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR« Chief, Interna»isnal Orgenizations Division

SUBJECTS Continuarce of Hroject FISCOPE

“1. Reference 1s made to your uemorandum of 21 April 1952
rezarding the desiratility of continuing Project FJSCOPE, which
provides a monthly allotment of £75.00 to Walter Fe Kaumeror for
services rendered to this diviston.

2e Although ir. Kamnerer is used as a consultant for 3%, he
48 called unon from tine to tine to furnish information outsido his
capacity of conaultant which wid not justify the payment of con-

siltant feces

3. It do felt that tne neatly stipend of 375.00 covers these
extre sotivities, and we should like to have Project FJSCOFE continued.

GRATIAN He YATSEVITCH .
Dervuty for Folicy Coordination, SE


--- Page 253 ---
14-0000

oe OP Se Manieenee

‘

24 beri 1952

waszaatvle FOR, CHIR La TUiN CUROES

ATTAIN Me, O'Meara
Meds oT Futore of Stracboury Free Ew'are University Stuients
FFLFLELSCis G/10 Hevorandur. ta C/ay oP 2 Kureh 1952,

Sere Uubject aa Above.

2, There sre attached hereto liete of stixiurta, toyother
witn diogrerhies) data, of the Free turepe University, ascorde
ing. to the national groupes of yow interest (Ceeahoslovakta,
Letonia, istvia, Lithuania, Poland and Hungary), aa subaltted
to ua on 14 April 1952.

2e ‘hon this inforsation wns given to us the following
caveat coon, aniod ite

"ou realize that the fsrilies of rost of ther
studenta ars in sost vulnerabio positions behind the
Iron Curtain and the daforsation we secured fros ther
w pronised te keep stristly corfidential. Of course,
eowe of the cares can bo canouflazed fer public ws
¢onsun; tion tut vo have to keep faith vith these
gmaysters oni for that reasen pares oan not ‘be
identified with even skoleton outlines of thoir careerD,*

3. The imilvidual reaponeible for the adninistrotion of tho
Free Europe University has explained to us thats

"The date of tho conpletian of their studies in cach
ease ie impossible to furnian with any securesy for the
Bisple reaean thst Fronch univereity courses ere not
arranged vith the sare exactness thet eharecteriess the
eustos of émarican colleges ani universities. Un thia
paint I cea give you tw hits of information, First,
that in go case is Lt expected that any student vould
Sontinve as © moubor of the Coliege de 1!2ureze Libre
for more thar 4 maxiew of three years. Alec, of the
present ctuient bxly it is oxpeoted that 25-40 vill finish
their eeadcnie vork at tho University of Ltrastbourg at the
end of the current university yoer."

secatl


--- Page 254 ---
ere nn A Sl REE Dy de wear ere ke wed

14-0000

. ~ Stetery
- Ses

- Anoordingly, we have re-vocted tnat ve be rrovided with a iset,
togather uith oy avellshble ieformation regaraing tue poiltical
orientation ard ;lene for the future, of the astinated 25 te WO
stutents ub exoet to csmplete thelr academia work at tho end
of the current University year. Vhen this list is avalleble
wo shall tranaatt the inforration to you.

TEXAS ¥, MALE
Caie? .
International Organivetions Division

os Piatettutions
Addresces ~ Uriginal & 6
fot Senn
Tafa
in/asy ° ey, Ci cequen * Ronen)
Ble

CIO/NBV: bw

SECRET | .


--- Page 255 ---
14-0000 : a - z x
- - anes ee eee naam eee ent Se Ae ROEM A e i Le ate a tian! Lei nance eines atone atnul Lebinaneon latina Ta wt cl

2h April 1952

ee. MPNRANDUM FOR: Gilet, contact Oivialon, 00

. SUBJECT: © Your Hemerendua 29 February 1952 on "Hungaria
Extle Activities?

I was interested in your report on Hagy and bis efforts to
set up a Hungarim Gevermentein-Reile. I note in paragraph 5
tet you say your contact is hoping to recelve nore information -
from them. Since I think tiie situation has becn cloared up by
other events, I would mot tant you to press your contact te stir
Heey to further astion ty a request for sore infomation. If,
however, Bagy does give you core information, wo should vary mich
like to see ite

THOMAS W, BRADEN
Qdef
Tnternational Orgardeations Divi alos

Gos TB/eh

Orig - Addressee
1 co - MD/PC

1 ee = 10/MAC
1 oo ~ cto .
2e<2



--- Page 256 ---
14-0000

\

ch pba te EE OAS he Pe ERA Ne i RA EN

penn en HR rh cea Seen nahn PEI

NTR RUA Fla) AP. RDP. iGer
tollcy .lenning taff
Departgant of . tate

“Stete Iepertnens iaer on “ihe funothones of ACFE -
and sri

Lk. Tisnk you for foruarcins to ue tae ‘tate Cepartnett meo-
Fandaz o¢ the funct'ese of Hoek ani RF. 4 at sorry that there
bas been a dalay in roplyia; te it. Tho ahtief reazn tae Lecn

eur eflor to obvtaln a written statewnt of dosition from the aCse

Gxpentive Sussd, and particularly from Nobert Lane, the | trector
Ot WE. ALber Lony gourtdering too natter, omg, nas oressed a
@asir> to Valk permnyelly wits you atout tha subjest, asd ! unfer-
etast cnt ciace the alapood tlio he hay tat one oprorsenity fora
eonfcrasse wA% yuu on tho rrebies. 1 acrme with the whew you
ezores+el ta hie -- that there ought to be furtser conforencen <=
but nevertheless want you to Knou our own Views without farther

delay. ,

2. 1 think that there is a basie element of af emnier. turting
in tie ‘tate Ceveartasnt paper. ibis the ‘dea wie eee: w ne
te te isplicit in it that We nxlies da not Droadeast. in fact,
the aclios do all the broadcasiing. fy at loge, these mon ere not
political Cloures bet tegnaicians, writers seni newemen Leaving pees
what Sis saw training and point of view aa wore mo do dietlar
work for Aa.rican cawendes. ireysaniiy, ot:a, exiie leawerm fm
within t¢ Kaiional ‘oiuelle are auemd to sae porcenal tbroudeaota,
DP.le oracties pili contimue. dil ina all, co great is u.e exila
@osination of £75 broadcasts t.st in any inetanese theco taes'oaste
bave tren ot tae tour and colcration of Lndigeasus radio in tne
countries to enicn thay are ainet, wherever waddle, Uirt ie the
ain of aiT e- t empete witnin cag country as an indigenovs navicna)
otation.

3. In ehiii$en, aven ollewing, rewuver, for Silo ri rondoretand~
fing, aa i baileys it to lw, tne bate .apartient paner prisaute a
poiot of view wiin widen i expwt agmoe. fie in thet tho Astional
Oguaciis could is ;racticn te rleeod in cianrgo of APE. | aa almest

Raine Eager Nucen


--- Page 257 ---
14-0000

FORE

cartala thay cou.d not bs. Wy statement nade by H7P, no Line of
polhey that K7) aould ;ursuo, ro sus-estion or parvpaganda line that
ksP gould follow evald be dem ia tis new of tw National Tounclia

c 20 long 43 the oa bers of cach vunckl an incapable of cuadhliay a
gen deeledon or af msebliy: a vafority deckcton tulch tin nlnority
would not abteryt W sulvari, If goat to .o taat thom 1a only
biatertoel value tn telktas smut wint the ordgzingl concept af te
Ketional spanclle war. Toe opacest baa waved, amd the o.nge wag
neesesary | Correamian: Sa the Pago, Thea fact do the ineiiilly £
e@ngn ‘iatlewal Cowell to ests. as a single voles.

cinta, themfors, [ ay um-rapamd to
@ea ie W make a Rajgor Ba ta ito elle cuca as wie Etats
Departsent psser sag,cetx. i tnderstasd that you and iire baraden
have acead wAth Acoru .dbler eatase ban to dinsuas tila probles
thsrasebly witty the pconle ine sm conctmel in tha Stata Soartant
and ij nose tuat afver those discusolann we may reach an ogresaant on
tho ratters witeh tho rapar ral sen.

h. sdB.out Qursher ai

CRA Ue RL NER

ClCstus/an
(2h Apr 52)

Orig & L Addressee

2 oc o SoRe (1 for Bi)

- AC

- clo

- oj mae —_
- U/orG .
© Stfere

oI

00 et es pee
2828328

SECRET


--- Page 258 ---
14-0000

_~

‘me
SEL CARL Pig Mr, Motert J, Joyes
eee YSU annine tar?
Tepartemit sf tate
Bere ier | Tostiragy of Sdalrh ', barlay dre

on temal! af hisolas “slo

1, Than’ you fer your merw7u.dua of 1b March 1992
trantnittia: to us Bre Canchell'a agre-andua of 23 Karoh
Feracdin: tae teatiaany of tdolnh A, borle dr. on beams
of Wcoles tclava, Thir is t2 inform you that sx ere da
earlete a-reemant vita the view eich yan and
br, Casptall hive expre:cod,

: 2. *e@ feck that it ts invead an.t recpattalle that
Br, Eevle in tle te.ti-ony mo certain remarla offensive
to the Cretatamefisalam: zrocn, In “arch, or. urow
Feos.ved tz, Cretalan in an asiast to di.claia any
Feoronsictiltr on tra perk of HOY for ire Corle'a
Staterente a. ales to -ersusle “re Cretstanu that Mr. cerle
hed oveben in a private eavacity aid op attorney to
rr, Melaza, This intersiow vas follow ty a letter fren
he, “wey to “re Cretala a on 26 “arch, in witch these sare
views were ort Porthe

30 Ye ahall save a serious atton’. to prevent tha
ecrm:enee of wich inci-cate In tre cuture, bo are returntag

your file ag sou requortai,

THoat W, BK EN

Mralosure
CIO/PA/t ¥rtdy (17/y re-typsd 21/4)
Metrititicar
Orig & 1 « Adresses

1-clo
1 = i0fpyre - :
30 ane weet
lei?
2k!

Yo re


--- Page 259 ---
= IS Ore

MEV
Jaa tes Mhd ome thes one

AL Cat yee aur 6 er}y of the.
Btn, Yim Coe te
Dat ow et. yin A ee
Aare e Quen Baw bap yee hany

r Forced Us Ree wes aresy

daze ¢ ad trey 2 frp & .
AM Me OST Tila, ho tha
Berle bad My miha & oth. @.
arte dd, ast. f Hea Ad
wit sy Rely nee
fr dk Come , ;
tue Mara pr x ay "OL
fun els ber a

[ Ait anos Rb WAY M4 oko)


--- Page 260 ---
an My (yk S 2
he Jabbar else fe,
a nbd,’ Je. vu
TOTP 20 arncerncl— Hh,
SY rao EL ee fe
AW tS antl yes Fane foe

Elbe chad bed

Deu ante wa Ue

PA tht digs apt

ani aac pd)
Red Ey Poba'
net CE ud ilify 2.

Min Chuedte ‘e )irwhes ag
al ge vil [lm « Se sly ap, he
byilis thn whl F fod tas

™~



--- Page 261 ---


--- Page 262 ---
14-0000

set anal

Nene TT tm emiraetees mete en

pS Senn renner eran

wn - . : .
1 17 March

ur, Bradons
Thies is another example of tnterference and partiality on the part of NCFE.

ur. Berle had 1) no right in testifying in this case and 2) no business ondoraing

the Radescu faction as against the cretetanud¥isotanu Group.

=

_ Major Fishburn would like the éocunent back today, ‘room 1201 J.”

‘

, Ellen


--- Page 263 ---
14-0000

ance REN Anse teEAa  n EARRE ES mee Re

> SECRET
Security Intormation - 207043
MAR 20 1962
MEMOPAMDUM FOR: Chief, Internations] Organisations Division .
FROMa ’ Deputy Director (Plans) ‘
SUBICCTs - Testinony of Adolph A. Parle, Jr, on behalf of

Wicolas Malazay Complaint of the Ftate Departnent.

1. Please note the attacked menoranda fro: Bob Joyce and John a

’ Campbell, dated “arch li and Yarch 13, respectively. Will you please

prepare a brief menorendum for eerrs. Joyce end Campbell inforning-
thea thet we are in cozplete ajreonent with their views concerning
Adolph Berle's statements, and noreover that action has been taken te
inform the Crotaienu-Visoianu group that “r. Ferle had no richt whete
soever to make rensrka of thie kind in nis capacity as a seaber of the
Boord ef HCFE. You cen obtain the details of what has been said froa
Mr. Crew and “re Dulles in order to strengthen and round ovt your ame
orandua to Mesers. Joyce and Camptell; (It ia ay understanding thet
Mr. Crew received “r. Cretsianu for the purpose of denying eny responsie
bility on tho part ef NCP: for 4. Perle's rewrks, which he nade in
hie zrivate capacity and incidentally as attorney for ‘“elexs.) Will
you please let “r. Horton sce the menorandus which you write to “essere.
Joyes and Canpbdell. .

2. For your inforwation, J have recently teen inforaed by a very
knowledgeable Rusanien that, in Fie opin’on, sore good hae reavlted
out of thie highly imaroper end sesry business of Rerle's. Tia Kerle

, attack on Cretsianu was partially responsible, in the judgment of ay

inforsent, for Cretsisnu's eucden turn-rbout and erreenent to shake
bands with and sit down beside Masers. Cafencu and Lavila. "It's an
S11 wind 2.07, ote.

Although the following questian may not be entirely in your field,
T should eppreciste your fetting up a statenent for my inforzation ecn=
cerning tho present stataa of and our proposed future use, if any, of
Julius Fleischsann. I have just hoard t.ro gh the grapevine that he
considore his ussfulness to us at an end and that he is severing all
connection with tris Agency. Tile disturbe me, as I consider '&,
Fleischmann to be an intelligent anc atle nan wo has elready gained
@nocgh experience in our line of endesvor to te of velue to us. If sy
infornatioa is by any chance correct, then I do not underetand why we
BO lightly cast hin asida. I hope tiet I ay wrong and that he nay be
eerering official cornections only to continue bis work in « sore subtle
meaner. . . .

CSleneg, Faarr g, Wi... -

ees OCT : SECRET Frank 0, bimer.
ap7e Secutty bee mat on .
c/s Attochaent: Described ameoramia and transcript of Ferle
testimony.

WA A rete


--- Page 264 ---
14-0000

. Rel eee

crpuMry MSRONeT EN

In reply refer tos G - 2003
18 April 1952

. Dear Mini

When you wore here tednesday, you handed me a letter
from Hichaol E. Thompson about General Nennyey. ,
1 have looked into this and find that Thompson
pranised on his last trip to Haskington that he would give -
us certain facts about Hennysy's new viea application mich

were necessary when the old visa application expired on
21 Karch. We never have received these facta fram Thompson.

. Will you kindly, therefore, ask Thompson to get together
for you the foets on the new visa application -- its musber,
‘where 1¢ was mado, ete. -- and we will go ahead and act as

we said we would. We can't act without then.

Sinoerely,
ClovTwB/eh
Orig - Addressee
1 ce = I0/Exsc Off. 8
2 cc - do
2ec-H

TwE Mentioned above to Adm Miller by

telephone on 17 apr 52.
eh

ae Us nen WEES MTD STOO Une CORTE: COST ST ERT Tee ean Somme ee vO mE

ee)


--- Page 265 ---
TOT wane mene eamernermeammerrnimnrine rareesneitim ind attinatiiar WAG te ta MSSM NAAR haiA Scents SZ Aan im PE Sagi D en REL A te edi ns wnt nS Ie a ne aN

TA DDBDET verre = re

April 15, 1952 . ‘ .

Dear Oliver:

Whcn I last saw you, I spoke of tho General

Hennyey matter explaininy the creat importance that
the Fund places on expediting Une arrival of Senoral
Hennyoy in this country for Fund purposes. I Later :
mentioned this matter in detail to one of your Liaison a
associates who has these matters in hand. I ezplained —
that it is considercd imperative that all possibte as-
sistance be developed looking toward the sponsored ar-
; rival of General Hennyey in the shortest possible time. 4
H - I now refer you to our letter of March 2, 1952, which I

delivered in person to Mr. Abramson. That letter con-
tains all of the necessary data for action in the case.

i

We have just been informed that the unconscionable
delay in the processing and approval of General Hennyey's ‘
entry presently will be made the subject of public pro- .
test by elements of the Hungarian National Council. i
The details of this situation will be more fully explain-
ed by Leonard L. Stamm who will hand you this Letter.

For your convenience, I am attacning a copy of our

i letter of March 2 above cited, and I would further state
i that wa believe that extraordinary action should be

: taken to affect the immediate processing of General

: Hennyey by entry permit or otherwise. Our reprezenta-
tives in Munich are in daily contact with General
Hennyey and can be of particular assistance in the event
you desire to use extraordinary means to expedite his
departure for the United States.

Sincerely,

Pela 6 angeer


--- Page 266 ---
14-0000

‘alization Service.
. was told that the filo in question had been lost.

ee em mr Ara RR EERE SE TER NR A ht ee ME Cr

March 2, 1952

¢

‘Dear Mr. Minett: . : ‘ : .

- General Gusstav Hennyey is Representative of the Hungarian National
Council in Yestern Germany and a persen in whom ‘the Fund places trust and
confidence in ity dealings with the problems of the Tiunzartan National
Council. The Fund has beon desirors for sony time that General Hennycy
come te the United States, and believes that his visit hore would be most
helpfid to the present activities and future of the Hungarian National

Council. :

An opportunity presented itself last fall for General Hennyey to
emigrate to the United States as a displaced person. He was granted a : q
visa by the Consul General in Munich on Novembrr 21, 1951, EC Number 254411,
D.P. Commission Validation Number A-/037, Sponsor Mr. Louis Rado, 152 Main
Street, Poughkeepsie, New York. Subsequent to the issuance of his visa :
his file was sent by the local representative of the U. S. Immigration t
and Naturalization Services in Munich to the Office of the Attorney Gen- :
eral in Washington for special consideration under No. 3-CFR:17557. .
Noither General Hennyey nor the National Council have been able to deter-
mine why his case has been held in suspense, by the Immigration and Natur-
Indeed, in response to ono inquiry Genaral Hennyey

As stated above, the
Fund attaches great importance to General Hennyoy's visit to the United
States, and considers this visit to be of high operational importance,
since it will deeply affect the work of the Hunyarian National Council.
We shail be very grateful for any assistance which you can render in tha
expedition of the decision of the Immigration and Naturalisation Service.
I may add that General Hennyey's visa will expire on the 21st of this
month, and he also will lose his rights owing: to the expiration of the ;
Displaced Persons Act in the near future should he not be able to emigrate

promptly.
Sincerely yours,

Fate:


--- Page 267 ---
14-0000

g

|

}
i
3
:

ene


--- Page 268 ---
14-0000

ome olagt

foe aye

1? april 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIOFNCE | -
SUBJECTS Crusade for Freedon

1. At a meeting in John Devine's office at noon on 16 April
at which were present Hassrs. Davins, Qnith, Lang, Lanble, Braden
and Admiral Hiller, Mr. Suith presented the prograa for the Crusade
for Freedon for naxt year, which I attach. ‘he budget ostimate ta
just over $500,000 and the central idea ia to campaign acrues the
nation for eignatures and dimes on behalf of a pledge to preserve,
meintain and spread freedom.

2. There are other ideas connacted with thia, namely a froedon
train which will carry the scroll and dimes of the people of the .
United States from point to point and which eventually will come to
Washington where the signatures attached to the scroll will be
Preounied ‘to the new Congress and tho nau Fresident. Eesenttally,
however, and-in terms of our relations with the State Departsent,
the progran is intended to avoid specific mantion of what the money
ie dbeing raised for; thus, for example, there will be no publicity
about wiat tranositters cost and how important it is to raiso the
money. Inatead, the campaign will be kept very genoral and RFE~RFA
and YOA will be mentioned only incidentally as ons means of spreading
the idea of freoton.

3. Mre Devine presented the progran to Messrs. Sargeant, Kohler
and Compton and reectved their approval. I have therefore notified

Acniral Miller that there is no objection on behalf of the State
Departaent to the plan presented for the 1953 Crussde for Freaden,

THOMAS &. BRADEN

CQuef
International Organisations Division

Attashnent
Prograa for Crusade

01 tw8/eb
Orig = Cod (thre Dd/P)

1 ec = apc
lee- mmc ~

. 2 ec - go nm
3 2ec- ‘ Phe Wi

on

3

4
ae)


--- Page 269 ---
14-00000

17 April 1952

KES FOKs §=DEFUTY DIRECIA OF CENTRAL INTELIZOENCE
Wis2els Propoced Conference at Princeton Inn

You agked me to remind you of Aduiral Miller's request
that you speak to David Erucs about his attendance at Adairal
Hiller =» proposed conference at the Princeton Inn on Saturday,
10 May at 10:30 AM. You will recall Admiral Miller's mention

-of tae fact that the idea of tne conference is attributed to

Mr. Zrsuce, dating back to a luncheon conversation that he had
in Faris with C. D. Jackson and the Admiral.

“Tue BuaBeue
PRADEN

BIUAS We
Chief
International Organizations Divigion
0: 2/en
Orig - DOA
2 ce - 0
2ee- 2

SECRET



--- Page 270 ---
14-0000

SECURITY INFORMATION

SECAEI

17 April 1952

MLMORANDUK FOR+ DEPUTY CHIBF, SOUTHSAST&AN EULOFS
SUBILOTs Bulgarian National Comittee

1. This 18 to confirm our oral report to you of the
Prosident of NCFi's report to us of his 15 April 1952
conference with Dimitrov on thie subject.

2. Adoiral Miller reported that he had presented the
egreed upon plan to Dimitrov, without threatening to out
off funds, Dimitrov's first reaction was that the plan
vas a maneuver to oust Dinitrov, The end result, hovever,
was that Dimitrov was to think the plan over and give his
viewa on it in roturn, It vas further suggested that a
eounol) meeting would bo held on 30 April or as soon there
after as possible. However, Atniral Miller:etated that .
thie meeting vould probably not occur before mid-May, since
the two members coming from Paria would probably not ‘arrive
before that time, A quormm would not be possible without

THOMAS W. BLADEN
Chief
International Orgenisationa Divieion

C10/NEVsbu a

Distributions
Addressee - original
clo -1 1
10/D0TO - 1 :
10/Bx.Aast. - 1
RI-2

SECRET



--- Page 271 ---
14-0000

‘ .. 17 April 1952

MEMORANDUM FORs DBFUTY DIRECTOR CENTKAL INTLLLIGANCE

He would

nNeNe

‘ SUBJIDTs Reporte of Leon Demen

1, Almost vithout excej:tion, the Dannen reports, of which
thirteen have been examined to date, duplicate reports already
recoived, but do not contain as much information as the reports
being obtained from other sources or from the san sources as
those used by Dennon, Of the reports, only one hag been .
@4eceninated, The Department of State's coment on that report
vas that a einilar one had been received,

2. For your convenience, a brief analysia of tho thirtoa
reports io prerented belows

Bapeary
1, Geepd érsensl tn ihmeery

Comments This report, consisting of a list of names of
direatoers or top officials in various Hungarian
industrial enterprises, was considered of
Harginal value, The pereons listed wero
identified with overt positions and have been
Rentioned in a mmber of overt Hungarian
publications, |

2. Rezort an the dctiviting ef the Bunrarien Exbagay and
Consulate do Pardee

r about the Dennen ai tation.

like to withdraw his objections to his evert use of De:

TI just talked to Min Mille

3. Report an Buncarien cosialis’ Grour in Exmuee.

Cements Information is thin and overt. Theee reporte .
duplicate in part reports already received in
grcoter dotail,

Thie enterial probably eomes from persons
vho have contact or knovledge of tha Hungarian
Legation, but vho have not actually “penetrated®
the Logation.

Burmmy of Iailiical Coniitions tn Hunesry fren 124) throvsh

Sho banly fort as lic. :

Comments Prenkly overt material, obtained (or could have
been obteincd) fron e close reading of published

Baterial, Of sargins] value as representing the
viewpoints of forrer imgerian industrialiste,

SECaEy

Note to DDCh:



--- Page 272 ---
14-0000

$» Huncerr'a ixodustive Campoity in Relation to Hunearion
isn Lar 1252.
: Comments Report was thin, Information on mines end
° factories vas already known.

Qyerad) Comments Contimution of reports similar to the above
is not recomended.

1. Polish Industry Gears for Len Lreduction.
Eroduction.

2 paisa Soak
3. Folend Je irenarine Keperve Industrial Stat with Spowledee

of iencuacage
4. Rerort on ioland.
Gomrent, on the 4 rezortss

Mast, if not all of this inforsation, had been provioualy

received ‘through our regular channels.
The material is not disseuinated to customer
agencioe vho have overt access thereto.

Se MIN Report o
Comsents A verbatia extract (42 pages) of a 100 page report
whieh wo hed already received, (In this connection,
‘ please rote C=E's memorandun of 23 January 1952,
whioh fo attached),

1. Dadaney Cadre Sahoo. in Iucharee’

Comment: Evaluation hare 73, Evaluation by State A2, tut
State had previourly received the infornations .

Estonia
Bleutions of Peonle's Judeos and Lay Asressora in Letonia.
2! sore Lore Tavortact pereJoments is soviet Latania in 1952.

Comments These rejorts duplicate inforration ve have recoived.
This ic true, primarily because Johannes ikhelson
de the source, Michsloon is a Wi-] agent, is alao
used by Kr, Angleton, end is on vennen's ICiTU~ine
exile payroll,

ee tinea



--- Page 273 ---
pera SSSR tier te Mit OH Se be Saat eed
14-00000 ee a ee rence enseniet athRomacss

-3-

pte

Cel
Va

Sanden
J. Raviok Propaconds tn Oveden

Comcenty This report 4s also a duplicate. (See preceding
; coment), .

THOMAS WV. ERADEM
Chict .
. International Organizations Division

fans


--- Page 274 ---
sat ete» ee Bi Se SET comb eet RR ih SE hehe Lif ne ne Oe 6 seth SA

7 April 1952

MQMORANDUM TOR: DEPUTY DIRECTION CLNTIAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJICT: © Leon Dennen

1. Me provised for Leon Dennen $71,000 for tha period 1 August
1951 to 30 June 1952 for a project to be opsrated by FCF: ‘in Europe.
(Dennen did not, as I understand it, agswwe his work in jurope until
6. 1 Uetober 1951.) The $72,000 included an allotment of $6,000 for
ten ronthly payments of $600.00 for special intelligence activities.
Otis recently informed us, however, that of the 600,00 por month
allotments, Dennen had asked for and received a total of only 8250.00

sll told. ©

2. On 2 April, Admiral Miller stated that Dennen's work vas
absolutely worthless as far ae KCFE and KIL were concerned.

Dennen's intelligence reporte heve been evaluated as having
practically no usefulness; and, as you knov, in his intelligence
"gathering", ho has crossed sore of Hs's vires. In both 070 and
0S), there is such suspicion of Dennen, that no one has been willing
to give him direct guidance for foar that it vould merely onlargo

Dannen's knovledge of our operations.

3. When Dennen returns, ny recommendation is that ve tell him
that walle wo may discontinue suport to the International Confederation
of Free Trade Untoniste in Exile, ve feel that, since we have a Paris
NCPE representative, we should uee this channele-or somo other. channel

not involving additional expense.

4. Meanwhile, sings the ICFTU in exile is of prinary interest
to ES, and of some intercet to SE ani hE, 1 have asked Mr. Brose, Mr.
Horton, and Hr, Scott their views on contimed support to the organization
and, efter a go-round with them, I will send up a further report to you.

THOMAS =. ERADLN
Chief
International Organisations Division

CIO/NEVibw

Dietributions
Addressce ~ original
Coe)
3a/no10 - 1
BI<2


--- Page 275 ---
14-0000

wee ee ca eR A A ce NR RT MEA ht RL AARC NI RES IRAE Ne Raa oe act

LAUT yurneunrees

gecael

: Ts reply refer tor W-19U9
16 April 1952

‘ Dear Mins

aa We have a 2 April report fron our friends across the

i atreot documenting certain eriticians which Hr. Visoiam
has mado of NCFE. Some of this oriticien stena directly,

I belicvo, from hie reaction to Nr, Ferle's testimony in
the Malaxa cease. Another of his complaints stexs from the
aprointnent of Comarnieiu to a position with the Frees Europe
University at Strasbourg.

Thies report raises several questions with me. I should
consider it a great favor if you vould have prepared for mo a
review of the vhole Rumantan Rational Coanitteo as to factions,
alignments and with recomendations recaniing vhat might bo -
done to improve the Rumanian Gounittee,.

Stnoerely,

’ Oliver Radwood oF

C10/NBVsbw

Distributions
Addressee ~ origina) .
clo -1
10/Adnin, Off. - 1
Io/poTo - 1 o—
RI-2

ee

SeCRE!


--- Page 276 ---
14-0000

‘poattion tovard the jawoent iisunity in the humanian eaigration,

- Ajril 2, 1952

Mr, Vioolanm called at his rocucet to inforr us of the high
lights of his recent trip to burope. Ho hai first attended the
meoting of the Eastern European Section of the Burerean Movement
in London, then vielted France, O:rmany and Italy, ©

. Mr, Virolam said that in Germany he had talved with Chancellor
Adenauer, Secretary of State Uallatein, and other officiala of the
Bonn Government, as well as with Mr. Rober and other Allied officials.
He said that the Germans were rynpathetic to hia discussion of
lumanian affaire and showed some intercat in the problems of Eastern
Europe. They, e=phasized, hovever, thet Gormany's Fevsent position
did not enable them to apeak in terme of any positive policy at this
tine, Mr, Visolenu got the impruveion that the Ge-mans vere now, and
would be in the future, even more actively interested in Rumania .
and other Eastern burcjcan countries than were France ani Italy.

Mr, Visoianu felt that F. ance had completely abdicated ite position
in Eastern Buroje and was entirely wrapped uj: in its ow domestio :
problems and relations with Germany.

Me. Visotamm also discussed in Gurmany the cuestion of Rumanian
refugees there (most of thom are Iron Guardiste) ami of the rather
large comunity of Volksdeutsche who cane to Germany from Rumania at
the close of the war. le said that the Gorman authorities vould
like to have this group returned to Rumania at such tine as the
country ‘might be litcrated, both because they contrituted to Germany's
over=-popuiation ;rotlem and because they would represent, as they
have in the past, a poseiblo instrument for German policy in humania.
Aa e Rumanian, Mr. Vicolanu was not over anxious ts adi to the mmbere
of the German minarity but folt that a free Rumanian Government vould
not deny the right of return to those who wlehed to do so.

Hr. Visoiarm talked at length vith Mr, Tyler in Saris. Ho .
Fetaine his iistrust and dislixe of the XCFE, which ke saye can never ‘
assist effectively in bringing about unity in the Romanian emigration .
since it supports one group 100% and persecutes the other group 100s, .
He vas particularly incensed about Mr. Berle's recent intervention in
the Malaxa case, He seid that he reserded the eituation as having very '
serious iz: licatione mot only for the emigree tut cleo for the future ,
of the country iteelf, He denounced ladescu's contust, giving
numerous examples, as detrimental to the true intercet of Rumania, Ono
of his mre syecific com laints against the 'CFi wae the aprointzent
of Comarniciu as head tuter (or somo such title) at tho Free surope
Univeraity in Stra:bourg. He eaid that Comarniciu ha: no education
and no qualifications for the post but was there merely beomuso he was

of the Radosou fection whieh KCFE favored.

Xr. Visoiany saw King Michael] in kngland but he «id not indicate
whether there vere any nov developments vith reepect to the King's



--- Page 277 ---
14-0000

In reply refer tos W-( 77 4
15 April 1952"

Dear Mins

Looking through the recently Inherited files, I notice
@ epectal fund which has its origin in the Poole ora. For
the presont fiscal year £10,000 has been draw and accounted
for, as a John Waterfield accounting etatenent dated 27 Janu-
ary 1952 indicates. You will note there is a cash balance
as of 27 January of 45,578.

Thio te one of those things that questions will always
be raised about. I know there is good precedent for it,
however, in business firms and maybe wa should oontime it,
In any event, I wanted to bring it to your attention ard te
be cure you knew of its existence.

SAnerely,

Oliver F, Hadwood

C10: TwB/eh

Orig - Addressee
lce = 10/mort.
2c - Cow

2 ce -

t
-_



--- Page 278 ---
14-0000

In reply refer tos W-17 BY
“15 Apel 19752

Dear Mins

One of your orployeos, Kiron Eutaris, prior to
aceepting employment with your firs, was intorviewod
by vs. with your permission wo should like to oontinus
procesaing papers for his employuant. If you wim to
keep hin, wa should like to know that eo tiat ws ean
close out the case,

Sineerealy,

’

Oliver Z. Zadwod

Clo: NBV/eh

Orig - Addressee

2 ce - cio ,

1 co = 10/Ex.0ff. .
2 cc - AI

~ SFEPSY



--- Page 279 ---
14-0000

« cat 7
“SORT, : SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations abould be used in the "TO" columa, Undor each comment a haa should be drawn acrosa sheot
and each commant numbered te correspond with the number in tha "TO column, Each officer should stial (hoch mark Insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Rocord Sheet should bo returnod 49 Rogistry, . .

Forwarded per your requost of
| 2 April 1952.

TWB

Noted - I hope we have heard the
last of complaints about this lovely
handled affair from RFE, NCFE,

Embassy Attache etc. etc. etc.

‘| I regret what I havo said before -
it is wrong for us to try to use NCFH
RFE as cover for covert opre

FoW -
12 april 52

Ted S 6 ecvasansat eqsarens Orns,

reste 10 SECRET



--- Page 280 ---
. we ee a
yen Weel

. ae
Oaths 28 we
ie

a nN.



--- Page 281 ---
14-0000

Stuukh

SECURITY WFORMATION

pp ow?

te
eae
na

MEMORANDUM FOR: GHIZY, IWESREATIONAL ONGANTZAPTONS
SUBJECT: . Roary Landowskt

f

i
1. Attached ia a detailed summary of the events surrounding the

attempted utilisation by Opo of Henry Landowski as a contract agent in

Athens. lLandoveki wae atationed in Athens by SS/PC with the cover of a
Journalist under contrast with RYE to provide that organization with neve
of refugeea coming into Groece from certain countries. Landowaki vas not
integrated into RYZE; he was associated with R73 under a contractual arrange-
went meant to provide him with a reasonable explanation for his income and

office.
2. Tho relationship vas not a succoseful one for ssveral reasons:

@. Landowski himself was poorly suited for the assignment, and
did not bring the necessary experience and skill required to maintain

amooth working relations with RFS.

be fhe Landowskt asstenment was not, in fact, compatible with
RYB's decision to otation a regular staff officer of ite own in
Atheae. Since the functions of the tvo men appeared to overlap te
an unreasonable degree, both were put in an awkward position.

@. RYE is not organised or designed to maintain covert relation~
ships with contract agenta notionally asscoiated vith it.

ad. The Maison detween CIA/opo and RFE was not, during the period
under consideration, fully satisfactory in this tnatance. Quite uinor
problers becane sertous because of a lack of complete understanding
between the two organisations.

3. Thies divieion concludes from the case that neither RFE nor (by
inference) its parent, HCE, is suitable for uce as a cover inetrument.
An agent under cover {fe secn in the landowski instance as rateing staffing
and organisational problems RYE has not been set up to handle. Because of
the unsuitability of the arrangement, and because of the security risks
involved, Landewaki fc boing recalled from Athano, and will be disposed of

as securcly as possible.

GRALTAN N. YAPSBVITCH
Chief for Policy Coordination, SB
Attach: (1) ty
2, de stated tn pare, 2 Stuticd
Distribution: (See ve. 2)


--- Page 282 ---
14-0000

TO a remem nt ne ROUND tae he SSCA ea aa on ct

Stout
SECTRITY INFORMATION
: 25 Ape we

: “
MEMORANDUM POR: CATHY, INTERNATIONAL ORDABIZAPIONS

SUBJECT s Ronry Landowski

1. Attached is a detailed cunmary of the events surrounding the
attempted utilization by Ope of Henry Landowski as a contract agent in
Athena. Landowski was atationed in Athons by S8/PC with the cover of a
/ Journalist under contract with R7E to provide that organisation with neve
“of ‘Fofugees coming into Greece from certain countries. Landowaki was not
integrated into R¥Z; he wae associated with A/Z under a contrectual arrange-
ment meant to provide him with a reasonable explanation for his income and

office.
2. The relationship was not a succesaful one for several reasons;

e. Landowekt himself was poorly suited for the assignment, and
até not bring the neceseary experience and skill required to maintain
emeoth working relations with R¥S.

b. Fhe Landowsk! assignment vase not, in fact, compatible with
RYE's decision to station a regular ataff officer of its own tn
Athens. Since the functions of the two men appeared to overlap to
an unreasonable dogroe, both were put in an avivard position,

ce RPE fs not organised or designed to maintain covert relation=
ships with contract agents notionally associated with it.

@. The liaieon detwoen CIA/ops and RYE was act, during the period
under consideration, fully aatisfactory in thie instance. Quite minor
probleme became serious because of a lack of corplete understanding

between the two organisations.

3. Thia division concludes from the case that neither RYE nor (boy
faference) {ts parent, HC¥S, te suitable for use as a cover instrument.
An agent under cover fe seen in the landowski instance as rateing staffing
and organizational problems RYE has not deen set up to handle. Because of
the unsuitability of the arrangement, and decause of the security riaks
involved, Landowski fa being recalled from Athens, and will be disposed of

as securely as possible.

GRATIAN M. TAPSEVITOR
Chief for Policy Coordination, SB

Attach: (1) Ronee
1. Ae otated in para, 3 dbonsi
Distribution: ‘See vz. 2)


--- Page 283 ---
14-0000 :

SECRET

SECURITY IhECOMATINN,

Distridution:
Addresses = Orig, 4)

jmnanone ties An

ia 2 <3 _? — Fit a 6a Sa te net 5 alee nm


--- Page 284 ---
nn ET I ALR nC Litt Re tT

14-0000

Srtoanry mere
Zhe Case of Henry Jondovakd

1. On 10 danusry 1951, at the requeat of Ops Athens, s8/P0 (thru BBL)

i .

roquasted an operational clearance on Menry Landowoki, thon reoiding in !
Athens. Landoweky, a Polish oftisen by birth, wao naturalised a US ottiven
on 25 duly 1950. Ho fe now 33 years old. ho PC Field Station wished to:
use him as a contract agent under cover tn Greece, engnged principally tu
PY work and in recruiting and handling other agents. fhe clearance was
granted on 30 Hay 1951, and on 15 June Landowaky signed a contract in Athens.
2. The field diepatch oatlining Landowsky'a capadtlities and the work
envisaged for him described him as a froe-lanco Journalist, resident of
Greeeo for savoral years (his mother was mrricd to a Greek), fantifar with
the Greek language aad fluent in Polish and German, and having certain oon~
tacts in Greek government cfroles. His success in interviewing refugecs
from tho satellite coumtries had come to the etation's notice, and it was
belfoved that under cover of such interviews he vould do useful in gathoring
gatertal for propaganda use and in spotting ccc recruiting exentes.
3. The tleld station snggented that a cover organisation be estabe .
lished to operate ae a neva agency tn Athens with oatensible headquarters
in Nev York. fhic agonay would notionally specialise in refugee sews for
press and radio, and would appear to draw ite rain financial support from
@ contract with Radio Free Purope for the supplying of dreadcaat caterfal
on refugee topics. It waa the ficid'’s plan that thie neve sorvies would
aleo furniah cover to other Ope personne) in the future, when it sight
Plausidly expand ae a dbusinese enterprise. Yo forward thie ides, 53/PC

ealled en Hr, Thompeon, Chief of SP, on 1) duly 1951 for hie assistance ia
uit obtaining AFE's



--- Page 285 ---
14-0000

s grunt l

SUCDRITY Berna AS

obtaining RYR's cooperation, Mr. fhompecn later informed this division
that a Nr. Phenix of HVS agreed to the contractual rolationshtp propoeal,
but wished 1¢ mado clear that RYZ would not give cover to Landovok’i in the
gauico of & regular RYE employee. This wae understood and agreed to by this
offices.

& Durtng Landowskt 's covert training in Vashington, ia July and
August, the Comercial Diviston wae conenlted regarding the various aspects
of creating a fictitious corporation, Burepo News Service, along the lince :

@utlined above. Tho difficulties of logal incorporation and of mintalining. I
plausible US hoadqusrtors for euch a fir, aoconiing to the Comercial
_ Diviaton, made thie inadvicable. It wos therefore decided, aftor consulta=
tion with the Legal Division, that a peresnal contract botweon Landovaki,
supposedly representing the “Burops Hews Service,” and RYE would be sufficient
and would obviate the riaks of building a cover firm out of nothing.
5. Durtog a drief conversation betwen Mr. Lang of RPE and I/P0's
ease officer for the Landowski matter, the following points were covereds
Nr, Lang wae particularly intorosted in waethor Landowaki could actually
provide useful material te RFK, and wae told that thie was the caee. Mr. .
Lang satd the desired contract could be arranged serely by his requesting
At at an Bxeautive Comaittee meeting of 3CPR. Ia ancver to an inquiry, Mr.
~ hang said no standard RFE contract fors oxieted, dat that in draving the
Landewski contract he would uso the nencorsd ttal phrasing of the RF/Pree
Federation of Journalists contrast, in water a@ definite monthly payment vas
stipulated without any mention of specific retaras from FFI (which, Mr. Lang

aid, ie o sudsid! -od organisation). He wea rosssuring as to whether AVB's

SLUAL : accounting mechantan
vL
2



--- Page 286 ---
14-0000

at

SLOURITY eTORMATOS

accounting mochanisa vas secure enough to permit large ($1000) monthly
payments to Landoveki vithout quootioning the oxtent of his services. Mt.
Lang otated that there was no accurity risk from RYE'a internal accounting
er contracting procedure. Hoe then mentioned that RFE planned te send one
of their own cmployces to Athens later, probably “around the end of the
yoar.” Although surprised, since this plan had not beon mentioned to Are
Thompson by Hr. Pheniz during the original diecusston of landowskt in July,
the onso officor 614 not go further into thie, feoling that Iandowski would
havo three ronths to eotablish hie cover in Athens prior to the arrival of
tho BYB waa.
6. In eccoréance with arrangements made vith Mr. Leng, Landewaki
wae inetrueted to report in Kew York for a week's briefing in RFS affairs,
and on 24 September ealled at RYK's offices and aoked for Mr. Lang'a
asolotant, Mr. Weld. heir meoting waa mont uneatiefactory, ae Mr. Wold ;
was not familiar with Landowskits background and atanding with RFF, had

arranged no training for him, know of no contract, and wae hincelf duay

with proparations for a trip to Birepe. Upon recetving this {aformiion in

@ phone call from landowskd, tho divieton requested Mr. Lasarus of PY te
phone BYE and inquire tnto the. status of the sontrast, and to urge that a
preliminary drat bo gubmitted to us. After several daye deley, during ‘
whieh ene contract was drawn by ays, eubmitted to Landovski who eigeed it,
and then with¢ravn and destroyed by RYE officials, a new contract was finally
exoouted by both partics without ‘nto office kmowing ite terme. Landowexi
later stated that ke had folt £¢ imperative to sign vhat was given hia in
order te end bie eonspiousne position in RFB's offices, where be had epeat the

Vetter part of ecveral daye fn the waiting room. Hie training consisted of
Pin
ULetle core than a tour of arb Meda iartes.
. . 9. Wnt*a Lents ab”



--- Page 287 ---
14-0000

“age

SEcael

7. While Landowskt was in Bou York, the sR/ve uso officer vas informed
that Kr, Sperling, who io in cuszgs of KB's Zuropean headquarters at Munich,
waa ia Yashincston for debriefizg.an4 would be available for a fow minutes
G@iscusston relative to Landowskt.: In this discuasion Hr, Sporling advised
that Mr, Bampft, tho regular 37% employee montioneé by Mr. Lang as going °
to Greece "aromd the end of the year,” was actually lenving in 0 wook.

As thia would of course make 7t sore e1ffienls 17 sot Sepessible for Landowski
to explain his activities, on ezriving in Athens several weoko after Xampft
had tnetslled Aimself as the KFE reprenentatizve, the cace officer protested
that thio was counter to tre spirit of the existing ngreement. Hr. Sperling,
however, said the Bampft asatcament to Greece haf been plannod a year carlier,

and that it was not poosible to cheney It. He wided that he would help

Landoweki in every possible wy, nowever, and asked that Landowaki visit his
office ia Rontch prior to startize work in Athens, for a thorough grounding
in BYB's Buropean procrassing operetions.

8. At this point, the question of Landovaki'a cover eae carefully
revieved by this division, ané @ decision vas made not to attempt to put the

‘wan into Athene undor an RYE: eontract 1f Easoft were gring out ae the recular

representative of that orgnaizatior. I¢ seomec certain that both nen would

be awkwardly placed, and trat their ostensible functions would overlap unreneon=
ably. The assigasent ef one cr the other would have to be withdrawn, and,
through the division's channel te “FE (¥r. lazarus), the withdrawal of the
Rampft aseigneent vas requestet. RBVE's reply was aff!rmative and the division

wae tnformed that Ranpft waa to be sent to Tricete instead.
9. Bywever, upon

deuarl



--- Page 288 ---
14-0000

SECRET

Slee TT NF undinswes
9» However, upon landowski's arrival {n Athone on 16 October, he

found that Ranpft was already there, gontrary to the above understanding.
Landoweki consequently found hinself obliged to justify his position, and
particularly his requests for access to refugees, as Hamft had already
progonted hia orcdentials to the Greek authorities, the American Embassy,
the Amorioon pilitary authorities, and tae international preas representa-
tives tn Athens.) Landoweki flew to Munich to confor vith Mr. Sperling,
who in on effort to resolve the problex, suggao ted that Landowski chango
tho name of hie supposed firn from “Suroge Hews Service" to "Radia Hews

_ aad Recording Service" and that he specialize in eire recordings of

refugeo interviews. A new contract was therefore drawn in Match, ueing
tae sugested title.

10. On 18 Ostoder a cable was received from Mr, Wisnor in Athena rela-
tive to Rampft's presence there, Thie cable (IM 35284), for relay to Mre
Jackoon of NcYs and Mr. Lang of KVE, stated that the Athons station was
concerned lost Bamft prove as troublesene so ono Ira Hamilten in Torkay.
On the same date an Ope Athens cable (IN 34940) inquired if dampft wero
cleared and if he knew landowaki's CIA affiliation. Upon requesting PY to
obtain this information, this office was informed that Rampft was cleared
and that he hed gone to Athens on personel orders from My. Lang. On

: 6 Sovenbder a
1. In a sudscequrat intelligence report te Defence, the US Military Attache
in Athens referred to the peculiar Ragpft/landowski eituation, the obvious
hoatility detwoea the men, tie Johnny-com-lately etatus of Landovaki cone
traeted to Ragft's prior arrival, and tho MA's own reluctance to agree to

Lendoveki's access to refurees in the face of Kampft's attitude and the
apparent lack of offictal sponsership for Lantowski.

SEuE..



--- Page 289 ---
14-0000

SECRET
6 Hovender a cable (I 39122) was received frow Ope Athens referring to

the wnsatisfactory situation resulting from Rampft's appearance in Athens

and stating that, if a permanent HVE representative were actually neceseary

isa Athens, 1% should be soreone othor than Rampft, who was reportedly lack-

fog in security eense and sald to te a heavy drinker. Through the case

officer assigned to this matter, thia division thereupon requested ir.

Braden's belp in learning from BVS how mich Rampft knew of Landowekt 's

covert ectivities, whether Aaspft would conduct hia own work in « manner

acceptable to the CIA Senior Representative in Athens, Mr. John Boker, and

whothor Bazpft had been fastructed to cooperate with Landowaki without

attempting to oversee hio activitios. Mo anower haa eon received to theses

queries, :

ll. Late in November the division wag advised ty Seourt ty that unspecie

fied derogatory information had beon racoived regarding Landowski; the

field station was consequently instructed to hold w his use pending fuller

information, Karly in January, upon receiving an adverse completed report

from Security, tio field was instructed to retura Landowsk{ to Vachingten

for termination. It was considered unwise to infore Inndownki, while still ,
in Greece, of the reason underlying hio recall; be has consequently been

told that the @nal BYE representation in Athens (Raspft and Landovek!) vas ,
no longer Vortable and that AYE had insisted on keeping ite ovn man, He

Delleveo tkat a now RYB agelgauent may bo possible for hia after Ade retura

here late this math (hte trip hao been delayed by his pother's recent death

tn Athens).
12. The lanfowsk! problem has now tecors one of recall and éfsposal. .

Quite acide from the RYB relationship, the ann has s0t performed well,



--- Page 290 ---
has net handled Afio affairs in a eecure or professional manner, and ia

not wanted by the field atation. The division plans to terminate bin,

-read hip out of any connection with RYE, and arrange that he bo placed

with a commercial firm for employxent as A junior publie relations san. : -
Simple dfemiosal is not regarnied as socure; continusd employment ty the

Agonoy is undesirable, hence the need to find hin employment of sorte

until his familiarity with CIA activities has cooled.

seURET

0000-71


--- Page 291 ---
TT i SR. tA RESCIND te TSN Tain SO Sashes

14-0000

as secret Siyy Pow og2 AID
— . ° 7 TT
z ___ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET

INSTRUCTIONS: Otficer'designations should be ured in the “TO” column, Under each comment a ling should be drawn atross sheet
and cach comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer steruid initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing. This Routing and Récord Sheet should be returned to Rogistry. Ly
~ x7
NO,
7 68829
DATE

. 8 April 52

INITIALS.

Mr. Erewers

Georges

_ POI asks that vou attenpt to pet
from State the information which

{

|

|

Tom praden for. Ne asks that
1 bring te attention the

2cvigable to launch any
balnon oner:+tons until after the
ed down a tit.
throuch Adan

7 the au: ;
tions with
ese ope
the fortnesning +
on policy,

a

want

VED ipo
P-22F2


--- Page 292 ---
14-0000 Ane Re a ie Rr ER eR MT Tae A NR rE Se a eh Tan le, Ta Selenite satin OA,

8 April 1952

MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
DEPUTY DTRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

SUBJECT: - Letter from Admiral Miller

1. Attached is a copy of a letter from Min Miller in
which he suggests the necessity of coming to a definite deci-
. sion in respect to a future balloon operation.

2. Can you take the time to get a policy decision from
the State Department as to (a) whether they wish to have a
. balloon operation in August or at any subsequent date, and
: (bo) whether they want us to set aside funds and materials now
for a future balloon operation at some unspecified time?

W. Buafi-

TSOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief sys
International Organizations Division .

Attachnent :
Ltr from Adm Miller 1 Apr 52. .

C10: ThB/eh

Orig - Addressees
lee = APC

2 ce = ClO
2ec-



--- Page 293 ---
100000 - ce A A EE NAS He CEES MEA lh Sg 5

ee
er
, ™ cane
._ ] “C¢ _ . YL
“ i
° = - Me et
° vO - - ’ ”
x Cy TH Ee
PE Se Avil 1, 1952? ye gt
‘4 . ine f a
Dear Olivers Boge ns ©
be ae yitiy

Wa need to get a firm commitment with reepect to the Crusade's next balloon /

i operation. . ~ ~
7 yn ¢

4 Our best target from the point of view of geography and RFF radia coveragd V1.

is Czechoslovakia. We can go into Poland and Hungary somewhat lesc efficiently
If Hungary should be the target, we will precumatily still havo the problem of ui
clearance from the British to launch from their Zone, and failing that should" -

have to back up to our Zone. we

: : haere

We need an abéolute minimum of three ronths to prepare a balloon operation; vw ne .
the longer notice the better. A date of epecial significance to the target ;. {-
country 1s perhaps of some slight additional desirability from the psycho- y~™ wt
logical point of view. It is, however, not essential. From the point of irae
view of our campaign schedule, an initial launching date of about August J “YY

20th would be ideal. This would allow tre story on the operation and its Je

effect to become known at the opening of our September campaign. foot

i We have in storage in Munich 50,000 packazes (of two each) of razor blades, KY -

. 100,000 zippers, 72,000 packets of needles (five to the packet), and 150,000 6 x

. cakes of soap (1/2, 3/h and one ounce gizes). All of the above except a
needles were donations to the Crusade, and the needles were at cost. Ws Ab
have had to tell Gillette and Talan twice (at Christmas and at Faster) that \ee

the operation for which they supplied their products had been delayed. We ©. An

should very much regret having to do thiz again. oan

I do not know what keeps putting this off the track. It is ny information ow}
that the boys in the big house were initially enthusiastic about the idea, +” we
we,

i and the record will show that Ambassador Priggs thought it most valuable a

2 in Czechoslovakia, witness his special request that this means of comuuni- \ 4

: cation be used at the time of the Czech Preedom Train break-out. Vee
Tey

I would appreciate your getting us as soon as possible a positive and (barring
an act of God) irrevocable approval for a tallvon operation into a speci fiedy-, -
target country at a certain date, with agreement in principal on the nature
of the operation =- 1.e., of an order of magnitude of 60,000 to 75,000
vehicles, bearing the above mentioned materials together with messages. ~ ..
To repeat, by far the best target is Czectoslovakia; our preferred dates °:

3 : around August 20th.

Let us not make this approval in principle (with fine date and target)
contingent on a budget, except in a general way. With an approval in hand,
we can proceed with plans and supply a fairly accurate budget, which will
depend somewhat on such things as whether we can use the P-20 balloons on
hand for the short flight to Prague or whetser we will have to resort to
P-50's for the longer flight into Poland or from the U.S. Zone of Austria

into Hungary. .
: Sincerely,

/s/ Leonard


--- Page 294 ---
14-0000

~~ CFLR I

fot Ty GHEE aA te

. 26 April 1952

MPRANDUM FOR: QUEEF, RE-2
SUPSECTs Future Ealloon Operation

1. Attached is a opy of a letter fron Min Miller in
which he suggests the necesslty of coming to a definite deol-
sion in respact to a future balloon operation.

2. Will you advise me as to (a) whether you wish to
have a balloon overstion in August or at any subsequent date,
and (b) whether you want us to act acids funds and materiale
pow for a future balloon operation at sane unspecified tims.

, THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Division

Attachment
Ltr froa Min Hiller
dtd 1 Apr 52.

10: IWB/eh

Orig - Addressee
1 oc = 10/MMC
1 co - co
2 co -


--- Page 295 ---
14-0000

soe

SECRET.

7 April 1952

MUMORAFDUM FOR) ACOL TANT DDCTH. FO RILICY COORDINATION

GURSILTs Lobor Sarvice Companies

The ‘exnot text of a 27 Karch 1952 letter from tho rolitiaal
advisor of FFE at Munich to the Iresident of MCFE its supplicd
below fur your inforration., |

"Thies te in respect to the verious labor Service
Comprries mide up of seetern Furopear oxiles now eal: t=

ing in Cerneny,

"There have been Yolish Lalor and Quard Compantes
ever since the var en’ theeo aro what their nano
dcpliles, Thore have been set up, hovever, within the
lagt year Crechoslovak ani bulgarian lator Service
Companies here, These latter two reprerent an activity
wits whioh ow fricnde ere directly inyoived. J have
beon informed by them upon ay inquiry that chould any
reference Le mede by satellite propagenca to these
compenivs it 18 decired thet in any | FE comment upon
it that there cozpanies ahould be treated ae being
what their nae implies,

"Tho Creahoslovak Company included both Creshs and
Ulovake, altiough I understand that the slovak ceparatists
here make violeot efforts to have a separate one for
themselves, The Bulgarian Company le at present nade up
alront entirely of adhurcnts of Uinitrov, Further reoruit-
ing, hovever, in this respect 15 now going on with a polioy
of barring both Pulrarian ational Front and initrov

followrs,.

"I am also informed by cy friends here that estive
Plonning is mov under vay in res;ect to the sereten
azerdment. I should euch apprestate it if va could keep
inforned of any developrents in thie respoet here for
posthle use in BFL broadcaster and for conversattona

with friends.”
THOMAS &, BRADLE
Chief
International Orgonisations Division
eos. SE
bb

iy aan 3 10/D0TO = 1 SECRET

-2



--- Page 296 ---
14-0000

. c .. wey y
. ay 2.
° ) youn f

‘ee

ome

STRICTL ¥ PRIVATS

27 March 1952

. Dear Admiral Miller:

This is tn respect-.te the various Labor 3ervica Compantos
made up of Eastern Suropean exiles now existing in Germany.

There have been Polish Labor and Guard Vompanion ever
since tha war and these are what their nane implies. There
have been set up, however, within the last year Czechoslovak
and Bulgarian Labor Service Companies here, ‘These latter two
represent an activity with which our friends are directly in=
volved, I have been informed by tham upon my inquiry that
should any reference be made by satellite proparanda to
these companies it is desired that in any RF comment upon
4t that these companies should be treated as being what
their name implies.

The Czechoslovak Company included both Czecha and Slovaks,
although I understand that the Slovak Separatists here make
violent efforts to have a separate one for thenselves, The
Bulgarian Gompany is at present made up almost entirely of

adherents of Dimitrov. Further recruitinz, however, in this
respect is now soing on with a policy of barring both Bulgartan

National Front and Dimitrov followers,
I an also informed by my friends here that active plan~
ning is now under way in respect to the Kersten Amendnent,
J should much appreciate it if we could keep informed of any
developnents in this respect here for possible use in RFE
broadcasts and for conversations with friends,
Sincerely,
/s/ SILL
4, 5. Griffith

ce: Mr. Leich
ur. Galantiere


--- Page 297 ---
14-0000

z
!
j
H
2
i
:
i
{
q
a

en amt

+

- SECRET wey
Seamtty information
: ER-2-7715

5 April 1952

MEMORANDUM FOKs Chief, Internetional Organizationo Division
i

‘FROM _ § Deputy Director (Plana)
1
SUBJECT 1 National Comittee for.a Frea Europe ~ Radio
Freo Europe - Hircellancous Recommendations for
Action ‘ :

REFERENCE s Memorandum from C/IO to D/DCI, DD/P and ADPC
dated 27 March 1952

1. I have read the reference semorandun which I note contains
guite a nunber of recomnendsttons for acticn, some of which apply
to the undersigned.

2. I would 1!ke to participate in the Princeton bull session
tut believe it unnecessary for CIA to be represented by so many
pecple. If Ir, Dulles 1s poing I should prefer to drop out. A
further reason for reluctance cn my part to athend this meeting 1a
that I have already passed on to the NCFE people interestcd all of
the ideas and information which I have on the principal theme of this
diecussion. I thercfore feel that, until after the forthcoming meeting
with the British or the devslo;ment of the Psychological Strategy Feper,
which is being lsboriously yround ovt by Admiral Stevens! Ad Hoc
Comittee, I would have nothing new to contribute. However, if Mr.
Dulles is unable to attend and you feel that I should gc, I would he

willing to do 80,

3- Concerning your report of Frank Altschul's feeling of
grievance, I should be glad to sign a letter to him if Mr. Dulles
agreee that I am the proper person to do this. Pending Mr. Dulles?
eoreideration of this matter, will you please prepare in draft form
for my signature @ friendly letter to Hr, Altschul in which you might
coment upon the fact that NCFE-RPE nuw represents one of the most
potent weapons in our entire areenal, and following with an acknowledge-
nent of the very ixportant contribution which Mr. Altschul made toward
the development and shaping of this instrument.



--- Page 298 ---
14-0000

SECRET “
Socwity Information 4

4k, I em somewhat confused by the contents of the action
paray:raph following paragraph 3, in which you Indicate that we
are continuing to urre NCFE to extend cover assistance to the
Kirk Comnittee. On the basis of our most recent conversations
with Mr. Dulles and Aduiral Miller, I wae under the impression
that you were trying to dig up sume other forms of cover = par-
tieularly in view of the reluctance of the NCFE Board to extend
the Crusade cover to the Kirk Comittee. Perhaps this paragraph | .
of the reforence memorandum has been overtaken by events. _——

S. I understand that you ere getting up a memorandum on

the Landowsky case. I am relioved to hear that Landowsky has been
recalled from Greece and that it io uct intended to ae im .

return. y,
\ we POG ee Lean

FHANK 6, WISNER

cc: DDCI (with reference memorandum)

SECRET

Security lator mohca


--- Page 299 ---
“He so
| Feeds tio 7

Sb Ave .

| ape we nee, / Modo

f. 7


--- Page 300 ---
14-0000

_. SECRET : way

_ SéGUHITY INFORMATION a
Fro : . 2 Aon. sa
TRLEDIC TRANSFERS .

*

Step 1. a. Facility (TPTONIC, PILLAR or what! have you) sends
letter of request to KSDIC.

b. Facility sends certified truo copy of request (1a.)
to 10 (via area division involved if not for TPTONIC

as set forth in Stap 2 below),

. Step 2. FOR _TPTO'NI7 only (Includes RGCAKEBOX)

a. IO prepzres letter for ADPC's signature, addrossed
‘to KEDIC, authorizing MEDIC to transfer funds requested
by TOIIC to TONIC on basis of la. above if request is in

order.
>. MEDIC receives letter of authority (2a.).

c. MEDIC transfers funds to TONIC on basis of 2b. and
at the seme tine prepares a letter of transmittal
addressed to TONIC, copy to Id.

d. TONIC, upon receipt of funds fron MEDIC (2¢.), prepares
a letter of acknowledgment addressed to MEDIC, certified

true copy to Id.

e. IO prepares letter addressed to CFD, signed by I0, trans~

mitting receipts 2d. together with certified true copy
of letter 2a. (See 2f below}.

f. IO prepares letter addressed to CFD, signed by CIO,
requesting CFD to reimburse NSOIC for the total amount ‘
of receipts 2e. Note: Letters 2e and 2f are hand
earried to CFD together.

g. CFD, on besis of 2f transfers funds to MEDIC,
h. MEDIC acknowledges receipt of 2g by letter to I0.

Step 3. FOR OTHER THAN TPTCUIC and BOCAFSS0X (after Step 1)

a. Area division authorizes CFD to transfer funds from
: "XXX" Project to M=DIC for transfer to facility by
: letter, signed by appropriate area division chief,
i (Note: This letter comes to IO whose responsibility
i it is to determine that funds are available in
' "XXX" Project).

SECRET

-l-

Fage 1 of 2


--- Page 301 ---
‘Sa BROT aterm Tn SNe Rn oe EY Ur Eel See Rahat

14-0000

a -- SEGRET. =

° SECURITY INFORMATION

Step 3. FR OTHER, THAN TPTON IC_AND BOCAK390X (COS INUSD)

: b. 10 prepares letter to CFD with letter 3a attached
: : for ADFC's signature requesting CFD to transfer funds

to MEDIC. (See 3c. below).
ec. At same time letter 3b. is premred, a letter for

ADPC's signature is prepared by IO authorising MEDIC”
to tranomit the funds to facility(addreased to MEDIC).

ad. MEDIC receives letter of atithority 3c.

e. MEDIC acknowledges receipt of funds which CFD transmits(3b) :

: . f. MEDIC transfdrs funds to facility on basis of 3d and at the

‘ samo time sends letter of transmittal to facility, copy to

2 TO.

Facility, upon receipt of funds from MS3IC, prepares a
letter,addressed to MEDIC, acknowledging receipt of funda 3t. ,
‘certified true copy to I0. (See 1b.)

h. IO upon receipt of letter 3g. prepares letter addressed
to CFD and transmitts same together with copy of letter

‘ _ (eertified true copy) 3e.

Be

NOTE: It will be the responsibility of the Administrative Office/IO to
verify that funds are in fact allotted for each project before

preparing the above papers.

PAM

Distribution:
=X0/10 = Original
Adn 0/10 - 1 copy
PY/iaggio - 1 copy

~2-

. SECRET

Page 2 of 2


--- Page 302 ---
14-0000

mee
7 c

etei

Bayes

. Upee at
Proviziong of frerosed treement Gc feren WePP aad (cA

Ie ds promosed thet an arpeevrent wilch will dnelude ‘the
following be entero! into We .<% snd ‘die

1, A statement te th: eofeet thet subjent, te thie,'c: ourity,
pram, Du retary, ane ngiigy antral: wt tite’ Tata authority of
Bal set forth celow, iets Yee SActnistrstive eed cperaticnal
Freerensibiitty for tn: ooG ust of Ate oretatt alata

yee
2. 7 provislow th:t vn wlll sweadt ca an anrasl
opertting plan and gup-ortins tn'aet for the programe which it plans
to uviertske eupdn: agch fleas yecr, The arprovsd of such operating
prosran ant bul -t by V/A wd] dealule authority to u/:#bo rroceed
ae neeess-ry in thelr judgeent ta acoalirh the objectives set
forth in the a-proved proy cram, anbseet to eantrole art forth below,

wen Fate tae

Yr
3. A provisicn thet NOT +11) mointain adequate acgounting and
fiscal cantrels,
vied
he A provision ¢h $ 9/47 vil) unsertace only thoce procraw
which h.ve been sporeved by ihe
Se A proviston thot SIN wilt rrovite fund. te W/E for
aprreved pregrert.e
ee
be & eravisien thet HAA will furni: hb n-t'cnal polfey rut ance
to 8% for the conduct of sich vrezravn ano that ACE will eonfomne
to such roltaye
Te A proviaicn thet 85% wth] eonforn to security repulattengs
to be erescrihei by (ZA, There wt) inclu e@ the cecurity ele rance
of nrcecacry Pers: omcal, ottainine of s-curity azreesonte from all
witting personnel, ant nocessary physical ocourtty meagurrde
8 A provision ta the effect that the gcceral erzanivat! nal
bythe ang saliry scaleg {neva ing allowances Wili te ar reved
€.
by : ome
% a Mrovision th.! t¥e prerident and viceepresicents ef TCT
wll be ‘enplayed sunteat to the ewnourrence of tity


--- Page 303 ---
14-0000

wa

20, A rroviston thst eff will hove veto authority over \
aotivitise to be un‘ertaten hy BR wtilch are contrary to other -f/ j
SFA og pational relictese ¢ oy SANT, ated ce Has teen tenn ly team, Sat
~ "hee tailed J
U1. A preristan vith respect bo the termination of op rations 1
under thia agreerent.

VF. A provision vith reepoct to invonlftcation of Bt
ddrertora, of Leert, ast eczloyesc by Oike

ewer

We A prosisdon thes dofiner ane Lladiiity of VET ta each

Gyector, afileer, ant aployen of Nath

tp ote
Use A provisdicn to the e-fect thit Serf will provide CIA wth
Pegular progress ant financtal revortse

. toe
1%, A provigion that “2 wlll have authority te eoniuet meh
surveys and adits of UivE aebivitias as it deen necersurye

yo

oy

.



--- Page 304 ---
14-0000

BY WAL Go tes FY BORA CPee PUAORE
PA Sk TE gee Ie es ek Ad

To elardfy the relationsh!~ of 4K to CIA and the recrective
responeiiiiities and autiurities of each for the gontust of HE
cperatd onde

Euckground

There {2 no currently eve: tive sleer statenant aa ta the
respective respansititi¢tsas end authorities of 4.7% and CIA for the
eontuct of of@rationss Tris has resulted in @ nuscer of alzundere
standings and problems with resrect to thea atuinistreation of tiie

project by CIA,
Disgussion
In order to define tho respective

authorities of Wi; k and ULt, it is prorcsed that an azresnent be
entered inte between 8.1E and «IA which will in effet provide fore

B, Foltey, pro.rary tudgetary, aeeurity control, and
veto pover by wha,

Be ‘uojeet to such coners] am'rols direct atsinistrative
and operattonal control over ito opmratioas ty Gi%,

6. The worving out of eavhinery for ouiaitting encusl
operating proyrase and evtpesting bu'gete by 4.1E for a yroval
by CIA (and asjor mbseuent aclitions thereto)

4 Adeaate procrese, financial, on! other reporte by
BCYE to C1A,

An outline of the rrincinal rrovialons of auch an
agreenont fz Let forth in Attachment A,

ft ie the ean ensus of oll concerned fn ~LA thet
something like the arove is es-antial. Thera 4s one teernical
point of di”teren.e, how-ver, tet—en the [9 . ivisien and
tho Adainictrative .taff ‘swelal, Thle is the nattcr of @
CIA regulation (Vecorancas for ALL ta'f and Bivisina cnlofe

af


--- Page 305 ---
14-0000

furjeets Categories of lereonnel front John Wy Corris)

to the effect th.t all sdttla: rerosmmel of C/A propriotory
@ryantzaticns mist Rue a costract relationship with ~la,
The anderlying rearone for tite requlrecent are (1) verrral
cortrval, (2) neourity eontrol, and (3) to provice 3 haria for
estab iehing a lezal [lability to auch porsunnel in the event
of & elats of ang cint, f6 4s the view of the Ii -iviricn
thot the above three recul(recents eoclt bea better an! more
aleanly net by ane avpesceont > tween VTA and tf E, rather than
by several caparste apreemerts tetcran witting dativi sals and
GiA,

The office of the General Counsel, Cit, Nag intleated
infenwlly that there is no legs] off ction to euah on a- bree
went bstxsen kG F aid GTA, tia alee eoneure inforwally that
one amtrset betwaan NY and CTA da proferahls to ceveral
emtracts betemen in iviuals acd CfA,

Rego: 2 of

Yo «(edo therafarea Preserenmied thet the 15 vtetm be amthorised
to megotiste an .creerent vith & '" in cooridnetion with the ofico
of Sentral Conncel ani other CiA units wiich wll] incerporste the
subetanse of the provisions in Atracteent 4,

2, 1 fe Bleo rocascomted that the OOo er other arpropriate 6 4
authority set aciie the arency ro culetian recairing that all witting
persomns) of rroprietery trot ata te re juired t6 oxteute a contract
with Cid, .



--- Page 306 ---


--- Page 307 ---
14-0000

~ AS
StuURITY INFORMA Tt
c
0

Pr
Y
MIMORANUM Oi: Mr. Joye Samary 23, 1952.

FROM ER =~ Mre Barbour

Tha Functtone of |

In our expertenee 2 tw, interpretations of their
funetions, between whte: ndulun swine from time to thee, have
dovelopead. One which Lu set ferth in the seperc im tao miscion of

-NCFKE and RFE, plves diynity and importance to tie Nationa: Guncils as

the leadership orrans of the zastern Luropcan peoples in tierir strugule
arainst the respective Communist dictatorsnips and defines we principal
function of RFE as providing a way of comunication between these
councils and the homelands in conducting tie Liberation stir.erle. In
the other view, which tends to rovern RFZ operations at whe ;recent
time, the R°2 is apparantly considered a predominantly Averican
enterprisa with the objective of achieving a hirer, hett-r, sore hard+
hitting, and more publicized procaganda prorsraa tnan the 774 Lut not
differing fundamentally from the character and course that 794 has
already marked out. ‘The latter interpretation reduces tie macition of
extles connect+d with the RFE to that of orsflesulonal exupinyecs enyared
by the Americans, and tho flationai Councils ar given aq cicect

responsLbLliitles.

As between these two theses, agrees senerally wits. we firet.
If RF continues along its present course it will in cur s¢inion Lecane
in the end simply another VCA (in fact the provraming of une two
organizations tends already to seek a comion cenominator) ent disappoint
the exiles and tne peoples in their homelands. Tils will leat to
competitive issues with VOA as is already tne caso With toe gal tie
lanpuare programs. If RFE is te achieve its firet promise ané full
justification it mist become the Voice of nast:rn huropean freedom
speaking throurh the moutns of the Eastern “Muropean leaders t.emeelves.

' broadcasts are made in tne name
2c exile legwiers of tantern Turope
ional

EE believes that unless the
of _ National Councils and the
can sneak rermularly to their people by this medium tie
Councils wili never becouse more than eraatims of arrested development
and, deprived of tie cossitility realizing one of their zest

‘important funetiong, will preoccuny tiemselves Wits sterile vartisan

rivalry and internai differences.

sationa. Councils

As the reference memorandum points out, if ue
. they

are to assume tnis important respensilility in relation te uw
must becom: effective orvanizatirns. likewise anrecs that tie



--- Page 308 ---
14-0000

treated in tho refernnen paper, nasely (1)

SECRET

ni

Hunearian National Council, being the only National Council which is
aetive in any derres aa a unified antl effective leatershij;. group,
cnuld be piven tan vroposed sponsihilities at .nce and that as

ooon as the other aational pre gume clrective arganisations RFR

facilities should be mate available to them

BEE op

snob seen cufficiently
ans of brincim: about
the formation of unified and effeetive National Councils, and (2) the

extent and character of sipsrvision to, be exereised over liational -

Councils once they undertake len activittes.

Such 2 course raises two probleas wht

EF concurs that, Cre snowld devote itself as a vricrity and primary
function to fostering the ernation of effective National Ccuncils. The
reference paper supseate that to inis end NCFE give nore attention to
the problem anc te nore pusitive meacures in the nature of interven-
tion in assisting the national egrouns to solve their difficulties. It
gecns to ER that by the very nature of “tne arransenent wiereby the
National Councils operate in tae & ean milieu aad receive financial
accistance froa the ‘CFE Late: tina is inevitable and shat: the NCFE
has not refrained fron intervesdnz. Tue problem apvarently is not
whether the NCFE should intervene in tie affairs of the National
Councils but what Kind of intervention sinuld vrevail. Fu continues
to believe that the ideal situation obtains wien a National Council
onerates efinctively witn the le ~assible intervention, and that a

national proup should be encoura sleve affective organization
and operations throurn its own ef lo: ive intervention and
certain types of Intecrertion enn Lroduee such ham as to defeat the
vary purpose we seck ta realize, ot oo the develonnent of strong,
dipnified, and immertant leaders. ormanizations to conduct the
national lileration effort fre .road, The wrene types of interven-
tion inimical to this chjective incivde actions which are widely
construed as(1) being in favor cZ, or in cprosition to, one candidate
or party as avainst anotner in tie organization of a National Council,
(2) representing an atvemst to

29se a policy with respect to the
future constitutional orranizatic

noof a stave or in relation ti foreign

states or Yoreifpn po:.ulation srouns, or (3) releratin- exile leaders
t- a suborniinate position «2 beins exployees af the Anericans. Intervene
ticn of the rorevolne tyves must be avoided by all neans, yet on the
other hand it is essential to accire, by intervention ir necessary,
that mo National Council falic under cictatorial rule and that incivi-

duals are heicd w accountabi 9 that our undertaking does not
decenerate into sim ly a sensionary system for subsicizinr tie conduct

of rsarty politics.

SiCREL |



--- Page 309 ---
14-0000

. SECREL ~

-3-

Tae ctroncest ree in inducing the national exile groups to pull
thenselves together inw some kind of unified and active councils may
well be our insistence that until they do so they will not become
elirible to take over the provosed RFK res gibi! lithes. tf one
National Councii rmeosives access to
an incentive to the ctiers without our
in order vo tuab they way do the sance

the National Councils
Py orts to their respoctive
tiat they will need extensive professional
nericans or by their own Nationals, in

to be exercised ¢
tne broadcas tin.

As to the
which have taken ¢
homelands, it is ob
assistanec, whether
preparing the day-to crograms. ‘The councils will probably wish
of their ow ini tats y after they have ciscovered what daily
propraminz involves, not to fo behond (a) policy determinaticn as
to type of pregray (>) utilization by the political and intel-
leebial axile leaders of the opportunity to sreak from tine to time
to their people, anc ic) decicion on selection of certain program
items. If thie assz>cdion is correct then our controls might properly
be Limited t» (1) previding each croup a recorded outline of American
foreign policy for ga:iance if they discuss any vhase of this subject
or its implications, (2) preventing partisan atuses such as the
¢isprovortionate use of the HFR by one party although making sure
that the representatives of each may nave access to RFE facilities if

LNACARNXEEXSENARN
party revfesentatives so wisn, and (3) conducting an ex post facto
review of programs in avoidine abises of any tyse. In entra’ would
be desirable to allow councils the maxinu: scope of activi ty and
resconsibility in the effort they are capable of undertaking in
orcer to nurse the health and vitality of these councils as leadership
organizations in the Literation strugsle.

HCle deler/al
y 23, 1952

SLCREY

setae utente mera 2 Set


--- Page 310 ---
14.0000 iss
: nuat retain none ha n> webbie
. _ shes aoe taba a pi een tae mc CAS sant

SECRET

UNCLASSIFICO RESTRICTED CONF = «TIAL
: «-  SSENDER WILL CHRCLE CLASSIFICATION RAD SOT TOM)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEMCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

Tisatiat OATE

ian ee
HA

ILA Brns

(7 Wrrovan C77 taroratton C77] sranarure
(Therion (1 pirect repuy (J return

Chonnent (J preparation oF repty——! 01 spatcu
(Aeoncurrence (J recounenpation =} rive

reams: Taz Qin Nh. we foe ad

RESTRIC Leo

cUSLassiFuen

SECRET COMFIDENTEAL

Fonw mo.
scp 1047



--- Page 311 ---
Rae EE ee nm Se alana eri var

14-00000
oe ee ne a me i te rE Na RE tN A ASE HERE Ma AR

. : April 1, 1982

MEMORANDUM

708 Adniral Miller

FRO: Mr. Myers

Attached is presentation describing our exile personnel .
policy. This paper is prepared in two parts, tho sscone pert of . ,
which is not yet in type, The part delivered horewitn is, 1 feel, . :
a@ precise rebuttal of any overall uninformed orlticisam ts enich we
have been subjected,

In every instance where thers has been apecif{: sriti-

. cisz involving individuals employed at New York or Munic: xe are . :
in a position to rebut charges of Communint infiltratioa an¢ to . :
defend every member of the staff thus attacked, . i ‘

: Upon the improssion that it is an adequate statemrt in
: writing, {t can bo delivered, if you so desire, to Mr. fnrtcs for
a study and contrast with the supposed allegations he pretambly
hus under scrutiny. Should Ehrang ask for information cf + spe-
cific neture, Part Two of this paper ean then bs furntaned nim if
you wish to do so. \



--- Page 312 ---
14-0000

fd

NCFS KUILE PERSONNEL SELECTION IN RELATION TO
(1) EXILE PoLitics,

(2) RFE BROADCAST POLICY, AND

(3) EXTERNAL CRITICISHN

=Ie

INTRODUCTORY HISTORY

A.

Formative Stage

At its inception, the National Committee for a Free Europe
belfeved thst its Iron Curtain broadessting operation, Rudlo Free
Evropa, could and shoul be developed and pursued throwsh the mediun
of "National Councils" or "Committees of Liberation” composed of
exile grours trea the targot oountrles, It wus considered that
prominent exile leaders and porsonalities of each nstionality group

could express to their captive countrymen, entirely without American

Advice acd guidanoo, the message af hop whieh NCFS proposed to sand.

This coscert was not fulfilled. Experience in attempting to weld 9

talented, dedicated group of exiles into @ non-partisan broadcasting
operation early demonstrated that without Anorican control tne mission
of RFE would be lost in the jungle of exileeworld politios. It scon
became evidunt thet the leadership among the exlles wie neither suffi-
clently streag nor personally willing to rise above the political cross
currents, Tactional rivalries, ant e;linteregroup weaxnosses characters

istically reainiscent of the political affairs of all Estern Buropean

couatrios. hose factors militated against the original plan of permitting

em RR eR I CAO Se ate eTcoba SNAN


--- Page 313 ---
14-0000

exiles,’ through their leossly organized Couceils or Committees, to

wholly develop, manage, asd control RFZ broadcantings

Since tho advert of KFE was the mect important development
artecting the oxiios whieh hed occurred since their flight from hone,
they quickly undorstood ond applauded its implications and potential
effect on their futures. Tirough this tustrument they sould once
again become prominent and powerful in the offairs of the homolands -

once more they could contend for place srd power,

Selection of personnel for the purpose at hand quickly became
a political football of rival leaders, perzonealities, and groups.

Rightists, Leftists, Centriste, Labor Zlezents, and Splinter-groups

argued with us for advancezent of their particular personal or political
views, Sponsorah{p of their own adherents &s RFE employees through whom
such views would be broadcaxt to their captive countrymen became the
pattern of their pseudo covperation. This petcern was followed to such
an extent thet ordinary progress and sentiile development of our basic
purpose of truly free broadcaste under exile control soon appeared to

be not only impracticeble, but dangerous. For example, tho Mational
Councils Division attempted to inaugurate troadcests to Crechoslovakia
under ‘the auspioes of a Crecheslovak Netiorsl Council. The Council was
and is mado up of oxile persorslities of differing political views and
parties. Its factions preceeded to engage in endless disputes and ire

recencilatle olaims for ecntrol of seript preduction and program ecntent.

Stoveak "Sepomatiota” arguing for the tots! independence of Slovakia



--- Page 314 ---
14-0000

p

sought that objective, while Crechs desired opposite viows to be aired
and edeyceted the rebirth of pre=war Czechoslovakia. Each group sponsored
and insisted upon employment of its own more or less qualified adherents

upoo tre soeumption that its special views would be thereby expressed
r
te the captive Czechoslovak audience of RFE.

Similar activities wore
pursued iy Hungarians, Bulgarians, ond Poles until the futility of per-
mitting the exilo Counaila to control the destiny and broadvasting
yolictes of RFE was made clear beyond refutation, It became tragically
edvious thet uncontrolled exileswerld Couneiis and profyssional poli-

ticians could not agree on personnel selection or program content.

In spite of every effort to induce harmony in and obtain proper

eocperation from the *"Counoils*, "Comuittoes", and individuals, RFE was

eonfreated with an impasse. Tho ulternative theory and present polioy
af Averican sclection of non-political exile personnel was the only way ..

out. It bas worked. Technically qualified personnel produce properly

oriented programs =- and have becn doing so with documentod success
aince July, 1950. Disappointed exile politicians, professional exile
caxp followers, disturbed Arerican special pleaders, and alarmed Gommuniat

agents all scream, snipe and snivel -- but RFE programs are doing the job.

NCFE-RFE records of this stage can be supplied by Frederic R,
Dolbeare, Vico-President, Natiora) Councils Division, and Robert 5. Lang,

Director, EFE. The current policy has the complete endorsement of these

officers and of the Board of Directors of NCFE.



--- Page 315 ---
14-0000

ee ee

8B.

Devolopment Stage

Upon the Collapse of the original concept of broadcasting undor
exile auspices, RFZ nocersurily utilized sumo exile personne! endorsed

and recommended by the lasders of the various nationality groups. As

technical radio facilities came inte being, exiles with radio background
or writing talont were required for the production of programs. This .

involved using individuals eminently qualified by oxporience to do 4

radio job of script writing, announcing, acting, etc., without regard

for the fact that such individuals might be pyrsona non grata with one

or another political faction or lesder of an exile “Council”. It also

involved elimination of proven ineffictent, inept or unworthy individuals
without regard for their exile "Council" sponsorship. in either instance

criticism of RFE was predicteble and indesd was alwaya forthcoming -=

often in viruleat and dishenest form.

The dey to dey operetion of BFZ developed new techniques ang
long range plans which sade it impossible ta employ non-entities of no

politicos! color or conviction, The bent people to produce programs in

harmony with NCPE-KPE purposes and policies negessarily were persons
know in their own countrice for their views on domestio political af-
fairs and their antieCommunist achivitios. Uardehitting propaganda
required hardehitting personalities wioss know: association with RPZ
and ita programs would add validity and significance for our captive
eudiences, Gradually, therefore, the nationality desks of RFE at Kew

York and Munich wero staffed with tested, qualified oxiles who had been

-4-


--- Page 316 ---
14-0000

Adentifiod publicly with domostic political philosophios at {osue in
their own countrios. Many, in fact, moat of the staff paople are con-
troversial figures among their own countrymen in oxactly the samo way
that prominent Americans ars controvoraial in our political arena. Many
Indeed aro mombors of tha Cousesis, but Gre mon of auffiotent stature

to give their primary allegiance to the non-partisan policy of RFE. The

“dociaive factor is that tinrs be no controversy ur yuostion about their

anti-Comiunist convictions and records.

were ae 4

At this point, 1¢ must be noted that our target countries have
bean subject to repetitive political ferment prior to and following

World War Il, as woll as the sucessaive occupations of Nazi and Communist
Araies.

i The tompor of the times, therefore, in which these exiles have
: lived for the past fifteen years has been one of excitement, bitterness,

recrimination, rivalries, and personal turmoil << all stemming from both
domestic and foroign struggles for power. The times have produced a
bumper crop of refugeo traitors, collaborators, and opportunists and at
the same time have developed purse Aestera style democrats, true national
patriots, and unselfis:: honest men. Tho exilo who stood by placidly
through the era is not much good, howevor talented, as a militant messen-

gor of hope via RFE; exiles who were honorably active in public affairs

at home, and who had radio talont were, therefore, the only kind of

personnel suitable for RFE purposes.

As the necessity for Amorican operational control of nationality

desks became self-evident, the only feasible personnel policy was to

e
a
iy


--- Page 317 ---
14-0000

Ce.

Ae

employ properly qualified individuals, regurdlesa of exile politics.

In the exvcution of this policy individuals wo were useless’ were
eliminated without regard for political sponsors. This process still
goes one Similarly, talentnad exile personalities recruited fron any
sourca wore employed whorover noodad, This process still goes one

Both processes are in vogue with a healthy disregard for exile pulitical
nuances and protesta. Nolthor process is satisfactory to self-styled
exile leaders since it follows that the appointment of an individual
sponsored by one faction as a ropresentative of its views, inevitably
will ovoke howls of rage and criticism from the opposite faction. This

is an accepted fact of exile life. We have to live with it and gat on

with the job.

Summary

Our formative and development experiences evolved the presant
and continuing exile personnel policies of RFZ. Exile desk employees,
whether at New York or Munich, must respond to three testa;

(a) Security cluarance,

(b) Endorsement of technical profictency,
(c) Sufficient stuture to eliminate exile partisan

interests from programa content.

-Il-

CRITERIA AND METHODS OF PERSONNE, S2LECTION

Recruitment -- General Principles

The best source of exile personne! is referral by “non=

professional” exiles themselves, Acong all nationalities there are


--- Page 318 ---
14-0000

many talented refugees who need employment and who can supply RFS's
neei for script writers, actors, announcers, etc. Accordingly, desk
stalfing has been accomplished by examining the qualifications of duly
reguzmended individuals, whether the recomzendations come from political
personalities or otherwise. Selection is based on tho ability of the
individual to fill a need efficiently in turning out or participating
in planned programs. Recruitment is determined only by ideological
security, independence of exile politics, and personal ability. This
is not to say that many individual exiles naving decided personal con=
vietions and wall-knowm political records are not employed, but a
positive statement is made that those exile employees who now produse

RFE programs reflect the policies and guidance of RFE rather than proe

motion of partisan objectives and personalities.

B. Recruitment -- Detailed Procedures

fhe personnel complement of each RFE nationality desk is
i founded on a hard core of dependable individuals, usually two or three
people, including the chief of the desk. "Dependability" is established
by exhaustive inguiry at all available sources to establish the desir-
ability, reliability, technical proficiency and security of the working
core of the desk. Sources used ares
a (a) Exile political personalities in the United States,
1 . (b>) Exile references of nigh standing and know im-
. partiality in the United States and Qverseas,
ty {c) Overseas contacts and personal knowledge of our
i Amerioan representative in Europe. (Royall Tyler-Paris),

to (d) Checks and balances of our political advisor at
Munich (W. E. Griffith),


--- Page 319 ---
14-0000 7 ———
- a cern ony ve cen mi tne NE A Nan Lee! Bilton wa ts ame RTS

" ~

(e) British Broadcasting Corporation, where applicable,
(£) Voice of America, where applicable,
~ {g) Special confidential sources. ,

Theso tests having been applied, confidenoe is placed in these
faltial personalities, and particularly in the Deak Chief, to catry
forward rvcruitment of additional personnel as needed in collaboration '
with the American Director of RFE {Robort BE. Lang, New York ), and his .
associate officials. Tho leading porsonslitios of each desk know what

. ia expected of them and since they respond to the ‘established oriteria,
the resulting full personnel complement is a group of exiles who, not-
with standing their porsonal political views, are suitable and capadle 1
prograg production people. They meet our basic requirement of daily

production of truly freo and properly constructed propaganda broadcasts

capable of avaking tha widest possible audience response in our target

countries.
In brief, the mission of RFE being conceived as a marketing
problex, the best available salesmen are procured, trained, and utilised

to sell tno market.

€. keceruitment -- Special Security Meusures A

Since RFe, although a private enterprise, is by extension a
collateral instrument of American national policy, special precaution
is exercised to insure the ideological security of all employees, in=

eluding exiles. In the case of exile personnel specifically, the



--- Page 320 ---
Neogene Teme ne eR dant nile re oe AEN ERR a A EL AME ea a EN rah wc

additional approval of tho Personnel Director of NCFE is required before
employment, either at New Yorx or Munich. Thus, even if a proposéd

exile employes mevts all the described oriteria ho may not be employed

without this ultimate approval. c

The Personnel Dirostor of NCFe utliizes appropriate and de-

pondablo sources of information to determine the accoptabllity of

personnel from a seourity standpoint. His sources are investigative in

nature and are conclusive as to the ideological record and security

: _ acceptability of tho proposed employee. In doubtful casds the Personnel

Director consults with the Vice-President in Charge of the National :

Councils Division and with the Director of Radio Frea Europe. These

three officers of NCFE jointly follow a policy of rojecting candidates

about whom there is the slightest doubt. It {1s to be clearly understood

that in making decisions of this kind the conflicting tnterests and
frantic representations of politically minded exile leaders and groups

are ignored. Acceptance or rejection of candidates is wholly based on

ideclogical security ond talent value.

D. Summary

(1) All nationality desks of RFE at New York and Municn are .

staffed by individuals who hive passed all tests described Abovds

(2) All programs produced and aired by tho nationality desks
are checked and scrutinized by American supervisory personnel for .ideolog-

ical content, audience acceptance and conformity to basic NCFE-RFS policies,

(3) These conditions have been progressively in force since

July, 1950,



--- Page 321 ---
14-0000

Ae

1k ee

RFE POLICY GUIDANCE FOK PERSONNEL

General Comment

The programs alred by RFE are not left to whim or chunce. All
programs and tho personnel responsible for them are controlled by a

written polioy aanunl. The manual sets forth in minute detat} the -
position and policy of RFE on every topic beamed to our target countries,
Tho manual is the daily guidance of all employoos, both American and
Exiles doviation from its rules 4s not permitted. Continuous gcrutiny
of nanuscripts and resultant broadcasts is maintained by American om

ployoos to inaure that thero are no deviations.

‘Tho policy manual of RFE reprecenta the conaidored views of
the responsible officials, including the Boerd of Directors, of NCFE.
It fe a statoment of the principses end purposes of NCFE expressed in
operational form. It is conaidered and maintained as a atrictly con-

fidential document, but it is of course availablo for examination by any

proper authority.

| Fhe policy manual is in strict conformity with current American

national policies as evidenced by the following quotation from article

Ones 1

"As @ non-governmental radio staticn responsible to
the millions of American citizens who support it,
RFE cannot take a line contrary to United States
Government policy or to the beliefs of the American
.poople reflected in the Conatitutlon of the United
States and in Arerican Institutions”.

-We


--- Page 322 ---
14-0000

The above quotation 19 understood by exile porsonnel] par=
ticularly to be a sclemn injunction against ideolcgical program content :
which in any way violates tio letter and spirit of Amorican policy and
ideale, It 4s 4 guarantoo to the American people and to our captive
Mistenors thet RFE and tho men who make its programs are unconpron! sirgly'

opposed to tho Comrunicst regimes now in power in Sovint Huasia and the _ i
i

satolilty countrios. i

RFE Policy Defined by Handbook (Direct Quotutions)

1, Tho purpose of RFE 1s to contribute to the liberation of

the Nations imprisoned bohind tho Iron Curtain by sustaining their

morale and stimulating in them ao spirit of non-sooperation with the

Sovlot-dominated regimes by which thoy are, for the time being, ruled. i

2. The central characterietic of RFE is that it is the {n-
strumont. of men who ure engaged in fighting for freedom and justico.
As such, it encourages resistance to every tyrant, great and small, in
the countries it addresses, Its speakers speak see ao men of good will
who seek to contribute to tho elimination of old enmitics and the

building ef an endurirg European democratic order.

3. As a freo forun in which exiles speak to their own people
RFE is particularly dedicated to arguments by which exiles seek to
persuade their listeners of the all devouring ambitions of Soviet

Imperialism, the cruelty and unworkability of Communist Institutions

elle



--- Page 323 ---
14-00000

MeO ote at oat hah pete ec canne

and the proven advunteges of the denocratic way of life for the worker,

the peasant, the administrator, and the business-and professional

strata of society.

4. RPE tékes counsel with exile leaders and ‘te respectful
of their views, but its policy is not designed to furthor the oapiras

tions of any aingle oxile leader or party.

5. HFE policy is further based upen acceptance of the prin=
ciple that oach of the liberated pecples shall be free to dotermine

for itself the political and social institutions under which it will

live onco it hus been liberated.

6. Finally, the following summary in tho nature of a spucific ©

“Limitation on program oontont is quoteds

"It is indispensable thut all concerned grasp clearly
that RFE is a multierational station established to
contritute to The liberation of ail the peoples it
addresses, and not rerely of one of those peoples.
RFE policy is therefore commanded by the limitation
that nothing may be said over its fucilities to one
national audience which will destroy the confidence
in RFE of its other audiences or whioh is likely to
induce any of its audiences to:prefer communist rule
toa liberation which sight appear to promise domina-
tion by a neighboring people.”

ele

Soe Haein artnet tending De EO Inge e


--- Page 324 ---
14-0000

SECRET
In reply reter (D1 769
tor

31 Maroh 1942

Lear }ins

On ono of tho natters Wich ve dincusset on tecranday, Lobe,”

tw ratte: poowl inte. duchec! letter, wo recuire ovo aseirtsnce
from you. be Lave gone over this tajto thoroughly ext find Mint
thio Lu the situation.

& The munter of indfgemrs pedrle wideh fnew: will ©
agreo to ineluue in their plan on our Lohalf ia woz Jirited,

be This betig: the cons, we reculsn froz you 4 caomAlae
tion of nanan of indjonoue reople, mt to exceed thirty, whom
you woul! coneicer iniis;enscble for the resestsblish-ent of cn
operation ointinr to that of Nenneth’s firm in anotrer erca, in
tine of rial heat. It 1a possibic, but mt absolutely certein,
that we can arrange to incluce this group of thirty in our
provisions for tire of trouble. :

0. tnreover, we feo] tnt it wuld te umtse for us
te arprosch the Dbepartuert or defence officials at tris tine.

©, nO, therefore, muiycgert thet you approecr. the
Departzent of Veferise directly and indepundent..: .itn no reference
to the fact that ve heva an interret:in the matter ac a Vole, ans
witt, no reference to our inturswert in-any part of it (e.c. Ue
moter thirty above), \e feel that denural Clay era other
infivential citicene woo are concernei with your orgertzation
Bey Le of ascistemoe tn the direct &p;roneh which we have

recommended,

I need not ereure you that tile cause is one of special
interest on ow part; mor do I nee: to etress the practical
coneiderations within the a:eirting Wpartrent whieh coclel
us to caolare our ovn limitations and to sugrest the cirect
inde;ontent aprroach, for you are, 1 a: sure, the first to
understend a probion of tile tyyee:

eee
wee


--- Page 325 ---
14-0000

Ta con;iling the list of thirty nwor, you should I belfove,
elwore Inciividiuals who fit ints the “Indicpeneable" cetegory by
virtue of their programln: au iden generation capabilities .
rather than becsuse of enginocring or other teclnioal backgrounds i

1 You vil] perhapa wish to know that a copy of this jetter te
, being sont by Allon to Ji. ivphoe to wton Alen has recently sent Cook
a Lolated interis reply.

I hope that we ciny bear fr03 you in repord to this let at
ep early vate. ‘Ville wo rejulre tho neneg, for your own informae
tion, these nases—according ta jaresent arpangenentse-would be
828 known only to our own pesple, not to tre military suthorities.
Yor the latter, numbers we boro will suffice,

Youre sincerely,

CIO/NEVsb1j _
Uictributions
Orig. - Addre:.sco .
1 ~ Hughes (ae stated above)
1 ~ CIO
2-HhI

1 = TONIC CHKOHO

SECRET

echt og, we eh.


--- Page 326 ---
14-00000

In rezly refer

3 Yareh 1952

Tear tins

T shold as resists your cleeusciay a astter of

core intcre:t & ws with th Yalterc, If agroeatle
to hin ant ts yous we shew lt like to heve f¥na you a few
sheets of Radin Free Burore stationery > we for a
letter, along ‘hs inc of the attached dra‘t, to an
individual. in Penera ity who has 6 redio station auefu)
to our parpceer, The tra‘t is, I talieve, ealfeexrlmitory,
although net rcecoorlly in tie finel form the letter will

sO, In oa:@ yx are willing t> ansiet us a6 au; 0. tod,
we weald handle t'e nuwey ant accomiines for ite You
will note, rourer, Ua the ro i lity exista that the +
funcs wll be sttrituted to ‘enneth'a organi scationg

Plaasa return vith your rayly tha enclose! Cricte
¥e will nrovice yu -ith a coy of the let: -r which io
sont, if the rlan is earrled ute

“hAnoerely,
Oliver Hat-ood
ClO/NAT Oly
Mstrtbutimne
. Orig = Aacreaseg
lo CIo
@ RI
lo T°xg Chrono

l= l0fb 0 oy


--- Page 327 ---
14-0000

ew Tork
LO Leoemer 1852

fp, Jaoss |

Radic “Eb ¢tan Continental
Tarara City ‘ :
Tecy Jin -

“hoeurp or, fo betieve Tas now in
eB to gomtat international
y acnt

Foltesin op our
arogiticn te aclity
cormuntia is the hanar:

edd pot beds but tol:
Un erercumd a/ ter
Dove a cersonmal inberest
suse oc dane ta trepr the western world Crees

Faron, “p the very meturs of
its charter, camot ain : 3 ¥- thin tris fanicr heres
tut in the <
groep oF y:
Aes -minet ta ay

trva-t da kee-tn-

Atve ti “teonal
{arse fist, whe ws.
fay $he comcunist renima,

vr

at

th

ste this eres the tee:
ine dnhée rerts o>
Mart thet y

ur AbA slay pad oP
ito Tan Pag iy a lead

I ay ah: - =
yu the : *s ar es0400 ners. i opts
which t Bove -
eo iver 2!
fread. tr
ory and: atl.

1
orsanizveti a ene nt
eit necd ates: ghane
azurce of tag fun
‘
rrr wet fo arcyrebs
: ating : nara lay
Tenetis, trtace. atom cl tp GN tet of
salaries af re unai, °

e

Tlese Tet me cor. z ing Hity & Later in cas
mds lesan int: wterocrives ty. din ividually, ant ia-t in
ery

z
tehalf af hidis Pree Furope sith wocen Lai affiifateeg 2

by the wa fo met bat heer reese tire Se has ivi ¢ &
nove ;

het me he-r whether yo w{il be alle to tae U:ls one

Tourn

(Ql mows ornare th tof -Sarstane 41 tole
i

Clere om avo fet t. uw.)


--- Page 328 ---
anne AN AT A ech Rita lame coma

14-0000

Iris 21 pil $2.
ny ai 5, ac

° s Suc— omen

ie
bo

pe at

OTe a ec ee NN NAR ce te EAN TEE AEM

+.

1. UNCLASUFIED RESTRICTED «TUL
(GENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TOP AND BOTTOND

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP

INT

OR

Deputy Director, Plans
_|_Chief, International Org.

__ Deputy Director |

$3] vecamnon

CO ovnect esa
(CO comment. (71 peepasarion of eEPLy O ossraros
(CD) concunsence (CD stcoswowanon Com

nemanns: 75 fate Lrvb -



--- Page 329 ---
vo ere Aan sn RT ER I ac sa Sra Seta Lae aE

i Ui March 1952

Dear Franke

IT have been hoping t> see you here in
washineton or tn Saw York for aome time past as
I want to take the ooportunity to tell you how
meh wo al} anpreetata the outstandin. vork you.
did in connection vith "CPs. «hen we cet to
gather, I shall Save an opportunity ty express
this appreciation more Milly.

Meanwhile, oleasa let me know ff you olan
to coma to sashinsteon and I will do tne sare if
and whon I get up to New York. Unfortunately,
recently i have been tied down hers with very oe
little opportunity to see ny friends in New York.

’ Sincerely,

Frank Altscacl, ‘94.
LO wail Street
New York, Ne Yo

AwDs led
Distribution
Orage - Adds
1 co ~ Chrono
2 ce = Fe-s
1 ce = NCFE file

2

EN



--- Page 330 ---
14-0000

corr
- FRANK ALTSCHUL
730 Fifth Avenue
New York 19, Ne Yo
Room 1701

Tel, Judson 6-5526
April 3, 1952

Dear Allen,

Thank you for your letter. I have no
present intention of coming tc Washington as for
the past week I have been knocked out by this virus
infection that has been going around. Howaver, I
look forward to seeing you whenever you find it

convenient to drop in.
Yours sincerely,
/s/ Frank
Mr. Allen ¥. Dulles

1308 ~ 29th Street, NeW.
Washington 7, DeCe

6 aN AREER RRR ON Et ES. aD a,


--- Page 331 ---
14-0000

co

SECRET
Security tiurnanon

$ april 1957

MEMONANDUM FOKs Chtef, Internsticaal Orjanizations Divigian

TROM 1 Deputy Directsr (Plans)
SUBISCT $ Wetional Comittee for a Pree Svrope = Radi
Free Evrope + *iscellaneces Eecomiendation# Zor
ae Action -

RAFERENCE 4 Meucrandua fron ¢/T0 to D/DCI, DD/P and acre
dated 27 Marek 252

1. I heave read tho refcrente “esorandim which I note enmcteins
quite a nuaber of recomendations for action, ser of which aorly
te the undersigned,

2. I would l‘ke to particiznata fn the Princeton bull seerion
Yut believe it unnecessory for CZ. to be renresented by so sary
veople. If “r. Dulles is going 7 szculd prefsr to drop ont. &
further reason for reluctance or. xy vart to attend this sesttur is
adat I have alr: ady passed on te. te SCPE peonie tnterestad ali of
the ideas and information which I 2ave on the crincipal trena oT this
Giscussion. I therofore feel thet, wtil efter the fortheamiag meeting
wita the British or the develo mars cf tho Psrehaloyieal Straniuty Faver,
ubien ts being laborioualy prounc <-* br Adaira]l Stovune! Az te
Committee, I would have nothing naw te centritute. However, 2° Sire
Dalles ia unetle to attend and you feel that I aheuld go, I wmiic pe

willing to do 80.

3. Concerning your report of Frank Altechults feellay ac

grievance, I shold te glod to sije a letter to bin if “re. Baile

aevss that I am the croper pcraor 2¢ do thie, Perding Ye. Incier?

eongideration of this matter, will rou sleare cresare in drafts Zorn

fee ay signature a friendly lettar so 4r. Altscheal in wilen yom aignt

@ument upon the fect that BCFI-KFR aow reprerents une of tae sort

peagat weapons in our entim areersi, ard followizy vith an eornorledre-
* ewat of the very inzvertant contr: oa which Yr. aitechul ssce toward

Ve development and shaping of th’s icstrument,

Be

SoORET

Ser OY s-eonee


--- Page 332 ---
\ ~.. SECRET
Security tformation

4. Tam somewhat confused by the contente of the action
para;raph following pararraoh 3, in whieh you Indicate that we
gre continuing to urro HCFE to extend cover sasistence to the
Kir Comnittoe. On the basts of our most recent conversations
with "fr, Dulles and Admiral Hiller, I wan under the inpreceion
thet you were trying to dig uo soma other forms of cover = pare
ticularly in view of the reiuctence of the NGPE Board to extend
the Crusade cover ta the Kirk Comittee, Perhepa this psragrapn
of the reference semurandum hig tocn overtakon by ev.ntb.

5. 1 understand that you are pettiny up a sesorcadua on
the Landowsky care, J am relieved to hear that Landowsxy nes teen
recalled from Greeco and that {t fs not tntunded to seve him

return.

Gigntd) FRARC @. FISHER

. PRANK GC, WI6EIR

cos vucrlaten reference - emorsndum)

SECRET
Security trtrmetoe


--- Page 333 ---
14-0000

. Varos
~ wk Lies
+ . ye ta

7 31 Marols 1952

MEONRALWUHY Was Doputy Dirsswr of Central Intelligence

Via Asaistant “rector for foley Coordination
Deputy Rireotor (Flans)

SUBS ECT: Radio Free Europe

le. As of April lat, this vision ;lane to diseontimo its
routine informational suppers te xadio Free Lurope. This suprort,
which hav been carried out by a staff of aiout rourteen poople,
originated in tie necosaity for KAZE to have accoss to Foreign
Broadcast Intolligence Jur.aries, Slate Lepariment information,
azd other overt information w-ich cana into CLA. It becane apparent
smetine ago there was not enoush of this saterlal to fill out NE
broadcasts and, as you know, AYE hired the so-called stringero to
@o the cilef nevs~gathering job. Ine inferuation cent RFE by us
has for some time been accessible to AFZ directly from tho agencies
whien publish it. Our decision to cut out tls service has the
concurrence of HFY. and makes posulble tne assignment of fourteen

people elzemhors.

2. To take the place of this ateff, 19 Division proposes to
have ons or t people cancentrate on developing ideas aad policy
and theme guidance for RFS along the lines waich tho DPCI has
sugsested in conversation with ne. One good man of necesnary talent
am? oxperience will concentrate an this full tines, pulling wether
aatters from FY Division, State and other sources. He will continue
to give RFE such intelligences sumaries az cam be made sterile, but
dis principal tak will bes to ride herd generally on the KE prograns
as our chiof point of information ani liaison,

THO-.AS &. BKADEY
Cueft
Taternational Orgamsations Division
C191 TH5/eh
Orig - Addressee
lco- GO ,
1 ce - 10/mo
2o0o-K
ie 2) oe

N

wcll



--- Page 334 ---
14-0000

%

OFFICE OF + LARITY UNITSD STATES RSPKOGEN IVE

t gt?

\ Wp NOKTH ATIANTIC COUNCIL

vd

AMEKICAN c¥BASSY,
LONDON, Wels

29 Maroh 1952

Dear Allens

This 48 a somevhat belated acknowledgment to your
note of 7 Marche I expect to be back at 15 Broad around

the middle of May.

~ C. D. wrote me about going back on the Koard of the .

National Committee several weeks aga, and I have told

him that I am favorably disposed, but would like to dew
fer decision until I get back and have a chance to talk
with him and see what my general commitments promise to
be. This is one which I should like to stay with be=
cause of my early association with you and the others

in setting it up. I also was very much impressed by

the layout in Portugal, which I went out to see after

the Lisbon meeting.

I hope all goes well with yous
Sincerely yours, .

/8f Chuck

Alien W. Dulles, Esq.
1208 29th Street, No W.
Washington 7, D. Ce.

C. 3. Ae

Copy of this given to Nancy 1) Apr 52


--- Page 335 ---
ae | | peo . )
Faw : Bg § a | hey tov “Ks hoot, nw.
sa Lh a a ig Yo wri

ao a a vow,

ao aioe the : a. L
p Cebane hon wee
ae :

a, ppc fod ep
bes Gk om

ey fol U2 tree os
& €. (em fete’ Paty

“ Thal

é aopakl
oy



--- Page 336 ---
14-0000

_ Mareh 28, 1952 |

Dear Olivers

Wearing ny Crusade hat at this jincture, let me M11 you in as best I can on
the history and development of the Crusade operating budget. This is no mean
job, since practically all of the transacticns concerning it were verbal -~
a situation I hope to correct in the future, starting now. So here goes. 1
will make the special budget the subject of a separate letter.

In December, Abbott got the General's verbal approval of a Crusade budget for

1952 of approximately $1,000,000 if Abbott would stay on. Sefore any progress
toward firming up this commitment had been made, difficulties arose in connection
with our position vis a vis VOA. On Janusry 17th, CD and Abbott met with everyone
concerned in the problen in Ed Barrett's office. Out of this meeting came general
agreement that the 1952 Crusade program shculd be considerably reduced in scope,
which was duly reported to the Crusade Board the following day. Allen instructed
Abbott to draw up a proposed budget for samething under $500,000. This Abbott
did under date of Jamary 21st and transaittec it to Allen with a letter dated

Jamary 23rd. . :

The budget sutmitted, which I believe is in your hands, smounted to 21,688,991,
covering the eleven months from February lst to December 3lst, 1952. (The
Crusadé had meanwhile received on January lth, on special request, funds covering

the months of December and Jamary.)

-, It was initially contemplated that the total sum of $153,991 should be transferred
to the Crusade in a lump. It then deveicped that because of fiscal year problems
five-elevenths, or $222,270, would be transferred inmediately.

Within a week or so from January 23rd, Abbott received telephonic approval fras
Allen of the $188,991 over-all, with $222,270 to be transferred in a lump sum.

Early in February, Crusade was advised it would be more convenient for you to
transfer just the February allotment anc postpone the liuzp sim payment until
March. On advice, we therefore made formal request for $iL,L54 fer February on
Februsry 19th. This payment was received ty us cn March 3rd. It is the cnly
installment we have received against the total (eleven-month) Crusade 1952 tudget.
During ny trip before last, I received verbal reassurance tat the balance of

the five-ronth figure would be forthcoming. This then is to urge you to put

this in line for attention as soon as possible.

To recapitulate, thie is a roquest specifically for $177,616, representing
$44,454 a month for March, April, May, and June.

Sincerely yours,

. Hora I, Ehime



--- Page 337 ---
conn mimes 1 enn badd rm oe hi at soa’ ‘
eA Mot se ac Nene anteater an AS aad

14-0000

March-28;-1552

Dear Olivers

This is an attempt to give you the background of our special ZASY BAYER budget.
This is the balloon project, initiated last fall after the first Winds of Freedon
one and scheduled for Christmastine. It was then knom as Santa Claus or SUGAR
CHARLIE, After definite cancelaticn for Christmas and postzcnement to Easter,
it became known in our accounts as Zaster Bunny or EASY BAER.

In a menorandum to John Danewood, cated Lecember 5, 1951, Abzott said: “Attached,
also, is request to cover costs of operation Santa Claus to date. Except for —
some continuing preparations in the field, this too is being xept on ice pending
further word fron you. You will recall that AWD authorized the purchase of
vehicles, etc., at our conference in his office in October. We estinated at
that tine that the total project would run approximately $175,000.

Formal request to the Foundation for the $51,500 was made Jamary 2rd, together
with request for December and Jamiary operating expenses. All tneze cums were
received by Crusade January 10th.

Qn one of Abbott's January or February tripe to your city, he received a promise

‘to transfer to us the balance of the EASY PAKER budget ($123,500). I would
strongly recommend that this would be the neatest way of handling thie account, VA
We naturally keep separate accounting for this budget and could give you an
accounting to date at any time on request. To make such a transfer now would

also enable you to dispose of this oucget in your current fiecal year, in which

an allocation for it has presumably teen made.

I should perhaps set dow for tke record that it cannot be guaranteed that an

EASY BAKER type operation, when anc if it should be definitely put con the schedule,
ean be carried off for the original budzet of $175,000. There are too many
variables. And, while the major part of the budget spent or to be spent goes

for quasi cazital equipment, same of it goes or will go for expendable operation
(publicity, cormni¢ations, anc the like) which would have to te repeated in
conrection with another balloon operation.

Attached is a schecule of expensee 65d Cuumitments as of Maren Zlst azainst
the EASY BAKER budget. Fron this ycu will see that we have had to use general
+. operating funds of about $21,000 for LASY BAKER as of that date. A rough estimate
‘of additional costs of-the prayer operation, which belongs to EASY HAYES, is
$9,500. (I also attach for your infcrmation a mimeographed report indicating
the acceptance of the prayer operation among the churches.)

' ' To recapitulate, this is a request for trensfer of the balance of £123,500 of
_ the EASY BAKER special budget.

Sincerely yours,

hon PL


--- Page 338 ---
14-0000 are. a ra
° ea ee ne et ARSE MT SYNE EERSTE an eM mince ecru An Spe chien Sem sL e asctin Sn aac Stel ate ih enh ASti

“~~ i
\
4
BASY BAXER BUDGET
. i °
Cash balance as of March 21, 1952 1,431.91 *
. : i
v -- Paid expenses as of March-21 50,068.09 |

Total cash received against budget. .ccssecssescsceee 51,500.90

¢ gona March 2 3
P.O. 790 45.00
. "780 30.50
" 779 37,00
" 149 . 333.20
i "47 . 16,500.00, .
2 © 143 757.60 ‘
- Robert Jordan (Dir. Church Prom.) 1,290.00
! German Accounting #5 1,465.00
\ . * # 24200
Total comnitments 22,311,30
3
. Total expenses and commitments 724379039
é -
L Total cash received on budget 51,590,990
* Budget deficit as of 3/23/52 PA sE79 239 -

BIG pa OU



--- Page 339 ---
aamve v0 pot . wijtnegho moar aces pat atten CL State nleecme
veer of ce sant eanceegen =p nett RNID DSS: AEH nh

14-0000
ee ee ete meetin

EXCERITS FROM LETTERS RECEIVED IN RESPONSE TO .
CRUSADE FOR FRELDOM'S SUGGESTION OF A PRAYER MOVEMENT ,

(Early in March the Crucade sent letters to-evory house of worship in

the United States, Councils of Churches, Jlinisterdal Acaoeiations, Councils |
of Church Women, ag vell as to a fow national seculcr organizations. Those
letters urged people to offer special praycrs for thore whose relivious
freedoms have been restricted because of Comuntst conination. The Crusade
undortock to make known to the peoples behind the Iron Curtain this movoient
on the part of Americanc and to request their prayers for us in exchanco.
The quotations heroin hich are of a cornrvratulatory nature to the Crusade ©
are included not out of vainglory, but beccuce they toll part of the

storys the acceptance by the First Letate of this proposal from a lay
organization. On reflection it may be judged that only a loy organization

could cuccesafully make euch a proposal.)

IVAWHOE, MINNESOTA =

"This is a step in truly proper procedure in the etrurgle...vetween
the free countrice of the world and thoce enclaved by Liarxian doctrines

and practices. May Cod speed the plan,

PALTTNORE, MARYLAND =

ie feel here...that the Christian Church ia in a period of greatest
opportunity in light of recent percecutions and restrictions throughout
the rorld. History has chorm ties in periods cimiler to these, the Church
has gromm large enougn for the tesi: ahead of it. .esprayers for those
who are under persecution and rectriction trovghout the vorle are cfforedee.
every Suncays.. :

"After o full year of such ea procran for the peosles of the enslaved
ereas, our orm peo;le have prom more ccutely consciwus of the problem
facing the Christien Ciurch. ...erlightemient upen Christianity's rreatest
canpetitor, Communism, is necersary for ti:ose of us whe are stil) cripred
vith ca;placency. ‘ocides enlightennent, it sould be of help to our om
people that prayers and thoughze of those peo;le tchind the Iron. Curtain
ere for our strencth to help thea conquer their cnslaving ideologies.

"ie will make public this letter and renew our effcrts to ms've our
own people more conscious of the :.eed. Our prayers will be fcr the veople
of the sorld and the persecuticn that they mizht have religious freeconm
and, above all, be rorthy of thet freedem rhen it cores. i.e csk their
prayers for our strengt.. in a firht arainst a cerdly eneny called ‘complacency
end religious pride.' I would lie to reczll that prayer cannot te scparated
from action end that our proyer i: for the, wrusade ror Freedom and that

our action will be in holpizg you."


--- Page 340 ---
14-0000

WESTFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS

",.chope that you will be able to got behind the Iron Curtain with the

specific information that Christian people are united in praying for this
freedom for all, It is my intention to include...a special prayor in vhich
the entire congregation will unite as a part of the Crusade for Freedaa."

TUTTLE, NORTH DAKCTA.
"I think God for the Crusade for Freedom, and for the leaders who give —

of their tine and strength for such a worthy cause. I can asoure you of

my support.* .

DRESDEN, TENNESSIE

"Qod grant that the common offort of all toward this campaign shall
not be in vain, tut shall eventually lead to the lasting peace and freodom
that all peoples cherish so much,"

‘

CENTERLIORELAND, FENNSYLVANIA

"pledge ny support in your prayer campaicn... On each Sunday special
Aintercession will be made. We chall ask not cnly that their...freadcmses
be rastored but that the...gospel may make easier the burdens of oppression

which they now carry.

"Our prayers shall be with the Crusace for Freedom as it continues its
splendid efforts in behalf of a greet cause. lay we be alvays of the sido
of God in the battle for right and truth,”

CEDAR RAPIDS, IOWA

®,,.will begin special prayers on Sunday, March 23... Hy prayer, by °
daily acts of self denial ard by constant cxpressions of material charity,
the menbers of this congregation are doing, and will continue to do, everye
thing in their pover to assist the Crusade. May God blees and prosper
your work,” ,

MANCHESTER, GDCROTA

"It is inceed gratifying to mow that there are yet God fearing mens.
who are willing uncer God to promote such a worthy cause as the Crusace for
Freedom, May God richly bless you and rive you spiritual courage to carry
en as a clarion in this cark hour of spivituel need.”


--- Page 341 ---
14-0000

sie ga ee

DENVER, COLORADO _

le shall be most happy in this parish to do romething specific in a
spiritual wey for the rectoration of freedom of religion in the satcllite '
countries. It vill be announced to our conprenation on Gunday, Harch 16th,
that a’ special Masa will te offered on the fLoirth Cundry of Lent, on Pacaion
Sunday, -on Pala Suiday and avain on Easter cundey for religious rreedon
behind the Iron Curtain, .I con acmre you thst in thia-ncrish nay hundreds
of prayers and Holy Commuicna whil be offerne to Airdgity Got for our
dintreased brothers and essters behind the Iron Curtcin. Cod grent that
your requcet will roceive the response thit it-co richly deserves. Huublo
prayers will be ncre potent tion tho most effective Lomb.

HOLYOKE, MASXACHUSETTS
"Thia silent prayer vas inrorted in our order of worship yesterday
in response to your request. - .

"Father, wo thank Thee for tho privilege of wornaip, end
for the freedom to listen, to think, and to speek es Thy
- Spirit directs. Nake us deoply sensitive to ibe sufferings
‘ of the proplus of Eastern Europe ard of keie, 19 vtom this
freedom is now cenied, Open their hearts a.d lives cs well
as ours, we pray Thee, to the message of the Gespel of Christ."

NEWCASTLE, MAINE

"I am very hapry to coopcrate...dit ie often difficult te meke people
understand that...we are part cf a grozt rorld movement. If caly each
individuai in each tiny place could and would rcalize he...can in a small
way further the cause of pezce and justice...”

ROSELURG, ORDCON

§,.,our congregation kas been ruch acre of the necds ard the available
power through preyer. We cicll continue to do everything -e can. Think
you for encourazing the Church peovlo to broaden tneir vistes end horizons

-of the prayer experience.“

SPRINGFIELD CENTTR, NEV YORK

®,,.sincerely trust tt¢ response to your eppeal will prove so universal
*hat the prevers of milltors of esrnest ani loy:) Christizis will preve
80 Cre “icl=ing that with God‘s help we shall te miraculously successful
in brirging so 1.0" tht the diabolical machinations of tho godless soviet

Tyrante..o®


--- Page 342 ---
14-0000

-h-

CONCEPTION, MISSOURI

"On March 23, I shall conduct a Day of Recollection end direct
4t toward the aims and purposes of the Crusades The Seminarians -
will be asked to continue thoir prayers on the following Sundays. for .
this purposee If thore 1s any other way in which we can be of help,

Please call on use!

ONEONTA, NEW YORK

NIt was most gratifying to learn that you os. in the Crusade for
Freedom rocognize the value of prayer to the extent that you are willing
to solicit the prayers of God's people for those who are in need.

"He assured of the prayers of the members of my Church eee OVEr

eight hundred members and myself in this worthy endeavor. I am per~
suaded that the God that controls all the wealth of this world is going

to honor you and your colleagues materially and spiritually because
of your approach to this inatter.'

DURANT, OKLAHOMA
"eI promise that we es. in this area will cooperate in prayers
for peace and freedom e.." .

YORK, PENNSYLVANIA

"We shall print on our Bulletin the following prayer, on the four
Sundays beginning with siarch 23rd, and shall ask our people to use it
a8 a congregation and personally. The prayer follows:

"Almighty God, Thou who are truth and iove, in whom is justice,
righteousness, and liberty, we bow in sincero and earnest prayer that
Thy power may bring the blessings of full freedom to warship Thee and
serve Thee, to all Thy children who dwell in lands where men know not
this freedom. Grant unto them that through Thy grace they, and we,
may rejoice to know Thee, to worship Thee, and to serve Thee. We ask
this through Him who died that men might live in Thea, the only true
God and Father of us all. Aman.®

ALBUQUERQUE, NEN TEXICO

On Sunday, March 23rd e.. will offer special prayers os. will
repeat these prayers from time to tine thereafter .oot


--- Page 343 ---
14-0000

Crees

BROOKLYN, NEW YORK

" I enclose a copy of a prayeress

"Almighty Ood,. our Heavenly Fathor, we bescech thee to bring a
righteous and just peace into our world. Cleanse the hearts of the men
of all nations of potty provincdalism, of envy and of hatred and endow all
their leaders with humility and courage to know and to do thy will.

And more especially we pray for tho people of Russia and their leader,
Josef Stalin, that they and lie, being cloansed from False Doctrine, may
be brought to the light of thy truth and may seek peace and understanding
rather than discord and war. Grant to our own nation a deeper sense of
responsibility in using the power thou hastgiven her,

®,,.and enlighten those we have set in authority over us 20 that they
may honestly try to further thy will, Finally, we pray for thy Holy
Church. ‘Whorevor she may be, that she may be revived by thine indwelling
spirit and mede the sure instrumont of union for all mon in our divided
world. Pardon the impecfection of this our prayer and in all things —
thy will be done. Through Jesus Chriet our Lord. Amene”

'

HMINONK, ILLINOIS

"Please put us dowm as another church with a world view and. os.
a concern for raligious liberty ... of our Christien brothron behind
political curtains in Europe and Asia. All good success to you in
‘our! campaign to overcome evil with good, to Neht the big lie of
communism with the big truth of universal freedon, freedom 'in Christ’,
which we in God-blessed ;merica so enjoy today."

FROM A CITY COUNCIL OF CHURCH WOLEN

le rejoice in this gesture fron crusade for Freedom and join with
you in special prayers."

TUNICA, MISSISSIPPT :
‘Wie think the idea is a good one, and, we > shall join with you, using
the following prayers

. "0 Almighty God, whom to know aright is life eternal, whom to serve
eright is perfect freedom, grant, we beseech thee, tho restoration of ree
ligious freedom to oppressed peoples everywhere, but particularly to those
in the subjugated nations of Eastern Europe. dive them hope, fill then
with courage, strengthen their determination until the iron yoke of

Communism is broken by the power of Christ, in whose name we pray. Amen.”


--- Page 344 ---
14-0000

= 6 «

BINGHAMTON, NEW YORK plans to use the following prayer which cane from
“brayers for ien in Service*s

"For the Oppressed: © God, The Creator of men end of nations, we

_ implore Thy fatherly care and protection in behalf of all Thy children

everywhere who suffer persecution. In all their triale and tribulations

be Thou their Refuge and Strength. Impart to then Thine own comfort and
courage. Turn tho hearts of the oppressors from evil to good. Stop the
hands and convert the wills of those who would arraybrother against brother
in racial strife. Restore to all men everywhere the biesoing of religious
frecdom, Fill our hearts and inspire our minds with a desire firmly

to entablish peace and justice, liberty and fraternity throughout the worlds
for His sake, who suffered for all mankind, Thy Son, Jesus Christ our ©

Lord. Amen."

DULUTH, MINNESOTA

",epleased to join all Christians of this country in a Crusade for
Freedom. Daily we are paying for the restoration of religious freedom
to the peoples behind the Iron Curtain. May God bless your effort in-
promoting Christian freedom and peace in this world.” :

WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA

™iith deep emotion we e+. assure you of our wholehearted cooperation
eooe Religious liberty throughout the world has long veen a special in-
tention remembered here. We shall not fail to ask Him to inspire Pastors
to encouraye their congregations to do all possible to cooperate.”

CHAMBERSBURG, PENNSYLVANIA

®,.eit is planned in our congregation to place special emphasis in our
Sunday Bulletin on March 23 upon the matter of prayers, personal and
corporate, for restoration of religious liberties to repressed people.
We shall, also, make a personal anncuncement calling attention to the
printed program and trust that in this way, we may ehare in the ‘Crusade
for Freedom.' Your move seems to be one that should enlist the thinking

and efforts of all Christian people,"

FORT SMITH, ARKANSAS

*®..ewe conduct a Novena here oe. every Sunday nicht using tha booklet,
Yrusade for Peace.’ [uring this Novena we include all the intentions
of the entire world.and in a special way the intentions for your Crusade

for Freedoa.®


--- Page 345 ---
14-0000

GRANVILLE, NORTH DAKOTA

In response to your letter, I included especial prayers in my pastoral
prayers today. It will be good of you to ask the peoples of Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and other lands.under the oppression of Russia
to pray for us. We need to understand them and to receive their under-

- standing. Qod help us all. a

- "How can we possibly retain our own freedoms unless we desire freedom
for these others? One of the greatest freedoms surely must be freedom
from self-righteousness. Will they pray for this freedom for us?

' Blessed are they who feel their spiritual need,’ Goodspeed
translates its" . :

HCBOKEN, NEW JERSEY

",.. constructive suggestion of prayer ... We will join other Christian
churches in this program. We will begin at once. Your letter will be o..
posted oe. Prayer changes things ... Count on use#

PINE BLUFF, ARKANSAS

mill be glad to cooperate.. Beginning Sunday, ilarch 23 and every Sunday
thereafter thu congregation ... will pray for ycur intention. ... A very
fine ideas!

COLUMBUS, OHIO
"We are glad to have a chance to share in this great crusade."

CHUGIATER, WYOMING
",..was glad to learn that the Crusade for Freedom is looking for help
to The Almighty God, and He indeed can help the people behind the Iron Curtain.

"I have been praying daily not only for my own dear ones who are behind
the Iron Curtain but for all people who are enslaved by Communists. (od's .
gracious Hand had lead me out from the Iron Curtain and how glad I am to

be in free America.”

PASCOAG, RHODE ISLAND
"You may include (us) see as spiritual contributors to your worthy cause.”


--- Page 346 ---
14-0000

ee ee I ant me ane he anc IO

oy

CONVERSE, INDIANA

"My sincere congratulations ard gratitude thet you are presenting
the matter of united prayer for freedom ... I assure you also that I
will present the challenge ... to our people and that we'll join with
you and all churches of /:terica in praying for the freedom that we believe
is the natural right of all mon.”

ENDICOTT, NEW YORK

"Starting March 23rd we will have a public prayer every Sunday «+.
May God bless you and your great work for freedom. I am sure that with the
prayers of Our greut Nation and all Freedom-loving people, Almighty God
in his infinite goodness and love will answer our prayers and all the
things you are trying to accomplish in the Crusade for Freedan will be

fulfilled."

LONG BEACH, CALIFOREIA

"To establish such a prayer chain from the concerned peoples of this
nation to the concerned peoples behind the Iron Cyrtain, in fact, to the
Christian peoples behind any curtain in the world, will create a pool of
resources that will etrike fire in the hearts of believing Christian
People. It is certainly one of the most important things to do alongside
other preparation for World Peace.”

PHILADELPHIA, PENHSYLVANIA ~ From a Church bulletin

"Beginning Sunday, March 23, and continuing, the Crusade for Freedom,
which encourages those behind the ‘iron curtain! in their desperate etruggle
for religious liberty, asks for our earnest prayers for those who have teen
deprived of their freedom to worship according to the dictates of consciences

Pray."

The president of a Lutheran ST/TE SYNOD, in addition to ecquiring newspaper
notice, wrote the following letter to his confreres; :

“Dear Srethren, Seeking to abide by the request of the Crusade for Freee
dom that each church in America have special prayers beginning Sunday, .
March 23, and each Sunday thereafter for the trestoration of religious liber-
ties to the peoples in the satellite countries of Eastern Europe,’ end to
strengthen the power of praying peoples for the advancement of God's Kingdom,
I hereby request that each pastor write out a prayer thot may be used in con-
junction with the General Prayer in my service each Sunday morning, and as a
Special collect for the Vesper Services.

(continued)


--- Page 347 ---
14-0000

- CHESTER, CONNECTICUT

In addition to making special note each Sunday morning service, we shall
see to it that some space is allotte’ in our monthly pastoral letter for
a suggestion of prayer for other men who are denied corporate worship.”

ELLICOTT CITY, MARYLAND - Pan :

"We feel sure that they know of our conedrn,: and: we kriow in our hearts
they are praying that our faith fail note: Anything that the Crusade for ©
Freedom can do to carry the message of ourcontinued concern, will be
appreciated." oe 7

SAN BRUNO, CALIFORNIA

"We shall be more than harry ts continue to remember this great effort
in prayer and ask God's blessing upc you who direct this undertaking.”

HBAWVAR HE

NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF RADIO AND TELEVISICN CACADCACTIRS

"The Crusade's plan for mass prayers...for the people behind the Iron
Curtain who have been cenied freecan cf religious worship sertainly is a
commendable one, The need for faith throughout the world has never been
greater, and that there should te freedom to worship as one wishes is funda-
mental to the principles by which ve in America live. Members of the National
Association of Radio and Televisi.cn S:oadcasters...will..,demonstrate their
friendship for the world's oppressed pecple ty supporting..sthe Crusade for
Freedom,"

PILOT CLUB INTERNATIONAL

"The Crusade for Freedom is doing a wonderful work and it is a privilege
te cooperate in every way possible.®

VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS

"As Commander-in-Chief...I harptly endorse this Crusade for Freedom
movement with a plecge of our cocplete sympathy, cooperation and support.®


--- Page 348 ---
-l17-

CHAMBER OF CORMERCE OF THE UNITED STATES

' "Prayer is a mighty force, a mighty unused power. Lot us all, here
in Amorica and elsevhere in the world put this mighty power to work.”

ANVETS

S\MVETS wholeheartedly endorse the Crusade for Freedom sponsored movement
for mass prayers...for the people behind the Iron Curtain vho have been conted
the freedom of religious worship which 4a the proud heritage of every Amcrican.

"There is a great need for a spiritual rebirth in this world torn with
hatred ond fears, The unity of peovles under a common God wili do ouch to rash
away the causes of unrest witch haunt us todyy and will lead to the mutual
objectives of peace-loving pecyle everywhere,

".a are proud to call upon our members throughout the nation to-participate..,.

AMERICAN DENTAL ASSOCIATION

*..ethe American Lental Assoclaticn,..erdorse your plan for mass prayerseece
for the people behind the Ircn Curtain.

"The members of this {zeeciation long have suprorted the Crusade for Freedom
and..ewill be pleased to Participate in this demonstration of the frecdom of

religious worship.”

,

BUILDIUO AMD CONSTRUCTICN TRATES PEPRTLENT = APL

\-e will send out a circuler letter to our local...Councils throughout
the country asking than te Join in the mass prayers..."

NET YORK STATE BANKERS ASSOCIATION: ...pleased to cooperate...and urge our
membership to participate....THE AMERICAN LEGICN: ...your efforts will receive
our wholehearted suprort...e.DCY¥ SCCUTS OF AILKTCA: ...jcine with the Crusadéses
and all religious faiths in sraying...eoKTehIS TITER ATICUL: ...a splendid
idoa.....UMITED STATES JUNTCR CHAUIBDA OF COML-ENCE: ...will certainly do every-,
thing we can...to cet our organizations to asetst in any vigy.ee. Al TRICAN

FAR! BUREAU FEDERATION: ...semding copies of your letter to all of our state
organizations, with a note enccuraging their participstion...eeTHEATRE O..NERS
OF AMERICA: ..eaction on cer pert...vill ctrenrthen.,.religious frith...and
keep alive the hope of ultizcte freedom from 21] opprescion.seseRPRE'E LODGE
KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS: ...your program...for mass provers...is indeed cormendabléessse”
DIRECT MAIL ALVEXTISING ASSOCLITICN, Tits .oin complete accord with this
movenente..»

March 21, 1952


--- Page 349 ---
14-0000

BEAVER, ‘CXLAHOMA
“Thanks for promoting this thought.*

“~WRESLING, WEST VIRGINIA

"Every day (we) join in prayer for Peace ani the welfare of those
dehind the Iron Curtains eo» We foel privileged to join all Christiana
on this day of prayer."

_ VAUX EALL, MEW JERSEY

"Tt is 3 worthwhile gesture se. We know God is pleased with it and
certainly pray that all churches will comply with this requests we cor=-

tainly shall."

DENTER, COLOR/DO ,

*Our church shall gladly remember this very inpertsat program in
. Prayer, and we will groatly appreciate the prayers cf oor Christian :
frieais everywhere.”

PIXSVILLE, KENTUCKY

‘This is a very small parish, but I will urge all to cooperate in this \
worthy cause. I will not exempt myself of the sam obiigaticn.” :

DUFRES, SOUTH DAKOTA

*.e0 together we shall pray for our brethren who heve lost their .
freedom... 29 ,
7 v

BLOOMPISID, IOWA i
“Grateful to you for this move and hoping for great success »..% a

CHATTASOOGA, TENNESSE

*xay God bless you in this efforts and those unfortunate ones for
whoa we prays? |


--- Page 350 ---
14-0000

u

Yee

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

"It ia a pleasure to cooperate in your roquest for prayers starting
Sunday, March 23. In fact, wo will start tomorrow ees od bless you

and your confrores in your work."

OSHKOSH, NEBRASKA
"I appreciate your getting word to them of our interest in their

‘welfare, and believe that such a plan is a real forward step soo"

CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA

"... our church will gladly join you in praying for these our brothers
and sisters. I am glad to know that you consider prayer as having a major

place in the affairs of the world. ...!

NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA

"Congratulations upon your forward step. in seeking cooperation and free=
dom through prayer. You may count on us and our two churcheo «+4

FPEABC@DY, KANSAS

"Wo shall take this mattor seriously and make it a definite part of the
dorning Worship Period ... we shall make PRAYERS FOR FREEDO.i a part of our
thought.”

ASHVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA

"The atudent body ... enthusiastically endorse your plan for special
prayers ..,. and will not only participate thenselves but will do everything
in their power to increase the knowledge of the movement and gain widest

participation from others."

PUTNEY, VERMONT

"The studonts ... wish to join in this crusade. Beginning on Sunday,
March 23, we shall say each day a decade of the Rosary for the intenticns
you recommend,”


--- Page 351 ---
14-00000

“~

-Y-

DELCAMBRE, LOUISIANA

"That we sll recognize the necessity cf turning to God for help and
guidence in restoring the world to Christian ideals is the most hopeful

sign of the times." >

i
i

HOUSTON, TEXAS

"There is rower in prayer. Our congregation will join you and others
in your prayer Plan, oe" .

LAWRENCE, KANS3S

"... beginning March 23 we shall make special mention in the morning
bulletin and give definite place in the program for the fellowship of

prayer."

SOUTH CAYUGA, ONTARIO

.e4 let me assure you that wo are with you in this great Crusade
of Prayer,4

LAKELAND, FLORIDA

"0. want to encourage you in your Crusade for Freedom, and remind
you that we who sre of grass roots ... are ringing the boll.”

ROCK HILL, SOUTH CAROLINA

"Y think this is a very fine thought and trust that ministers and con-
gregations throughout our nation will undergird your labors with prayer
and faith."

FROK AN ARCHDIOCESS

"In conformity with the request of the Crusade for Freedom we are asking
all the Catholic Churches in the érchdiccese to contime to recite prayers
for those ... umer Commnist dominatione®

Mf. GILEAD, NORTH CARCEN
“We will join in the continuing prayer for Religious Freedon.?



--- Page 352 ---
14-0000

BUNKER HILL, INDIANA .

"This world under Cod can have a new tirth of freedon by the vory
method you are surgesting. Praying for each other is the real mothod
to bring our world out of ite darkness ant fear,"

BROKEN BOW, NEBRASKA

“Qur morning congrogation see voted zlacst unanimously to ehare your
prayers for the peoples in tho satellite caustries ooef

MILLVILLE, NEW JERSEY

"I presented the matter to my congregation »+. amt our people pledge
their prayers beginning with Sunday, Harcn 23, to the oppressed peoples oso!

NEY YORK, NEW YORK

"... moet happy to cooperate. May Got blese you and your associates with
wisdom and insight as you strive to free coth the bodice and the minds of
the people from dictatorships of all kinds.*

BIRCHWOOD, WISCONSIN

Realizing the importance of this work, I do promise to ask the con~
tinuing prayers of our peorle for all our trothers ent sisters in Christ
who are presently suffering ro2igious pereecation."

SPOKANE, WASEINGTON

"Be azure’ va are most happy to join in this crusade of payer on week
days as ¥sl) a3 or. Sucdays."

PETOSKEY, MICHIGAN

Bone Hint sterday. Assnniction in meeting on jsarch 10 voted to have ite
Secretary sei? yo. mr? fat ws #3) continue our support of your Frocraa
as in the pez*? . “cine with March 25, we will make sure that prayers

ere given in cach Wwwrea,®



--- Page 353 ---
14-0000

-lbe

COLLEGEVILLE, MINNESOTA
"TI endorse most heartily your Crusade for Freedom e+e and hora that

_ 4t will receive an enthusiastic responso throughout Americas"

GIBON, NORTH CAROLINA

"T shall count it a privilege to call upon my people to pray thus,
and will myself make this an A object both of my personal prayors and those

made publicly®

LIBERTY, NISSOURT

“May God bless you and your earnest efforts for these peoples oes
we have a family in our church who were D.P.'s and whoa our people have
helped. They are «+. proving well worth any help and prayer. Therefore,
we are close to this problem and understand it somewhat. God guide you
and may He give to these wounded and gentle people their freedom again.*

MONROE, LOUISIANA

"Our people are sharing in the Crusede for Freedoa by prayer for
our friends bchind the Iron Curtain as well as for the forces of
righteousness engaged in the propagation of the Truth oee#

ADA, OKLAHOMA

"In my judgment this is one of the most real ways in which Christians
cen combat the menace of communism in our world.'

GREEN SPRINGS, OHTO

"Thank you for inviting the people of our churches to share in the
special prayers ... we are happy to have a part in this great Christian
enterprise. Yes, amd in turn we will be glad to have tha Crusade ask
these people for their intercessory prayers for us. Surely God will
bless this concern.®

ELGIN, ILLINOIS

"May. God miltiply and fulfill your greatest hope and prayers, in wiich
T shall be #1s4 to joine®



--- Page 354 ---
14-0000

MANHASSET, NEW YORK ,

"your challenge to pray for those who have been deprived of their
spiritual freedom is.timely and greatly necded. The religious liberty
which we enjoy in America should be a cherished heritage, and one which
we seek to share with the peoplos of the world. I trust’that the Crusade

for Freedom will be successful in many parts of the world."

DUBLIN, TEXAS :

"I think this 1s a most worthy and wise onterprise, and I wish fa
it the greatest success. I am greatly interested in the world situetion
and think there ought to be dono much more concerted praying in the
‘nation today. I see little hope for us otherwise."

WATERFORD, VIRGINIA

“We promise to join you in special prayers for them beginning Sunday,
March 23rd, and shall continue praying until these people are grented ,
religious liberty. Thank you for your interest. say God crown your
efforts with success -- and soon.* :

BURLINGAIIE, CALIFORNIA
"We will remember them in our prayers particularly on rarch 23rd weet

JOHN DAY, CREGON
™,.,we will be very gled to do our share eee”

LEAVENAORTH, KANSAS

"The wor)d needs a greater faith in God today and all religious leaders
should have a part in this prayer effort.”

BRISTOL, VIRGINIA

? "We shall not only support this Crusade in our own church but also expect
to sponsor special redio programs over our bost redio station. Be assured
of cur interest ond prayers.”


--- Page 355 ---
14-0000 a eee ree ie mcpenane meS E RS

(continued)

"Hoping that you will comply with my request and the request of the
Crusede for Freedoa to remenber at the Throne of Grace, those whose
opportunities to worship our God and Father, are not as great ag those:
of the peoples of /merica, c

I am,

Yours in the Master's Service ...”

COLUIBUS, GECRGIA .

"We shall pray, as you suggested, during these ... mevtings, during
the pastoral prayers, and ‘at! other services in our church. You are
on the right track. God will richly bless your efforts, the prayers
of the peoples of the world.*

F CINCINNATI, OHIO

"The oe. boys and young men prepering for the priesthood ... will
be glad to join with thousands, and I hope millions, of other spirituale
minded Americans in praying.

NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA

“You mey be assured thct you will have our prayers for all the
thinga which the Crusade for Freedom is endeavoring to accomplishe”

i -
‘ MINISTERIAL ASSOCIATION, TXDIAMA

"Ye, are grateful for this opportunity to express our conviction that
this spiritual relationship betwoen peoples is a vital part of the progress
toward freedom.”

BISHOP, TEXAS

"There are many Cathclics in the sateélite countries behind the Iron
Curtain. They will underst:md this language. rich simpler still, if you
: only let then know that Lere in this parish of ce:cican farm-laborers as in
mary another Catholic chureh in Avzerica we aro fitverously trying to put
into action the peace plan of Our Lady of Fatioa. i aa sure they will be
greatly comfor.ed hy this message.*


--- Page 356 ---
14-00000 eon ee ran
meer berg ne eg OO i dant Sane te A APE ab NN ai el cA ee ie SE

7. wee AY dean ali

SECRET a

Yy. John C. Hughos,
e/o HeCanpbell & Cos,
40 Worth Street,
Rew York 13, Rew York.

Dear Johns

Hy promised thouhts on a matter of our mutual concern,
raised in your 28 Jamary letter, are given in the duclosed
eory of a Jetter being sent concewrently to Min Miller, You
wiJl note frow‘the enclosure that Min knove ve are forwarding
you a copy of the Jetter to him. Min will certainly voelcore
your advice in plannine the arrroach te the Defense Lepart-
ment, While the Virector and I should, of esurse, like very
much to assist in the effort to obtain the diroctive fron
Defense vnich Eucos explained to Lang wan necessary, ve
feel that, for rcasons of security, ve should not do so ;
Anitially and, for the sare resson, ve would rather have you
carry the bali ail the way, if possitle,

Min will undoubteily keep us both advised of such efforts
as he and lang shall pian, end if in the qouree of their
negotiations, en opportunity rreeente itself for either the
Director or me to be of asrictence, you ino’ thet sou may
fount on ue to do 80, A copy of this letter fe also attached,
in case you have en opportunity to hand it t2 Hin.

My kindost personal regards to youe

‘ Sincerely,

Aller W, Dulles

Attactaents 2
As stated above
a

croperit (dot 2 1

Distributions
addresses — originaland {
DOCI - 1-~
Rel
cloO-1

al -2 : x
SERED



--- Page 357 ---
14-0000

~ ee 1
,

~, : ~ . ,
oe RESTRICTED (4714S a
it

CONFIDENTIAL

nthe "TO" column, Under cach comment a line should be drown
ith the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial
outing Sheet should be returned to Registry.

INSTRUCTIONS.—OMicer designations should be used f
eo | geross aheet and each comment numbered to correspond wi!
(check mark insufficient) before further routing. This Record and R

From:
al

OFFICER'S
TNTTALS

: 29 March 52_

Batley phoned me about this case a
day or a¢ ago and Lt seems that there
{s considerable pressure abuilding

on the part of Mr. Scripps to be al-
lowed to use the large balloons
overtly. He is hoping to be able to
get an answer to these people prior
to the April 2nd meeting. Whether
this is possible or not, I do not
know.

It may be thut this question must de
raised ayain with the POCC since they
were in on it at the beginning. Ac
tually thie may be an opportunity to
have gome overt agency do a job for
us and the request should be evaluated
on that basis. :

‘K ’
Groy Wess uve -

want ot PSR Luntlaw

ee Move 7 + hee

Dut. waar . Fate - Sergtauk
Peer . Bora a AMAR

sees 51-9 FREE RESTRICTED \ CONFIDENTIAL
en~ewint re


--- Page 358 ---
14-0000

ote

ee

7]

. . BEE Aza TIAL ~

SEOCE Ya ladda TION

27 March 1952
nae ——n
, .
MEMORANDUM FORs SPC / ,
SUINECTs Leaflet Balloons for use in Paycholosical Warfare

1. On at least four occasions Mr. William Scripps, Detroit News,
directly or indirectly has approached the Government with proposals for
utilization of balloons for psychological warfare. Following is a list
of tho dates and mothod of these approachess

Ge 12 October 1950 - Letter from General W. J. Donovan to DCI
enclosing "Operation Ballast.” ‘On 1 November 1950 William H, Jackeon
responded to this moriorondum to the effect that this suggested opera-
tion was being referred to’ the appropriate persons and suggesting a
subsequent meeting with Donovan to discuss this and other matters,

be In November 1950 as we were undertaking planning for develop-
ment of balloons with General Mills, we wero informed that Mr. Scripps
planned a general meeting to be held in Washington to discuss balloona,
Through the Genoral Millis Washington Representative Mr. Soripps was
persuaded to keep his meeting general and was inforved that the various
agencies of the Government had the matter under conaideration and
considered that it would not be in the public interest at this time
to disclose the nature of their findings, Consequently, Mr. Scripps
forwarded us on 1 December 1950 a proposal "The Use of Free Balloons
for Load Carrying Purposes" which we acknowledged on 11 December 1950,

ee On December 26, 1950 General Smith raveived a letter from
Blair Moody summarising a suggestion from Mr. William Scripps for
encouraging defection of Chinese Communist troops, A routine response
to his letter waa sent 6 January 1951 from Mr. Jackson, I believe
also Mr, Moody called upon the Director in early February of 1951 to
discuss use of balloons for psychological warfare. APC addressed a
briefing memorandum to DCI on 12 February 1951, Subj: Balloons for
Carrying PW Material to Soviet Areas,

2. In Septembor 1950 the NPSB requested that Cla should represent all
interested agencies of this Government and should acconiingly take steps

to develop, procure and stockpile an appropriate number of scientifically
designed balloons for future propaganda use in conditions of international
emergency, At meotinzs of the NPSB on 13 February 1951 and 11 June 1951
4t was agreed that OP€ would procure and stockpile 1,000 large leaflet

balloons for use by the appropriate agency when ani if such use was
authorized, The Board also agreed that inquiries vhich the various govern-

mental agencies

CMe dea AL



--- Page 359 ---
14-0000

~ ROE HAL a
o2a

" mental ‘agencies might receive concerning use of balloons would be anowored

to the effoct"that the matter is under continuous study by agencies of the
Government but disclosure of results at this time would not be in the public

interest."
3. A perusal of tho NPSB minutes sinse June 1951 did not indicate

further consideration by that group of the subject of balloons. From this
we mst infer that CIA still beara the responsibility of the commitment

made by Mr. Wiesnor for procurement.

4 For your information this research and devolopment has been con=
ducted for CIA by General Milla with ONR serving as tho cut-out. An existing

‘ project "Skyhook" which ONR bad with General Mills was accelerated to cover

development of vette, balloons continued aleng with ONK's program of como
ray research, We/obligated to ONR to deny a newspaper access to these
drawings, specifications, movies and reports which bear a SECRET classification.

5e I might make one small suggestion that since Mr, Blair Moody is
now a Senator and running for re-election in the naxt election, it might be
possible to solicite his aid in bringing Mr, Scripps in line with adopted
policy regarding balloons should it become necessary.

Louth

ROSALYN J, SMITH



--- Page 360 ---
14-0000

CONFIDENTIAL jet p 73s i :

ROUTING ano REGORD SHEET sy

INSTRUCTIONS: . Officer ursipnations (sce reparate sheet) should be usel dn the "To" column,
Under each comment, # line should be drawn acrsas eheet and each comment numbered to correspond ‘
etth the number tn the "To" column, Fach officer should init tabsfcheck rark insuffictent)
before further routing. This Record and Pouting Shect should ba returned to legistry.
AGCESSION NO

a \

Dare RECEIVED NSA

ofricer’s COMMENTS = * {

Recurd mentioned in our telephone H
nonwt w...- fdiseusston 05 March 1952. Drawing:
_ fand specifications of this item ©
SO, lare in the possession of RDD,
fn “4. laithough the tnformation is also
m hand at General Mille. It
arries a SHWRET classification
der our contractual arrangements
ith the U. S. Navy. Questions:
1. Does CIA still have the
commitment mide by Mr. Wiener
to the National Psychological
Strategy Board for procuring
1,000 of these balloon units
for stockpile and use by any
agency deemed advisable by
that group?
Should RDD release the SECRET
drawings and specifications,
movies and reports on trial
operations for use by the
Detroit Newe?

\ 4 ttached ta the Memorandum for the

L. R. Dailey

feee 80. CONF IDENTEAL

see ieee O®



--- Page 361 ---
14-0000

TELLPHORC CALLA, WILLIAM SCRIPPS, DETHOIT Mews

. . 00: fs. uv, cytand

Mr. F. B. Jowett, Jr. . 3/18/52

C, &. Moore
COAVIDENTIAL

On ? March, Wilitem Ceripps of the Detroit Neva, called and asked for price
eotimate in lots of 160,006 of a carrier balloon syotem which vould carry

300 pounds great distances. On discussion, it eppeered that ho was in- —
terestod in something e-yutvalent to our interin eysten, 80 IT told him we had
mode quotation on such a ploce of equipeent in quantities for prices in the
ranve of 2350 a unit. Tris plece of e,ulpownt under the expected vind con-
Gition, should cerry 15) pounds 150u mileo and deliver it with the vest possible

accuracy fron a balloon veLicle.

I avl:ed bin if be vanted specifications, but he said he would get these leter.

Ye wau working with a group who would use thes to carry propaganda, and he would
geo us in two weers, acd then vould discuss an¢ obtain exhibits, It vas pointed
out to hin that this equfgoent and polyetiylere were well controlled by the
goverment. Tida eppeared t+ be no problec to hin. _

Scripps called again on 14 March, and esked 1f ve could atterd a luncheon in
Detroit Wednesday noon, the 2nd of April, end then go on to New York for a
luncheon Thursday noon. x asied that ve bring along data, cost estinates,
exhibits, and all solea data, eu vell as movies, to this meeting. 1 asked if
this had beer, cleared with ALLott's frierdz, and he d4dn't appear to know wht
I was talking about. 1 told hin that some clearance would nee to be obtained
before wither the year wan ehown, or before 1t would be permitted to leave the
country. Ucripps is rost entiuslastic avcut support forthconing to carry suck
an operation forvard, and felt that the State Lepartment would interpose no

objections for the procran pleamed.

Seripps aaked that we confirm on 19 Harch whether or not you and I would be

able to attend. This I prosiseé to do. I would also like your guidance es

to what course sheild be gurssed in this. It in believed that certainly Datley
or Gates Lloyd atould te xade aware of this effert, so that we may deport
ourselves accordizgly. Incidentally, Levey ard Alry wiil be at both seetings,
in New York and betroit. Upon asked 1f we had any ovjections, I said, "Of

course net.”

CEMthe
cc: J. R, Meith
G. O. Haglund

COMFIDERTIAL COMPIDEHTIAL

er year ee


--- Page 362 ---
14-0000

“sy

z ~

yr ARON

yet
?

27 arch lys2

MPSORAMING OR: Assistant Dircctor for Policy Coordination
Dejuly Director (FLans)
Deputy Dircclor off Central Intelligence

SUBJECT? Conversation whtn Adwiral Killer

I shall make a practice of bringing to your attention current
matters for discussion between Admiral iller and me, the first of
which took place today and covered the following itomss

L 1. At the susestion of Bob Lang, seconded lator hy NUFE!'s

. Chairman, Joseph Grew, Adulral Miller wants to nold at Une Princeton
Inn on the Weh and llth of May a peneral discussion of United Statea
policy toward Iron Curtain countries, with particular emphasis upon
what now lines, if any, Radio free Europe chould take. ‘tho background
of this, acconting to Admiral Miller, is that Lany and others within
RFE feel that tho Line is running out behind the Tron Curtain, that
the people are ready for mvolution and Urat wo cannot continue much
longer the "hold everything" line. 4 want to gauvler 2 froun of
experts, including liessrs. Wisner and Dulles, to diseuss what policy
. . we siould now adopt. :

Action
i

I see no reason why wa shouldn't have sue. a ceneral bull session
and I will not atvenpt to discourage it unless instructed.

2. Admiral Miller recontly had a talk with Frank Altscnul who
complained somewhat of his treatment at tua hands of NCiE and CIA,
saying that he iad never even had co mucn as a ‘wort of thanks tor
the work ho did. Miller suggested that the 22ST mirht want to write
such a Leiter and taat, if so, a similar letter should go to Dowitt

Poole.

Action

i a little of thaaling

For the DOCI to writa a letter misht
in tue Lew York

himself since he was enc tain tic Alls

he finds an

5 operation. JT therevore surzest that tne 2 .
; carly opportunity to write to Altschul on soae matter, mention his
: pratitude.

: SEC!



--- Page 363 ---
14-0000

2
oe

MSlLor hovec tiiat no Zecicion aas been mace to put Admiral
Kirk and hic Oumittwe for toe bitcration of tno iussian People
under Crasaie for Proedom covnte tninks tils would be a great
wistake tecauce it would furtner sturstea ‘tne already too thin cover
of the Crucate and ne furtoer save tat if ft has to be done, ao

cannot tan L Ors. sould be les conad according
to tau arresnent alin the State pepartennt.
Action

Iounderstund that cubceguerthly Acairal libler talked to wir. Tullos
ai keen wal: wo pub Adiiral

wie mafle 44 clear that nv uecholon nw
and ain Comatice

andar Uae Crasace iit tuat wn ero in CIA would
atc wa clear wo doiny so.

Admiral Hiller agreed taat ne take the matter up with the Board
ity inclined, GLA would take up

of Dircctore and if they wees iby
with State the possibility of aneniiny in some extant the deciuton
to cut dow en tae Crusade In order in tcy to furnish bebter cover

for this opcratioa

much apreciate it if

he Adriral w4)ler cated + beara) y and Ranft were etill in
Greece, toat tie cituation was; ass eeectnle and tnat one of them must
Coe He said that nic advice from tL Bang was that the CFE man was
the beticr of tue tee and wnerctore £4 chould be Londowsky wio must

20-0

Action

Tae nictesy of vite problen aes arvolved wd long. Landowsky
has been called nome, however, and witl not go back to Cmece so
that it so longer remeins a fostlene. I have told Admiral Miiler.

undation on
> Zoard had
ae ctral-ntened

fe Aduiral !
the subject of tne
taken a cir view on we Bist
out by praai 2 bate
or not NC?E wanued Fi ped to 1 the ac ita
the rayututs of the “iresent > f Sees elst
Jackson ®as present at tals meeting as
the operation wee worth an al.ttionas ler mserved
dudyment, aowever. Ho uantod to knew wheteer CIA wished hin to hold
Ford to its pledge of an additions. $55,000 or not.

‘ron now. «Ge De
Ford he did not feel

Action

I nave checked tris with the E Liviston, which nas cabled the
field anc come w the view that twits o.cration is still very imortant.
They want to urce Acniral lilier to nold Ford w its acreenent. I

wa
mm
oD
=r)
re

“


--- Page 364 ---
TR RR NA UE RESTA NMR | NE le ce

14-0000

6. On 26 January. John ‘luvhes wrote a letter to Nr. Dulles
asking CLA's view of the problem of the evacuation of RFE employees
in Munich and elsewhere in the event of war. He said he thousht
this croblen was extremely important and there had been no answer

* to the letier.

Action
: This Division received this letter last week and we are working
i on it. Meantime I suggest Mr. Dulles sien the attached note to John
: Hughes. .

TOMAS Ww. DRADEN
Chief

By aa

& International Organizations Division
: oan

& Attachment,

: Draft ltr to John Hughes.

é

i CIO: TWB/eh

: Orig - DDct (thru DD/P & ADPC) .
i 2 cc - lO .
rf 2 cc -

i

i

t

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

i

j

H

i

t

z

i .
;

i erpr

. QL &
4

oa


--- Page 365 ---
1400000 eee Cena ue neuen ae searing aM theta Bechet + Meme hee FANT whic healt

Mo

 s3948

“SECURITY WhiGew Arian

‘ -
27 uareh 1952
MEMORANDUM FO: Assistant Director for Folicy Coordination
. SUBJECT: Crusade for Freedom
‘ Today the Lirector discussed with Kr. Menry Ford, II the
: possibility of his assuming tne Cnairmanship of the Crusade
2 for Freedom next year. I understand that Mr. Ford is warm. : ’

‘ :
THOMAS Wi. BRADEN

t Cnief
International Organizations Division

“ SECRET


--- Page 366 ---
Soe tnealaemednendlialibaemetiicien teaeainnete aenenat nema aan net eimai cine race cee eC

14-0000

Oey

In reply refer tor W) - 19 By

26 March 1952

Dear Nines

A little ineidont has caused a bit of trouble and a flurry of
eables hore that I think you can correct very quickly. Spencer
Poenix's assistant, Mr. Hiller, haa written to Leon Dennen telling
Dennen that Miller has been called in by our chop and questioned in
detail about recent Dennen accounting.

hhether or not he was quostioned in detail 15 a matter on which ~

be and I might disagree tut is really of no conesquence since tho
accounting by Dennen should normally go through us to Hiller, and I
think you would agree that we nad a right to ask questions about it.
What bothers me a little, however, is Miller's writing to Nennon,
giving details of how our teo offices work together. Dennen, it

turns out, was annoyed ty the content of Alllerts letter, not eo

mech at Hiller as at us. “His anitoyance is misplaced but if there

had been no mention ty Hiller of detsils of our relationship thore

would have been no annoyance.

. I presume you know of Pennen'a close affiliation with Lovestone
and the possibility that this mall thing will reverberate around
and around the usual vicious circle. Can you explain to Xilter how
these little incidents can get blown up into big issues and ask hin
te use a little sore discretion in tae fature?

Sinserely,

Oliver FE. Hadwod

Addrel H. 8 Miller

Bational Comittee for a Free Burope, Inc.
120 te 57th Street

Hew York 19, Row York

CorthBseh

Orig - Addresses

1 ce = Brocutive off.

2es - do .
Zee- al



--- Page 367 ---
14-0000

: \ SECRET

INSTRUCTIONS: Officer designations should be used in tha "TO" cotunn, Under each comment a tine should be drawn across sheet
and each commant numbered ta correspond with the number in the “TO” column, Each ollicer should initial (check mark insufficient)
before further routing, This Routing and Record Sheet should ba roturnad to Registry:

@ March 1952

Ione attaching a memorandum wich
T received today, the subject of
which may be of peneral tnterast

i you. le 3

hed

eS SS at-10 SECRET iid © © eortsaannl Pewtias Gn



--- Page 368 ---
14-0000

S.batiTy INE! seer . — 5
“SEEAET =a

. 25 March 1952
KEMORANDUM FORs EE=2
c WE=3
EVESECTs Eatablichmont of a "Propaganda Section" in

SHAPE under Control of an Hungorian Refugee.

Summarised below 4s a report froma reliable source in
Paris with regard to the reported establishment unisr the control
of an Hungarian refugee of a "propaganda section" in SHAPE:

"The first rumors are somowhat vague with regard to

@ new propaganda ecrvice which wil] be established

in Eisenhower's Hcadquartors, It is a Suyremoe
Direction of propayanda as was the case during the
last war. This service wil! comprise military sections
for propaganda on the other side of the Iron Curtain
including parachute activities; also soctions for
‘elassic propaganda,

"According to source'e information, the head of the
section for the countries of Eastern Burope will be Mr.
Mihaly Zoldheyli, an Hungarian who is a Colonel of the
Reserve in the French army, Mr, Zoldhceyli, about 50 years
old, has had an interesting owrear, He left Hungery
after the first revolution, he lived several yeere in
the United Status, he enjoyed, as a socialist, support
of American labor, and it was at their initiative that
he Joined the front in Spain. Of the loft, tut anti-
Communist, he was one of the chisfs unjer the pseudonym
of Genaral Cantiaga, Returning to France he wee interned,
then liberated from the camp at the personal intervention
of Jules Moch, 4 leading French socialist politician
(recently Minieter of Defense), Under the pemudonyn of
Major Michel], he was one of the heroes of the enti-Nari :
Fesistance in Southern France, He appesr..d to be the
. only officer in the French Army who dia not have French ‘
~ nationality, Hu is married to a Frenehwoman and has one
child. He now works in Paris in the office of the Force Ouvriere,
He appears ts te a man of confidence to both the Americans

and the French."
Sllen dha
ess ADPC £38038 °
pb/P

DCI


--- Page 369 ---
14-0000

“eee

SELLL,

STUY esau

25 March 1952

MEMORAROUM FORA CHUSP PIMARCE DIVISION
BUBIECTS “ SPTONIC end THEDIG

It 49 requseted that the 641,000,000 revolving fumd for

TPTOHIC bs replenished ty a total of $1,302,001 ta cover
Gigvursements fron TPMEDIC to TPTONIC wider date of 16 Hearch

1932 | ig the sxounts of §92),50h end $377,500. keealpte for
fyon TITUNIC are being forwarded to tha

thess discursensnts
Pinence l4vistea, attenticn Hire kdword Lownsy, this date,
under seperate cover.

QGEOHGE 8. BuBWER
Chief
Payoholovical Staff Division

Siu acl


--- Page 370 ---
14-0000

~ Sen tke’ a fw
Jo : ene ‘hie 7m [spss |

Noted by 0/00)
‘ vg “_ a

In eeply cafsr tes

Wy

DMGOMAMIAR: OL ASuictant Tircetor for kobicy tnorct
Deputy Ulrecior (Flans)

Deputy Uireetor ot Cental Intell izerce

SUBJECTS Attached Lotter from Srencer rrerl«

Attached Ia a letver fron Spencer laenlx to nh Leng
which Fnenix details the story of nis efforts ©
with the German authorities on the stams of 1:
post-!L 0G goverment. I would judge tuat Sve:
wonderful jch to data and that tnings ars on tie track,
think you would bo Literested in ecoadias his lety: x
second attachment, which dg the masorandun of unser:

: with the Gernan Government on which se is wow wort

. International Organizatics: Iivision
: Attachmant

° Ltr 3 Mar $2 to Bob Lang.

6

bf

€

,

& -

f SFORET



--- Page 371 ---
14-00000

Paris, Marcn 3, 1952

v4

Dear Bob,

- I have not done much reporting on cur Cerven
negotiations for suveral reasons; first, tere was not
much to report and, sccond, whatever there waa Dick Condon
undertook to forward from Munich. I did write C.D. @
couple of lotters cutlining our delaya ani sone of our un]
certainties, and last week I cabled him that J would send
a nore detalled narrative when J got to Paris. As ha is
now technically no longer President of NCFE, and a2. Admiral
Miller may not have been completely informed of all thatw
are trying to do, I am adiresring this to you, with copy to

@ach of thames

‘Yn the first place, let me say that progress
during the last half of last week was surprisinsly speedy
and encouraging. There sre stil! ‘any opportunities for
the well known ®slip 'twixt the cup and the lip’, and local
Gerran political evonsiderations coulc roar their ugly heads
at any woment. J think it must algo be understood that, as
Dick Condon puts it, no satter now many nor how good written
agroe“ents we may ‘have covering our operations, the whole
RFE enterprise in Ger-anywill have ty be played pretty much
by oar once the contractual agrzuments take effect. I raard
this, however, as an inescapadle risk, and Y ventitn it now
only to exphasize the parctount importance of the ut vost care
in programming and {in ecndiet to evol.! a boror wiich could
upset our entire apple-cart, The very ravarabdle repert eich
your friend Asher Lee made after his hurried Iinspe-tion of
Mundeh underlines tn= need for regular spot check on program
output to avoid howlers, and the neec for this once our
Pelationship with tne Ger.sns is ne loncser through the Occue
pation Authorities or HICOG is even nore imperative,

Dick Condon s-nt you from Munich the text of the
proposed Suncespost license which we acrecd on with Dr,
Schuster on Fe: rucry 19, 1952, and this should long aince
have reached yous

Qur Bonn ne otfations resulted in the accerntance

of this text, with two except:onss
1) Sub-clazuse 2 of article JJ is cli-inated, You

will resender trat the Rundespost wisha’ to

insert a provision aut.orizing License cunceilation if RPE

shou.d :rosceast anytring which @ft will te tne opinion of
the Federal Governzent tat tio transmissions will prejudice


--- Page 372 ---
14-0000

the interest of tha Fecurni Nepulic®, Wea objected to this

O% two grounisag

a) thet such provision had no logical place in
a technical License, and .

=p) that 4t nods ar position far too procarious
. since {t uxposed us to license cance! lation
practically at the whim of any Geran dureaue

crat,

and we persuaded Pre Schuster to lenve it out of tha liconse
and let us discuss the problem at Bonne At Bonn, we vere
fortunately able to persuade the Foratin Office officials
that guch a provision hid no techniczl place in tha liconse,
and tnat whatever shoulc he seid on the subject sould be
said in an oxchanie of Tlatters, or the eculvalent, batvcon
the Foreiin Office and ourseives, Accordingly, Article IT

now contains but on: clause,

2) Guestion was reiscd by the Poreizn Office

ofricials at Bonn ragardcice the lereth of the
license. Thetext Dick sent you provides for validity until
August 32, 1960. The reason I chore that cate wes that it is
the expiration date of our lease on the Yolzxirchen transe
mitrer site, ant J thought tiat if 45 arbitrary tora were to
va Fixed that tying it In with the flolzkirchen lease gave it
a plaugisility which wonld hels acceptance @ and thet provod
to te the case so far a3 the Sundespost was concerned,

The Foreisn Office people told us, however, that
numerosus cuestions had been sexed in the Bundestag regarding
RPE and its progeems, anc that for the dovern-ent to give us
@ license for as long a3 eirht years would cause serious
criticism, We are a peculiar sort of animal, anyway, and
for our irregular activities to ve vlessed with such long
term aa;roval would, they thought, be unwise for buth their
and our soints of view, accordingly, they sus scssted « foure
132%, periods J counterod with five, datin: from the date of

icense issuance which (since 1¢ cannot take placu before

the contractual asreeanants becore erfective, may well be late
in 1952) will give us consideratly nore tran five years life
expectancy. My ovr feeling is that ir we have not cone our
Job within five years, we might as woll pull dovm the shade
and go home, In any Case, my counter proposal was, «2 J said,
accepted, and Article JII of tne license wili now reads

8

®Tnis license shall be valid for a pertod

of five years com encing with the ¢«te of
its issuance ant vill be automatically
extenied trereefter from year to year unless
written notice of ter {nation f9 given by
one psrty to the ot'or not less tian 95 days
prior to the next eypiration datc,®



--- Page 373 ---
we mr nam

14-0000

‘ \ .
So such for the License, tne terms of vnich were
ghown to our HICOG frienda and regsrded by then as highly

favorable.

Our political discussions suffered fro~ a variety
of frustrations, Wa sxrecd on the licens: terms wit!, the
Bundespost on Fubrusry 19th, and an azroiatcent wes made for \
us to soe pr. Lenz = the ofiici.l to whom foctor Adenauer
had referred our preblens = as noon on Thursday, Februsry 21,
1952, Dick ani 1, tnereforo, tok an early train from
Frankfort and were met at the Bonn station by Fritz Kenpner
who told us that the srpointhent hid bean caneollied as Er,
Leng had been called to the Chancellery on an urgent xatter,
Fritz said that he hs bean told that if vc weet to Dre
Lenzts office, hia assistant would make a definite nppointe
nent for us later. VWs cid this, ani were received by a smocth
and noneco:;-ittal incsividual, wo said he would not be in
touch with Dr. Lens until nine otclock tint evening, and could
not make any cerinite dato until after he hai spoxen with

Lene

I had the very uncomfortable feeling that ve were
bdaing given a runearound, and Frits was very much annoyed.
We finally got the young chap to agres that he woules trv to
reach Lenz before evening, and that we would tol~ hone hin
during course of tre afternoon to know what infor-ztion he
had been able to obtaing We telephoned repcatedly, tut the
answer was always the sites "nothing to repert™. Dick and I,
thererore, took tra train buck to Fr.nkfort, while Fritz
stayed in Bonn ant, in tro evening, ha tele honed thet he had
finally got soze infcr-ation fro» Lenz! young assistant that
Lenz had turned the entire satter over to a recular Poreif¢n
Ofrice ofricial nated strohm, and that we were to rake arran-
genents to see Strohm, Fritz said that he has endeavored to
dv this, but had taen told by strohats office thet ha could
not be sure to see us until Trursday, the 78th, although
Vednesday, tha 7th, waa a aligt.t possibility.

As I think I wrote CPs, the pasehing colebrations
vere resching thair climax ov- > that veekend, and the first
two deys of the next vera, and f hav> no souct that Strohats
unavailability was, to 2 certcin extent, relate” to Fasching.
Frite scicd that curing his vistt to tn: Forel n Office bullde
ing he noticed that the founs were all iecorated with Fa ching
decoritions, so that even the hicheat of victals anparuntly
tske Pasching sericusly. Not wantine to -ake another fruite
less trip ta Bonn, I cecige: wa voulc accept Strohm's appointe

went for Thursday, Fesrurry ieth.

At 10.50 AM on Thursday, ve‘ runry 22th, Dick, Fritz
enc J presente: ourselves at Strohetls office. Ye vere not
ty a sober and not too effusive iniivisucl, nated Bruckner,
who inforzed us that, uaf rtucately, Tr, Strohm had teen
tailod away frost his office, tnat he wouls return as soon as



--- Page 374 ---
14-0000

-4e

he could and thet, mounvnile, he = grucknur = would be glad
to start pralicinary Jizcus- ions,

Again, I place? . comevhat sinistor interpretation
on what avpenred to 5° » chronie tencency on tre pert of the
Ger un officials authorize? te nerotiste with us to be absent
whenever wa put in an arvearance for the mu eof nevotiae
ting with tam, My pessinism was Increase: by the very rigid
and uncooptrative attitude of Brucansry altnough J reziized
trat having no authority ani vroba ly having bean Incufticiente
ly briefed he was, nituraliyy, cecping hie neck vell vithin
the protection of mia collar. In acy cate, he broucht up some
or the stickiest ,uestions com-ctec with sur op-ration,
talked of parliasentary interpeliations, of the responsibility
or tne German authorities for anytcing broadcast from Gerzan
soll, of tie importance of German certicipstion in cot-rmining
program content, of the dangers of arousing refugee ant: gonism,

and so on anc sc forthe

After an hour of this, Iowar ready to call it a day
and sugvest that wa come back wien v2 evul<¢ talk to Strohm
but, fortunately, at that moment Strohm ca-e In and the entire
atmosphere changed, He apoiogizec premisely © and esuarently
sincerely -— Yor tho delay, exprasse: hinself anxious to coe
operate in every possiole vay to meet our reculreventa,
brushed aside sone of the technicalitios raised by Brucmer,
ang got dow, to the essentials very rapidly. We vent over
the ground we had previously gone over with Bruckner, we exe
plained our -urpose an! kept our feet fairly firmly planted
on the principles which we referdec as btesi¢. The result of
our long discussion was substantisl ayreesent on the two

things that scattered roasts

a) license term of five years, and

bd) no uncuilifiod cancelintion richt of the kind
first euc. ested by the Buncespost, and more
or less inaisted uson by Bruckner,

Tne sree of ozreencnt wes se broad that we sucvested
an adjournment to per it us to nut in writing the a,resrent
ve hed recched, return with it to the Forsicn Ofrice, end
asrce upon . final text. :

Fritz wea a little too optinistie rerarding the
task that lay ‘efcr: us, and 1% wm: cle ren hour or so
verore the tine fixed for our aft mocn a-rointient thet ve
would not be ready, so ©. tel--proned to Strole and postponed
the appointztent until the next diy at noon, We vorked all
afterno n at 3ICOG, anc until arter midnight in our Celogne
sotel, Wo hoc talked about an exchange of lettera as the
vehiclo for the a. reement, but 1t becene 4if7ieult to detars
mine who was writing what to whom since the Gervans could not



--- Page 375 ---
meena 2 Rar cn me a ETN Si ela ve iaraamnitie t

14-0000

very ‘ell offer to give us sovething we hat not anked for,
and we, tae New York State Cor;oration, cout-—hardly demand

certain rights fron tne Geruen Govern ant,

Nothing thet wa vere acle to compose satisfiod my
Yecuiresents until shortly before midnight the us of u new
forcula, netely, e seroraniut of understanding betuvaen me,
reoresenting ACFE, ant Dr. (whether Strohm, Lenz,
or flallsteia -wndch I do sak now) resresanting the Garcran
Governrent, couls be initialed ana made the basis for arreee
rent. This forsula treke th: santal logeJam, and va did a
paper, a copy of which is snclosed.

Friday morning, ke wert back to HICOO, Pick typed
the manuseript which Frit: and I had prepared, and va took
4a copy in to Sam Reber, Sam rajsed » fax guestions which
we were easily atlu to ansver, made one sucsastion, nevely,
the Insertion of tha word ‘u:sic® in the 8th line on page 3,
then expressed hiiself as complitely sutisfied, He attached
the very greatest icp rtance to getting from the Cem:anc the
_endorsenent of RFE's objectives, which tha; hac given to us
erally and which we expressed in the peracraph cosasencing at
the botto: of perce 2. He thousht »: would havi accomplished
the al:cst icpossitle if we oltained such written endorsee

mente

From HICOG we went direct to Dr. utrohatls office,
showed him the memorandum (Fritz had net had time to prepare
@ Gernon translation and we wera afraid this wigi.t caley
matters, but Strohm said ne fuwis the text entirely clear)
and got fron him feucdiautely a practically complete ap -roval.
Bruckner joined u3 a ilt:le liter, and ho followed Strohmts
lead, There wero oniy two points of diffare:ce bet ern us,
and neither 9: then 4i¢ J re,ird as sutstantsal., You will
. see tnat on prise 4 I asked for agrennent that the Gersan
’ Governzent would cooper..te vit us to tre fullest nossitle
: extent in reanect of three Steas, only one of wich, nacely,
{e) was vituin the competency of the Forsiin Of'ice. stroha
4 and Bruckner argucd very logically trat the Poreicn Office
an could not bind the yinance Ufai-try or an: other ‘Ministry of
the Gevven Governient an: atvised vary earnestly against
seeiing im scvanco to cvtein the approval of the Finance
: Ministry. I recocnizgeé tre walldéity of both these noints,
' Y §ncor;orated Iteas (a) and (hb) in t).: perer vocsuso I did
not cow woo would si.umoon tre prt of the G2.~-=2n Jovern=-mt.
Had it ben Accnauer or, Sy his Instructions, Heilstein, 1%
eouls be argued that thefr sisactures dif in offa:t sind the
entire Goverment. If, howover, it wis to oo Ctrohm, a: he
facicats.! ft wouls be, tien, obviously, he wa- without pover
An th: procdses, It wor acried, therefore, tict (a) ens (b)
would be orfitted, and that insteal thereof Strohm would draft
@ generel clcuse Dinding the Tore! n office to ceorerate to
the fullast pos:itle extant with NCFB in preaching satisface
tory solut-ona of any protleas arising botvacn NCFE and any



--- Page 376 ---
14-0000

“Pelief, tnat the u -

ee ee en ee mm REE OMe EE ae Te a

Ministries of the Garten Govern.nonts

. Iten (c), obviously, va. intended to cover particue
L-rly the suestion of visass for Poles now in London who had
been recruited for procrs” sork in ‘unich, In cur talks on
Thursday, Strohm had pro:tised to facilitete the cntry of
these poles, and Said tuat if Sick would sent in their nases,
birth dates and any other identifzing tnfor-ation we had he *
would Instruct tha Ger-sn Consul in Lonwon to Is-ue the
visas, ani thet goarral instructions wold, If we wished, be
sant out to ths effect trat sogssascsen-of an ermpleyrent letter
from NCFE would se suf-sctent Justification for the Lasuance
of a viua, subject only to th: s.curity curstion. On that
point, Stroha oxpressed the wish tnat our recruits ba screened
for ug by CIC. We pointe! out the impracticability of this,

I call your particulsr atteation to ti.a@ Language
of the two full paragraphs on paxe 3, Thia was vary curcrully
devised, and 1 ac vonvinced that it {2 acre favorsble to us
than wa nad ny roasen to aynect. Ag I tela vou, Aeber
accepted it vith the single change mentioned above. Nelson
and Thurston thought it excejlent, and Charlay Lewis, to whom
I showed it Priday, said it was "the optinun®,

The G rrans hac indicated a daiire for so- kind
of a pre- scrutiny of our prograng to avoid political cone
flict. This woula, of course, heve futally erippled our
efrectivencss, go the lanvu.ce tnat I drafted wis drafted
for the purpey: of emphasizing the postebroadcast nature
of any Gerasn scrutinye In orser to avoid frivolcus come
plaints from any Geran of ficial, I stipulated that any
protest must reach NCFE through the Foreign office. This, .
also, placos NCFB in a positian to put «ny such controversy
before the Stuta Department, and if tne fscue Involved ds a
gubstantial one to have tam Btate do tie neces:ary vis-a-vis
tne Fureiyn Office, If, notwithstindin,; the Ger an protest, and
notwithstanding the intervention of the state Deorsrtment
should tne latter wish to tecome involved, RFE continud to
violate the Gerazn rejuest, J phraso: the next step ag ine
volving the surrencer by us of t!.c license ratnes than its
cancellation, This say te « Fine roint, but I felt it Inters
posed one nore step between the £2 of the guillotine axe
and ths drop ing of the head in the basket. I found, to ny
of tha Portuguese for:ula, no.ely, the
filing of the broadesst tapes for thirty days to por-f
@xa-ination by the dorvans was « co-pletely accentatle device,
and you will nete tuat J case. tiis procedure on ths desirable
lity of providing a factual btusis for the consideration of
any cuestion®,

We left with fr. :trohm a co:y of thiv re-crancus
of uniorstanding, and he underto.k to prepere end forwerd to
me in Paris a dreft of a letter §incorperating our agreerent
as sot forth In the crerorancuz, with t.4 so ifficutions oute
lined atove, which tte Forel... office vould be rropared



--- Page 377 ---
14-0000

ofricislly tu adress to NCFE imavdiately upon the coming
inte erfuct of the contractual agreonents, and which would
Nave ‘nttached to it a copy of ta License which would bo
grantsd dy the Pundespost as of th: date of the coving Into
efrect of the contractual a-reesents, This lettar, when
acimmovledged and accepted by NCFE, woulc constitute, with
the License, the agreccont botvecn the parties. Dre Stroha

proaises to huve the draft in Paris by Wednesday or Thursday
or tnis +.0ke : °

Fritz ¢2 din toncon this wre Im connection with
the Ger an ‘wits ne,otlationg, but will return ror the weeke
ene at which time he ano J vwlil go over the drsft torether,
Yt se ngs ty both of us unlikely that we shall hu ably to accept
Dr. strohtta draft without any epanse whatsoever, and It will,
theresure, protavly ti nacesssry for us to go back to Ronn :
for one or perhaps two days to dren out any renstuing diff le
culties to acrec on u Mined teat and te fultial such text
with the Gurus for the puryose of reconiing our acreemants

Both Fritz and J are astonished at the aprarent
@use sith which our na,oatistions pogressed, We were atle
to reach aglgoscnt on the most Important questions conesrned,
but we ere bots ceutdous and we tots rezifze that between
' Last Peidayts agreement and next Thursday's draft lotter
there may be sora vost Jdivergensics, but certainiy if the
spoken word can be reljued upon, and if e friendly, cooperative
and even generous attitude on the part of toe principal German
ofricials of tia Bundespost and fForeisn “ffice to whom we
spose is sisaificant, he Germin authorities are gonuinely
anxious to meke 1¢ possible for RFE to conticue to operste
effectively, J think that we ure ell justified in feeling
very mucn encoutsged by what it has besn pvasiile to accom=

plish in she pint two weekse

If the above time achedule can be observed, and if
not leter thin Tuesday of next vock wa can have tha cocunents
in fi:al shape anu culy initialed, I plan to leave Paris for
Lisbon, via Ponair co crasil, on Thursday, she lith, stay in ,
Lisbon aot sore than ona wack, ami bu Lack in New York ’
arouns the 2lst.

Toomciote a copy of thse fngiish translation. of the
prozosed Buriespost license e: » reed upon on Fo!-rusry 19th,
with the ne Article IIJ referred tc a:ove, and «a copy of the
craft Mezorandum of Underst-niing dated Feuru:ry 29, 1952, 80
thet you cey have before you ali th. sl vant papers.

Sinceruly yours,

Mr. Rodert EB, Lang,
Director, RFE,

110 Vest 57th street,

Mev Yorn 19, NoYo = Usrede

ec Mr. C.D, Jackson, Advirai Nilier, Mr. J.C, Hughes,
Mre F.C. Sompner



--- Page 378 ---
14-00000

I.

The Bundermini:ter fuer daa Po.t=- und Renneldevecen hereby
grants to the HCFE, a membership corporation orgenized

under the laws of the State of Hew York (USA) recognized

in the Fedoral Republic as a foreign "Verein", ea licence

to operate the redio instalistions listed and specified in
the Annex as foreign radio stetion on German territory on

the following conditions. .

1. In opersting the rauio instellations the NCFE will use only
the frequencies and call signs al ocated to it from tine to
tine by the competent cuthorities of the USA, and duly
notified by said authorities to the competent organa of

the Intornational Teiecommunicationsa Union.

The radio installations may be only operated for broadcasting
purposes (Resto Regulations Chapter I Article I Section II
n. 21 and 22) ‘of the NCFE; international point to point

2

connections for broadcasting purposes are also permitted
subject to the consent of interested foreign administrations;
for purposes of third p&uties the radio installations may

not be used ui thout prior written consent of the BPMin.

3e Without prior written consent of the BPMin NCFE is not per]
mitted to change the technical specifications of the above
mertioned resto transmitting inste:iations or to put additional
Pacio tranzmitting installations into operations changes in
frequencies and ¢all slengynget de notified to the BPMin

* aes eee Services

a) A radioco.cunication service of transmissions to be
received directly by the general public.
22 b) This service may include transmissions of sounds or trans]
missions by television, facsimiie or other means.

1
:


--- Page 379 ---
14-0000

4e The radio instalictions will be operated in accordance with
the provisions of the Internutional ‘“elecom-unteations
Gonvention presently in force (Atlantic City 1947) and the
Radio Regulations annexed to said convention and any convention: i

or Regulations, to which tho Federal Republie is a party
-

which may take their place,

5. In the avent of inte: ference by HCFE ratio installations with
German reiio services NCFB in consultation with the DBP will tak
necesvary measures to clininate the interference as rapidly
as possiblo.

6. Duly accredited representatives of DBP shull be accorded free
access to all techniesl installations of NCFE's radio
stations in Germany Curing office nours as vel] as outsido
office hours, the latter only upog prior notification,

7. NCFE shall reimburze D2P for all sums which DBP is cbliged
to expend ao a result of eccidents suffered by any of its
employees in the performance of their duties on the premises of

CFE,
8. The license foe for the above-mentioned radio installations

is fixed at $ 1lo,000.-— pe: year, payable in advance in BS
~~ > =" "“arterly tnstalhents on the first of each quarter by re-
mittence to Benk Deutscher Liender in favor of the Generalpost-
kasse of DBB, except that as*first inztuliment there shall be
paid an amount compute? pro rata tomporis from the date
. of the license to the first of the next following cuarter.
\ Il, This license is not trensferable. It can be revoked at any time

without notice if



--- Page 380 ---
14-0000

111)

1¥)

" 1) one of the conditions of the license (I) should be

violated and such yioiation should continue despite request

to desist;

This license shall be valid for a period of five yoars
eonsencing with the date of its issuance and will be autbmatical)
extended thereafter from year to year wiles: written notice of
termination is given by one party to the other not Jess than

Jo days prior to the next expttation date.

In the event of revocation (II) or of expiration (111) of the
license tho operation of the radio installations shall be

discontinued at once.


--- Page 381 ---
14-0000

Drafg . 29 Feb 1952

Nenorandiua Of underetanding between wr. Phenix, representing
the NCFE «hd Dr. » representing t!.¢ Fedaral

German Repudlie

AP. Phenix stated that the NCFE hed been founded in

‘1949 by a group of private Auerican citizens aninated by

the desire to engourxge by positive measures the eventual
Liberation from the oonaunist yoks of tha peoples of the
enelaved countries. of Sentral and Eastern Europe, He
Oxplained that with the help of endowments and publis
contributions to the Cruesde for Freefon, the Comittee had
undertaken, saongy ite other activities, the operation through
Ra@io Pree Europe of radio broadossting installations through

woieh 46 disseminated to listcners in the Iron Curtain

sountries prorracn eepeoially prepared hy the Cemmit:ee for
the furtherance of its objectivea. He pointed out thas
Radio Free Europe hed conatruated and vas precently op=
erating transnittier etations at Holskirchen end Biblia, hed
erected a lars studio and office building in vunich and nain=
Gained a lerge monitoring estobliehmeng et Sehlessghein and
that 160 prograne were prepared vith the help of lesding
ocholers, journalists, adzinistrators and econeate expertes
and men of letters who have escaped fron the Coununist
@ontrol of their native land, 2

ur, Phenix explained that the inetallation of RFE
fagilitiea in the United 6t.tea Zone of Geraany hed been
effected by the HCFE:the eecupation of that Zone



--- Page 382 ---
14-0000

fae

2.

by the U.8 Army and that the operations of RFE had been, and
wore being facilitated by the U.8 Arny authorities because of
FFE's etatus as an accredited Anerican information

agenoy. He observed that the NCFE ves concerned lest the
termination of the Occupation Status would, in the absenca
of specific agreenent with the Federal German Republic, re=
gult in haspering the work of RFE and fapairing tts effect
ivenses, and that, with the approval of the Department of
Btate, negotiaticna had been carried on vith the BPAin which
had resulted in agreement os te the terns of a license which
would be granted by the BPKin to NCFE innediately upon the
termination ef the Occupation Statute. A copy of that license
4a appended hereto,

Hr. Phenix called attention to the fast thag$ this lisense
dealt with the technical aspects of RFE's radio broadcast
operations and that there vere several non=teohnical matcers
Wiich required clarification before the RCFE would feel
juetified in undertaking the long rence program it haa under
conelideration.

Dre stated thet the objectives and purposes
of NCFE, 1a the realization of whieh RPE was enraged, vere
objectives and purposes to which the Federal Government itself
wae unalterably coanitted, The negeriations for a BPhin
license had been conducted with his full knowledge and approval.
Be was woll aware that by licensing RFE's operation in flermany,
fully cognisant of the objectives and purposes of that operation,
the Federal Governzen® was on the ene hand encouraging the
expenditure by HCFE for that operation of large sums of aoney
eontrabuted by the Ancrican publis snd on the other



--- Page 383 ---
14-0000

3

was giving NCFE an, aggurance that RVE's operation in Germany
would not be interfered with, buS on the contrary would be

” fagklitated and helped by the Federal Goverment,

From his viewpoint there was only one reservation he had
to make: RFE would be expooted to refrain from using ite vroade
oaet facilities on Ceruen soil for the purpose of advocating
end promoting political enda whieh the Federal Governuent con=
sidered in conflict with ite ewn bagio policies, Hence, the
Voderal Goverment. would have the right, officially to aotify
NCPE through the Foreign Office of any such conflict. Shauld the
German atations of KFE thereupon not refrain froa advocating
and prouoting the polletes te which the Federal Gevernsent had
objected, the Foderal Government would have no choloe but to
require the surrender by NCPE of {ts licenee and the dicoontinudnoe
of ite vroadcast operations fro: Geraan territory.

Nxy, Phenix stated that he understood the reasons for ms
the views expreased by Dr. » accepted his reservation,
and agreed to the procedure outlined, and that to provide a
factual basis for the coneideration of any question which night
arise in respect of RFE broadcasts the latter vould keep on
file for a period of 30 days froz the cate of use all tapes
reoording prograss broadcart frozn RFE transiuitters in Gernany
so that any queertioned prorran would be avatlable to the appro=
priate German aut}.orities when requested ny them ur. Phenix
then emphasized the inportance attached by NCFE to certain other
amecta of the opereting pro>lene ef RFE, for exemplet

ee ert et erm ate


--- Page 384 ---
he0no00 re

4s

(a) thet prenerty of NCFE brourht into Germany prior

to the termination of the Occupation Statute be recognised as
- lezally within Gernany and cubjeet to tho free disposition of

CVE,

(bv) tha§ NCFE be recopmnized as a non-profit orranization
of publie interest and that in reepeot of ita operations in
Germany 1t and ita euployees are entitied to no less favorable
treataeng$ than any aosparabld Geruan nen=profit corporation or
entity.

(0) that the non-German personnel now Gapleyad by NCFE
in Gernany be permitted to remain in Geraany while se employed.
an@ that additional non=Gersan enpleyees be perait:ed to enter:
Geraany for ouch employment subject only to the right of the
competent Germany authorities to deny entry to any indivi-ual : H
whose presence in Germany vould in their epinion pre juédice : -
German internal security.

Dr. atated that he recornized the isportance of
these elenentsa in the operation of RYE in Germany and that the
Federal deruan Republie vould gocperate with NCFE to the
fullest possible extent in meeting ite requireaento with

respect thoreto,

oH


