
--- Page 1 ---
1 104-10071

10122}
. » 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992] *

wee

RETURN TO CIA

us ‘ . Background Use Only - - ?
+ Do Not Reproduce

vA Reni Se eek
t ay lb Hay 1955.
Te cniel, NBA (z-tz DATE _ _

FROM Senior Hoprosentative, (ew Dolhd
+

* GENERAL Opsrational/ INTEL
SPECIFIC CPEYLIPPER = Pransaittal of Reporte
of

3, Prepawitted herewith are copies of THAR IAVLT reparte and notes
os listed belov, Hot included are carbon copies cf tho initial report
(plans vnéated) end the report covering the period 28 Deceaber - 14 January
as the third copy waa not nado, .

2. HERIAULP requested that, dg posaidle, a set of bis report be
made available to him on his returo to facilitate preparetion of a easter
roport on overall findinge and impreceions.

a

Phoans ¥, USED

Enclosures Uadsr separate cover
(Pouched 7 Hay 1955

“14 Jon ~ 23 Jaa vb - 7 ber

25 Jen = 30 Jan (8 Kor = 16 Kar

30 Joa ~ 8 Feb 18 Kar - 30 Mar

FJ Yat ~ L7Ved Interview with’ U5. TAGs , *
18 Pod (1 pp) Bapre 12 apr _

20 Fed - & Har Notebook

Diatribation:
Orig & 4 = Bye
9 Kay 55 2 = Vilos

GE 51-28 A



--- Page 2 ---
ec ae eens a ene ene eee pe ROT

debriefing cf T

Ne AE RURTEE o

<a May 1955

York to handie the preliminary

1. Frtor to my departure for Ye
foliowing subjects witb CNEA@5:

MERIAULT, 1 discussed

i} In view of the fact that iIAJLT's expenses on her recent
‘rip te India have been ereater n was anticipated, 21,000
aijitional funds have er are te te shortly deposited tc her bank.
Thig will be done by sterile check. It {s to be accounted for
ander the terms of the original centract.

eo:
t.

25 CNRA-5 gugpested that ' tke ger reports up with me for
posaible annetation and expansion, /!pon exarination on 14 May,
this avpears unfeasible in view of the fact that there are cra

correo ‘ndiecators and R! symbole attached directly ta the reports.

3) CNEA-5 suprested that [ pursue with THEKiAULT the
possibtlite of developing an interest in Krishna Menon, utilizing
a cleared publisher who could request Menon to write a book, This
4 preach to be based on Menon's acute susceptability to flattery.

4) CNEA-5 sugcested that THERKLAULT be asked to review the
areas of her inflvence in order tc lay the groundwork for an
official invitation to visit this country being extended to the
trtea “4nister in the future. ‘ve suggested Sen. George and
Chestar Bowles ss possipie points of departure.

5) THEFTATLT is te be informed that her reporte have been
of i:rensurable assistance te the Ambassador end to the U.S.
Gevecnrent vis-a-vis policy :lenning for India.

6) THERIAULT ig to be asked tz come to Washington for a day
or sc in the very near future for further debriefing. This te

to be arranged at her convenience. Pz
S
7) In view of the fact that THERIAULT has been umitting R
of the Agency's role in sponsoring her trip, I suggested that I s
new make ner witting in terns of the pecurity involved. It 2.
seemed advisable to me since it is likely that there will be a)
future contacts with TIVKIAULT, CNEA-5 agreed to this. &/
‘ &
2) THERIA'LT 4g to be advised that she is at liberty to al
digeuss any and all aspects of her trip with anybody with the =)

e ception of the Agency's role in sponsoring it.

02.
id
Peroved from Projec PAF L iPfER =:

jassificatlopx: ONG Z
SECRET sco # EEA | &

_Foldu % >

okt



--- Page 3 ---
i Mar ee FN ETE HR hte ct BRI OI: OI ICR TITER

. : nurs
. r= ' See 24 a

2e-

°) In view of the vast amount of work that must be done,
T suggested that 7 plan to spend two days - 16 and 17 May ~
'¢ {t hecomes neces-ary. ‘cn yrevious trips to discuss
“UT's mi:sion wit’ her, 1 found that she frequently
“nd other commitments which made it difficult to cover
adequately the material which 1 hed amassed. If this is the:
case on this trip, 7 should prefer not to press her. One
dav's latitude seema the better part cf wisdom. CNLA-5
agreed, ve shall see, however.

ic} tn the event that it becomes necessary to reach me,
“ surgest that wife be asked tc get in touch with me,
(5 okson 7-7018)) and that T be asked eimply to call ny
office, Twill then call on the sterile phone, For the &
record, my telephone number ‘n New York ts @ELEAN &-25300

SECRET

-

PRE Eee REO a hae eters EE Bia tO RAST AEST SARA ERS



--- Page 4 ---
FL Phe

|
Frsect (2)
AOE AN ONE

FroJeo

GEG >
FA
Polds sh >

Absa Liog

Jong

S$

Pronvag fren

YT
= t
Boz:

pore hs
~

sy
t

?

3,

26

Bo

4

Joneral Covsents. 4

1 beve no. talsed wath aany Ford Poundation .copig@ and i

TO’ peopie. 4.3 darreseed theds qualdty. They oe workscy
hrrd and ere doing {t in a colf=cffooing aamner. & have not heard
one critiodsn of t.ca froa anybodve There are a Sou Guia, of cour
I have not yot mot thea. They fare hore °to help Ind’a eaxay Gut
ber projcata and key 44oaa" no one put 4b. ind they seca te Co
@ not only der0craticncdy but with a very reed wareeda

sy2p-thy «o yet they otey quietly in the background nga take none
of the yreddte put I feal nore ;trongly esch wook X am hare

thet the work 40 60134 and 4a having fam enfously geed effest in
relieving tension end hostility between the two countricas fhe
resuite of the pQtuad work dre spperon’ now and hope bea recently
Ancreased anong Indienay sleo their cam self-ceonfidenso, when
confidenge ineren: ea, censitiveness deorersea, of courses

Fro. ail J have picked up, the feeling 4s widesprond that
tmbraandor Allen did e good job out here. és one put At, Phe
wan axsetdy right for the period he vas heres just aa Bowles
wos right for the epectal probles3 of his two yesra.®
Both Indjan and ..ierdeous highly raise both aca.

“ve have a prize in Evelyn Heresy and so.agkody sho thapk God
every night that she 4s hero. she and. Dy4end i sae? ore
posts the 1ctSrldved suericens in north India, certrinly.
Svelyn Hersey ie “nown throughout India, Sho waa Sobinl Webfore
nttreha »t tho =nb-asy beginning I thins 4n 1948. The only cao
nttached to any enb-esy anywhere, I understond, Her tore eo

to interpret tho sociad ch:-nges taling pdeco dn inddag to beeoad
nware of the needa ang probieas and kow these needs nnd probleas
were boing iet; »nd to offer her serviecs end her expericasa
whenever or wherever 4t wes asked for. hen the administratica
eh nged, she wns dieaiaced cspublican ba the grounds that this
wes a new Sdeag nobody eleo had ever done such a thing, that ia
nu other foreign serviog «nd so why should the U.Sodam At Hr.
cilents urgent insistenae, che was sent baek, this tine unter
the »ogia of T&i- She is, however, doing the seno jobs Eee
duffirenoe is very wide; she 4a edalrcd end Loved by liaveralig
thou::ndsa of Indians froa the high echoalens dowa to the ovewwera
ano vther horijens. whe do called on for e:vieo 4a mares
ficlds end by very high off4esala,. Sho vorka behind tho eccucs
and fools thet her work vould be ruined were she given aredas
for what sho hos actualiy done. she 4s vavid ond full of lave
end one would hardly -all hex self effacing; and yot her wore

4c Gone alaoct anonynouely, J heave been around her enough to see
how wido her o4rele of Inddaa frisnds 493 end how conatentl;

end continuou sy they etresa through her house, sho go ove
indie. Hao trsvelicd moh sore than 209 thougend m4ics.. She say
in reoqat tontha ehe hn: felt abeolutely no sutegonica towsrd her
ro rn Agerdorn. she is ohrewd, hes sherp eyes and cazog 4&3

ino wa cea bho poratacriiyy 43 nobodyis foo} 43 etrongiy antic

Go %; 4s varahe: and inteilestuelly Gonible. Gus of
the best ainds J have run 4nto since coning ott.
cy
J wash «3 had five tines the PE 5: e, in Ti. They cored
e

"Wosd polities. J. think it

Posed yeh Pep foe

fed hb Bie Nomen,
ae aN \

e. cet



--- Page 5 ---
5.

65

. : SE ONS ca IT GRRE MeO Ca

ne RAR(NODED ILS
e.

Genera. lJommente. (continued,)

4 very good projext haa regentiy bee: inunched, It de
cried The Delhi freining und orient.»tion Centre for

Poronign Teehnici: ns in Indie. Tiis isa the scgond time At

hne been held, I think. Gt begina today, Jan. 24. Gontimes
for two weeka, (The first one worked out e fine short
bibldogrmphy on Indiat and a littic broohure on "Peods
eveilable in North Indis.) Thde second couree covers

the Indien villnge, with visita out to villyegess Indian
art, erchitesturo, dance; Indian history; rellgtony Yolen
in india; other religiona and philosophies, Indian fendly
life and customs; Kealth probiens and rea rods t educetional

problensy urban probleas; rural unesploynent and ef@y the
role of foreign eid in India; diecuasion of the Pive Yeor .
Pian. ppc ee BET

It is the wind of briefing that evcry foreigner coming to
Indid,Shousd have. It is open to eis of then/ we wore
dovited ainply cs gueate and shaii attend zany of the meetings.
Faiags sre chown; trips to art galleries and auseums, eta,

Miss Hersey hav hed uct. to do with this; slao Dre bouglas
Eeminger. and yrobrbly othera, too, Indians will do zoet

of the briefing, ,

2 shall write later siout the PAve year Plen. am etidi FR
etudying 4t. Shall have s number of intervieua with the e
Planners, or with « few of thes. Shall also go out on aeveral ¢
of the projeets, Thie ceeag inportant to ue for scedad

changes and how they sre medo troed polétios, Fhe political
picture’ oan aert-inly not be dnderstood if the cultural and
ev@ial pdoturee are not atudied and analysed carefully.

we +re enclosing » fea exverpte of g

Hv. Nebra, ur. Menon
Gongress Party bi;



--- Page 6 ---
14-00000.

R,

3,

fe eee ene oe

EO RS acer RAN pd Sn GOT TTD

ae A RAR AH (MaDe (tus
04éq ond Ends of Information; 22
ERS

Hy Piob.told ae that the Gougunists are organising the
doaestie@ workers of New Delhi . Lest woes there wad a

goating 2° oyahs at Endda Gato colied togother for this

pur oo¢, The waex bef ro the bearera (cr tho ouerp ae)

were oslled together. The Gomaunista are godng about it dn

s ohresd way; making very reasonable desanis, euch 16 o hal?
dey off ech woek, n rise of perhaps 4 of & 6e3 a 2oath

in wagag, 4 Gouminist dn every home will reslly be somethings

Re crya there is iittle petivity of Gongress perty or Soeislist
party enong lsbor groups. The work is bo done by
Gouzurists., Phey, sonehow,’ ave the soncy Qo thes
organd sathnal work whase there is little nonoy ansng reguier
workers Gua to weakness of daduatry, suell meabar ond low wages
Gy of the vorkerayd.Ho io troubled over leak of ootivaty
esong the desocrrtfa groupa in isbor cireles. Saya he hss been
here cniy 3 sonths end ernnot ia yet soa the picture clearly.

Fhe stato Dept.ts eoldnesa about peradtting fn..idea to vaodt

the -iracn dn Ghina g:ve the U. S. a very bad presa ont here.

it wre very clover otrategy on the part of Ghinoy St ure bed
strategy on our part to appear caidous to the feclings of the
fesiiies, Famiiy affection rugs deep out here. It enother
ene of our many eaoil biugdera which sonchow loom so largo

when viewed the hundreds of ailiions out here., If, souehou,
everybody 4 count up to ten vefere opoaking, end think nod
hov China is going to tele 4¢ but how tho entiro area of ania
ill rerct. fhose faailies Gouad have becn told quictly end
personelly thet 1¢ thoy wanted to go they vould not be protests3
by en agericen prooport,; they co.ad even havo been ocarcth

urged not to goy but tho blatant press rolesoe. . . . Forgive ay
efatorielising, J aad sure XJ am not suppoocd to Go St; tod one fa
very close here to the sind and heart of 4340 and onnnst help
boing ruaro of these reactions of the peuple. anyone who loves
the U. S. oennot help but wish thet mcm our o;oltesaen could epee
cora Coftly and nore trctfully, a broggart or bully is dislike
7 ell traen bodngsa. To have strength fs finos to brendich that
etrangth offends. .

a a cs Oe a va

The Fines of India (Jan, £5) has exocllens editoriol ca the o59
socialistic socdety gond ag outifacd by nchru ond Gongresa perts
leaders. "Boca Avad’ mark a revolutionary ohafts in genecas fezey -
e + o o All that St wcamt way en acknoclcdgacnt of the imsveaging) 4,
agportant role of the public sector 4n the national ceomeay ce a }
rode that was already defined with grester precisica fn tha :
4asustried poldey resolution. Phere was arthing to &ndisase thst
there wovid be ey neu engroaghaent on the sphere reserved to
private cnaterprise, and the fosrs expresacd cutsida tho Ccngraaa
ca that score were, therefore, unjuotafiod, Hoither tas thera
eny justification bor the apprehension that the new ckgestiva
ecent a redieal departure frou the Saryed Genk. « o o Baad
mattered really uns not tho Label th t Bos given the eco CPSEa on
tat the extent to which in aotual preotisa t could re

the production of greater veekth end in ita ~re eqaitakle
Gistpatations o . . What vas odgnifdeant . . . bag that 1¢ should
EE GS es e Rise Bred

PERG SS. OO SES DERI 2

te

eat arene

TUBE, CARD .REPRODUSTIONS



--- Page 7 ---
ao

oadg a ad enita of inforent. on (cont.) , Ake. ene Es _&
AeA! ee ee sp

ae + ns

°

= ~.

a - ~ Leg 7 a Reaper be meena SOMA: Oranpimetie, &

‘

hove been goapelled at thia stege to ceck s sore ,opuler dabek

for ita eoonsade and soodnl poddedes.. . . If this couattacat io tea
be sore than » design to steal the opponents! clcstoral shusdes, the fy
Gongreas Governaentsa at the Gentre and in he gtatea have :
qaneddotaly to eet about the task of translating tho mea prdiesiples
Anto polieica, . . . The only way to aske the polisy of Gongress
Governnenta ecoord with Gongresa principles is aolf eriticisa and

et there were recponsible Gongreaszen at Avadi who sev

eager even in the condenmation of nalpraetices y CoDgrIsOQsBo

eo « » . Phe roed to full enployment <-- for which tho Gomgrese has

for the firet tiag 1nid down e time-limit - = is by no Geags Gaaye

3t dezapds e coapXeto roanovetion of iife in the countryside on the one
hen@ end speedy industrialisgtion making the country ras ealfe
eufficiont ne posodble on the other, (ete.)
Dagest of OF

Se SRE nhs apegen on Jan, 2Abh.

Ho spoke of the unsuitebdlity of totolitardonisa dn the desooratia
Ropublio of India and the dn Goquacy of ca, dtalien, stating that
there was left only e Soclaliatda approach open to the courtry.

He statos thet the aceoptenee of tha Socdalistic society as Sond
meant the nationalisotion of institutions that could imnediately.
nationalised with ndvantogo. Phe presughion ia so doing, daid
Hr. Geohrushh, waa thot Soodaliscd proddotdon vould bo acre
psofitable, Ha, hovever, cautioned that 4¢ experfense balded that
vicu, the otep aight have to be retr,zccd,

a

Wo otated that a Socdnlistio ideal which roseived the support
of tho people could achieve the tuo objectives of incresaing
geational ineoe end enhancing individual davadend,-

He otated that Indic hed established eeonoate etability though
at a rather low lovel of prosperity during the férat Plan perisd.
Yio oaid the eredit for the ochiaveacas went nod porely to egonoaga
GaRagcacat end pleaning but inanded other fad, arayanong thea
aooiotence froa fricadly nations. Tho Unitcd States, he sai @
had contributed the largest share of foredga gid.

e 1 gay!
Removed from reosoot( PAV? L PIER 21

CS Classi ticatiod: NE Bi

qasestss. S02 oC 74” 2
Boxn Fol 3 =|

isc Sind4 ond fr. Haden (pravate seorctary of Mra. Gendbiva St
and reception cloris et Prine Udniotcsia Eause) over a es37 eh

Gup of tea in their quarters told G2 the following otorye =

ant

Ubilo an China, at firot big banqacs g4vea thea, tr. poten and
his cin eared (and othera) were carved tang baby Ive Eieo
Capped honcye Uro. Gath’ (his daughtcr) was co ehoccd
teat d cat the esnoe he ofghs end turncd abeye Bone of theq  <y
iy aC7o wi : :
chile they vere da Giice. aa not ever gorved aggin to thea :

Tega ek ee ee nN ee cyt eee ee Ee teammate SESE


