
--- Page 1 ---
14-00000

def of Station, Buenos sires
Clef, bE
chief, &H

‘Keting Chief of Station, Madrid _
, SuaeECT Cc ter Sapi
lnis TEDESCHI, aka Inie TiDECHI

AGTION kEwuaiD
FYI

TEFSRENCES.

OTEN-1A463, 29 Hay 1962

Ca reeeipt of reference, Madrid Ststion traces were run on the Subject
with negative results. Traces were also requested of the QUANTUM cervice
end on 21 Ancust 1941 they informed us that they had no record of the
Subject in their files, In this case tho WANTU service aleo carried cut
traces in the WUOTA files for KULARK,

ney
ANTHOLY Be  LiRAKS

., SSE MPKOUS EDINON - . 5, SASSIEALC
REACES POMS |

" S1DR SEMA ANOUSIIe fT co : SECRET”

Wiel ARE OBSOLITE



--- Page 2 ---
14-0000.

“DISPATCH

mete

HEADQUARTERS FILE NO.

DWSLS ‘

. “ah3" — (CHECK "xX" Os)
epionaze Ga
SOOT (ressibly late TAINO) MARKED FOR INDEXING

ACTION REQUIRED

OL 1663, 2 May 1961

Filo checks comiucto’d am fubject thronch Police Liatgon sro nomtive.

Distrimations

| REPLACES FOR - --
7 SE28, SLIMA ano 5129
WHOCH ARE ORSSUTE, ”



--- Page 3 ---
saat a

DISPATCH | eens
Chief, WE (Attention UDZSK).
‘Chief of Station, Madrid -

ef of Base, Barcelona tes.

Counter Espionage
luis TEDESCHI, possibly lnis TEDECHI :, MARKED FOR INDEXING
_ INO INDEZING PEQUIFED

ACTON MOUOR GY your information OLENG CANN BF HIDEO

OIRW~18463

There are no base file or QUOTA traces on Subject in Barcelona.

cere: Bock

aine 3. Friedwald
13 June 1961

Distributions
3 -_ Eeadquarters
2- Madrid ~
2 - Files



--- Page 4 ---
14-0000
?

_Chiefs of Station, Rome, ‘Madrid; CCB, Barcelona _

Chief of Station, Bueros Aires ane

Chief, WE
suBtct Counter Espionage
luis TEDESCHI, possibly Luis TEDECHI

ACTION PLOUGHED MLEEREMCES,

See paragraph 3

1. A source who has given highly reliable information in the past, and
whom ve bave no reason to question, has stated that during 1943 one Luis
TEDESCHI was either being considered for recruitment by/or was actually work-
ing for the RIS. According to the source, be was known to have been active
as a member of the Bpanish Commmist Party. The address used by TEDESCHI
during early 1943 was Pichincha 969, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

2. The Buénos.Aires Station hre determined that a Luis TEDESCHI, born
2 February 1918, is listed in local police files aa living at El Dorador 3150,
telephone 58-3717. Further investigation is being corducted there. Unfortu-
nately, Headquarters does not have the date and place of birth of Bubject of
paragraph 1. The source bas indicated that Subject was probably born in Italy
and may have been active in the Spanish Civil War 1936-39. This » of course,
could explain his involvement in the Spanien Commnist Party.

3. It ig requested that Rome, Barcelona, end Madiid check Station and
<Baee‘ files for any traces of Subject.-- Liaison and Police contacts may be -
approached for any information available in their files.

4, Please address replies in this matter “Attention KUDESK."

Distribution:
‘2+ Rom +.

, 1 - Barcelona
L-Medrid-
1 ~ Buenos Aires

- oT ay — GATE DISPATCHED
. 1 @ JUN 1964

_ OTR -1 B46
JARTERS FILE NUMBER,

20x64!

~OIN5
pays

. - ; a ORIGINATING
post - | we/k __Jobn D. Walker ! isis os08 _|
| wR | ISTHAL | ere =
ag | 221 [cmme 14S" | hans
SN | | otis | 2 (tee Shared Ghat |.

jab .
DISPATCH.



--- Page 5 ---
14-0000

~. anny

we

DRAFT
7 February 1961

MEMOPANDUM FOR: Chief, CI/Project
SUBJECEs Luis TSDESCHI

1. This office is extrenely inter;sted in obtaining ail available information

on one Lui8 TEUZSCHI, who was reported to ve residing at Pichincha ¥69, Suenos
PAA bn rma, .
Aires, sin the early part of 1743, at which time he allegedly was of interest

to the PIS, The attached document refers to a Luis TEUESCHI residing at
this address in 19u2 and to an individual by the name of TELESCHI who had
resided at Estados Unidos 6366 in 1yu2. Apparently the information as shown on
the attached document was obtained through mall intercepts.

2. We would appreciate having you tell us if you know of any way we misht
locate the intercepts referred to and possibly any other intercepts directed

to TEDESCHI etc Ks Hg Ofer pt hagcegdasy Was in Divelion.
: F

) i

BIRCH D. O'NEAL
Chief, CI/SIG
Attachments 1
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Addressee
2 - CI/sic

CL/SIG/EAGEgerter: jn

DRAFT

Saat em teed atte ee

i
i
|
|

“RUM Ar meen


--- Page 6 ---
14-0000

—-F DISPATCH

Ero)

PROCESSING
ACCOM
Lan ACTION Pits,

Koos manne nares QAGMCATED Somer

SECRET

“Chief. of Station, Buenos:

te} Aires -

oad
_ Chief, WH
SRACT
Counter Intelligence/Luis TEDED UW ory B78 ny believed to b Base
ACTIOM REQUIRED REFERENCES .
See Paras. 3 and h
HABA@9016 of November 1960

/
7

ee

1. Headquartera reprets that it has been unable to learn the date and place
of birth of the Luis TEDESCHI who, according tu a usually reliable source, was being
considered tor recruitment tn 19L3 by the RIS, or was actually working for the FIS,.
4s stated in HAM=6515, our ‘source reported that the address used by TEDESCHI during
the early part of 1943 was Pichincha 969, Suenos Ares.

2. Collateral information on Luis TLD<SCHT of Pichincha 969, Buenos Aires,
has been found in a 192 document which ancears to have been based on censorship
reports. This document indicates that TED2SCHI's address, as given above, was a
cover address for a VDE (Union Democratica sspanola) nanifesto sent from Cuba.
Also one TLESCHI, Estados Unido 436, Buenos Aires, was given as a cover address

in a secret writing message. A copy of the pertinent portions of this document
is attached.

3. It is hoped that a unilateral surveillance on the Luis TELEDCHI Living at
Bl Domador 3150, Buenos Aires, if instituted as the station Planned, will be
fruitful, Headquarters will be extremely interested in any further information on
this individual you may be able to Cevelop, as it is possible that he may be linked
with Communist and/or KIS activities in Cuba as well as being ueed locally by the RIS.

. he &g.KUDESK 18 currently handling this case, it is requested that the slug
PEDKOOD not be used.

OLIVER G. GALBOND

Attachments 1
BATE TYPED. DATE DISPATCHED
6 February 196119 FEB 1961
‘ DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
! “HABHB669
Distribution: '

HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER:
Orig. & 1 - Addressee,

. t (CLASSIFICATION. . .
with one attachmen'  BRCRE? 9 202-2892h7 es [an aoa

.. ORIGINATING

2 OFFICE, on OFFICER - TPIS) .
y La WV/2,n0 atte | ciety {etter jn fee | ;

: RAR EW for gle p= — COORDINATING

WU sist 209 AHS: 1 & OFFICE SYMBOL ‘DATE T OFFICER'S NAME :

=-=3 = CI/SIG, 1 att

pie || oD hey —

, _ RELEASING ; Lee
OFFICE SYMBOL. Care - "TOFhicers 352 URE * » — - :

4 E Vb ob cheer \c. Ei a (oJ ae a

es ven rmenous eomon. rcoreioim more

any

SPATCH:

e



--- Page 7 ---
14-0000 4

ee pee nee eee pep emeten mNtytaet in “7, us
~ Sia? mtr be HABY ~ 6669
- ©,
.. .
7 a :
“is t
eas :
FEM og No nace, HAVANA, SUEA, o :
T 3 “13 TEnesoEr AR :
Bib daly to leh puruet 192 4 & avah . < fa
tre .
: S cover sontaing Retortg Nee,
arviews with eracne a:
slam pac le tc
A . in Bain and Srey se”
and star we Pi ar
diving in the .ao¢r
of loth Be. eu--at @c Palenjot spre th gers,
RBSOMNS: eer :
j othe x
TRILL003/62, TRILLC 3/42, ‘

. TRL 45.7, ard PL.14201/42 cover cr-pe of re; .rze or the sam suLject.

: 8/5555 covers a greup of re:¢rte on the Bpartah ;olitiod
: scene, pogsitly from the sang source as the
above, wh'sh asy ce VICENTE URI3K, the Ca.sunist
. lester, wices heaiquarters ere in CUBA. jee
. alec Bimee145s7/sk, 55°,14974/42, SER. 192E2/42,

H Acar esace, LLIS TENSSCHI, io shown by FRIL1826/42 to be a cover ed=reas for
DDE, (OX IN BREPATICA BSPAYOLA) Manifesto cent fro: Cuba, Ho say

elas Se b.o TRUSSOIT, SSPADCS “87503 8546, who is eiven aa a cuvir edcresa

. in the aw poasare in TRIe14725/42 (secret).

5 Oh wHhaR..

i
i
i
i:
yo:
3
3
7



--- Page 8 ---
14-0000 aot -
. a i

+ OEgUMEHT wea

‘Cidef of Sta*ion, Baanos sires

“PEDWOOD/DPsovE - -
is STEVEDCET tft
ACT#Ors BtQuiate INDEXING CAN BE 2. 2GEO
7 i cese ONLY
_, -See_Paragraph 2. he. _. By QUALIFIED KO

: /

1. In view! of the fact that Subject dispatch presented a
possible lead to an RIS agent, it was decided to do a unilateral
check on TSDADCKI rather than refer the matter to.liaison. Asa
result of investigasions undertaken by<BIP{IA~1, the Station learned
that: i

‘Lais TDEDCHT

NO INDEXING FFOU 26D

Ts, listed in the Suenos Aires police files as

Living at El Dador 3150, wit: telephone nuaber |

58-37. 717, and has no record of police offences.

‘This Indi vidual was born on 2 February 1918.

Ce My eet
2. If possible, » it 7 recuested that Headquarters attempt to

confirm the above date of birth with the source of reference, The
Station plans to institute a unilateral surveillance on Subject, and
will keep Headquarters inforzed of pertinent developments.

Cc Ly \ wa . —
Garton Go Dons

Distribution:
3 - Chief, WD
1 = Chief,-SHD
1 ~ Chrono
1L- File: 201-6115

Geran ox

fee % wep



--- Page 9 ---
DISPATCH | sen =

% 7 —
Chief of. Station, Buenos Aires. :
Chief, WH Division pes

ALTION REQUIRED REFERENCES.
See Para. 2

1. A source who has given extremely reliable information in the past,
has stated that, during 1943, one Iaia TEDESCHI was :either being considered
for recruitment by the.RIS or was actually working for the RIS. TeDseSCHI

_Was known to have besn an active member of the Spanish Communist Party.
The addresa used by TEDESCHI during the early part of 1943 was Fichincha 969,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. _ poe

2. Our source was unable te provide further information on TEDESCHI
and Headquarters! files contain no pertinent identifiable information on
him. It 16 requested that you check all available records including any
appropriate local services for any information on TEDESCHI that may be
available.

SECRET.

ORIGINATING
- OFFICER > TYPIST

AnGEgerter jra
COORDINATING

2E/SI

OFFICE SymBOt,


--- Page 10 ---
14-00000

pos SUBJECT: Luis TEDESCEY

1. A Source, who has given extremly reliable coe
information in the past, atated that, during 1943,
Subject was either being considered for recruitment by
the RIS or vas actually working for the RIS,

2. -Subdject is kmown to have been an active
. . menaber of the Spanish Carrmmist Party. Toe addresa
, used by Subject during the eerly part of 1943 was
Pichincha 969, Buenos Aires.

: ; 3. It is requested that Latin Anerican, as well
, . @s fyanish ani Portuguese stations be asked to check

i Gvailable local services for any possible traces cn

: Bubject. \

| Hie



--- Page 11 ---
TO

Care

PEGUESE WO.

a /

G

PRODIE

eaten

SECRET

ePhee Fitted Tes

REPROOUCTICH ROUTIKG SHEET

BRANCH

| CYS 1 €

iROOM & BLDG.
44e& 3

Tarqwest cere

TIONS

aresect

f AND ANY TNDIVIDUAL DOCU

OL kb tes

MAY

71259

SECRET



--- Page 12 ---
14-0000

"Tot es
to cerre
a. ffietent)

feceerntie nese cet

RTM

NOT ARMac erensernatit A RDA Se TERMI



--- Page 13 ---
14-0000

| Sethe D. Lloyd

STATUS 7

"SUBJECT

GENEAAL

Borie ly :

SPECIFIC st F

to Fer 928
o>

Leta to toane!fteaston of ine

. és eiduels: aL also submitted as background

7s materiel that u baats for investisetions of
Spanish Com IDEs»

+
At
5

, ADULSISPRAT IVE ADLEVDUM: ; .

link any of

in referer. feue2SS_
‘ is quite « se ena is not 5:
honed thet, 27 usins it as a
more contret<e cetails reczerd
ties in Cuda, as well as ifontli
fn reference, can be obtained. "Contes, of tals rer
teins furnished to our fiers etations in Nexleo 2
#ives inesscuch as addresses used by the Party in
feveral in those countries.

S208

ee

ay


--- Page 14 ---
14-0000

pe mie tg

moony

aot

ernts to

Roborte fata
ten 4055

cuenos Aines

Prehiacaa
Buenos Alres

Awe.

nN
\ +
f antonio 2 dsr, \ :
Csregosa CT, apt. 27 i
Kexico, Der. J

. 8. bornisuvee/ :
Moreles 77 Ce

MENLCS, Deis



--- Page 15 ---
14-0000

Prado 22

entre

efo Pranciscs 3 +
Ereadway, Sth flr. Si Cleveland Square
‘York, New York London “i. 2, England.

ied

3. Enclosure to THi-.-255, rerort on expenses, cites paynents

c 3S, represent=
ing the Association of Tilten ex-covetaats of
the Sranis eruolic, spoke at a ceronstration
an

in front of th Legation in Cuba held as

- _ oar - -@ result of the execution of ten leftist uncers
: grounc worxers in Spain,

each month. From Source A it

SRR ee se bat oe senate RD he

pa ae enasnnten nsoentntanene a



--- Page 16 ---
14-0000

Series

) BEIVSLICAN

ates th eae

dndeana t
‘orforestiun, ot
secret arising: <

Aires and ono 302

in Buenos

4q Source 3B advi
records, the vess
has arrived at Cy
was 19 4
havint

to official Cuben
Se, fe 3 Re
hee since "LT
2 is no record of t
4 in 1042, Tle srew list
earry the nace-of Joaquin
re almllar thereto.

. = 4
ved Conreces

M4 e Sosmary Inne"

‘rerorted by source & that
oto Sone (s22 32 (1))
2 and 1345 from Cu

t> Portusal

Francise
. hac trey



--- Page 17 ---
14-0000

and returned
Womens

me rererte?

nosvavier

tween Cau

oe

re Deke

»

BPO ree

ani eu

Oe
o
3
8

na
PSP srainins

Committee of the

Luis

de la

: B “net They

raz Cuba On the Or.
One of the "

is the Saucier 22 a mourned

3.710 Giod sare"

was eiected Ir January 1945
Section of theXry:

2 C

4. Others mentioned In reference
COMCHITA, CULALIO, Es
ica persons nazed in Source A files.



--- Page 18 ---
14-0000

° Se In ecditica to the infomeat!
been gleaned some detaile rezar

‘ munist «roups and indivicuals.
since e ager inforration rv

back two-four voars-eor the mers s

. sorve little or re pursose at this
Poports Ti\S77 ond T5386 concer

no inquiry rogarding him is beir

T Abe ay


--- Page 19 ---
14-0000

fu

VIA AS DISPATCH NO, OT T4=39 "i

(SAIC ¥ Aik Ga SEA POUR

” CLASSIFICATION

TO : Chief, at DATE: 10 ctorch 19S
'
FROM : sActinn Chiof, Trieste Substation IiFO: Senior Rep., Rome. | AK ‘
a
SUBJECT: centr = IILTEL <7

secon = Surmary oF Reports Submitted by It. Col Willian hashinzton

ante 2275.

Attacned hereto is a cur
Trieste which sac prepares Ly C2,

ts relavive to poscitle disturbances in
for the nectin> G ved in reference.
. ‘

Enclosure; 1 G2 report
6 Mareh 195k,

Distributions
3 - Headquarters w/cnel
ee ; 2 = Rome w/enel ©

: ) vey
CLASSIFICATION

fae

wer tutinatbtede nites,


--- Page 20 ---
14-0000

VIA: te DISPATCH KO, C27AT2S

CLASSIFICATION

To t Ciel, WE DATE: 3 2 hn pete Ep ee
FROM 1 Retin Chie’, Triuste Suistatica miner fentor uep., Hone
SUBJECT: cencraL— Shab

Setciric— £ deporte Lutalticd br Lt. Col, it2btau Vastdneten

REF: GRE) C1iS

Attached hereto ts 4 sum.ary of cenorts relative to poscibl
rs

ble cieturtasecs in
Tricste which was prepared uy C2/s.USs Lor te neeting ces
eres «

£0 c
erated in reference.
. Jace B, bievine
Enclosures: 2% C2 scport
. 6 March 195)
Distrititions

3 = Veadquarters w/enel
2 = tome w/cacl

snes 01-28 A

stg

CLASSIFICATION



--- Page 21 ---
14-00000

Bo : toh to .tore tra int rt rc ron :

i “2 yor :
pies 8 a

tur
Lo eee >



--- Page 22 ---
14-0000

sper ¢
t tre rolica.

woof tts

Yucosisy * >
re fe le eget y

the Suture rolter

42D Pane Tvnl os}

altar cs nattety ¢

law on the part of ltalfan



--- Page 23 ---
14-0000

2

Ser
othe a

2¢

2 follicvtne

vothy bete ue of tiqat

of petriotle rrecesstosus

tercs ef civ
froce sioo

s


--- Page 24 ---
14-0000



--- Page 25 ---
14-0000

pen Ps that secestn ©

scOXgtee 7am te

via: ALR

(AGS Am te a Ren >

DATE: 2.

TO ? Chief, OF ’
TisO3 Senior keprecantative, komo

FROM: Chisf of Miczion, Trieste:

SUBJECT: Gener IGT /INTLL

/

I Metivities ane Plans for 20 March 1954

sPrric—

A~35S7, cateo lk Jancary 19354

formation is 19 Sena

vy tairty rersoss ¥
ne Italia" wnat it

zinst the sentences
mper riotse Instezd, he
efforts and attention oa preparations for
autnoriza stucent demonstrations on tnat date.

20 March, prorising that he wouls

enization, compoced of aoproximately

3. It is rovced that a new clandestine orzen:

Le 260 yesths Kho are semvers of the MST and other parties, is teing formed .
i SSETTI (TSO Com-ants : TTI is possidly identical with
¥ Salvatore 5eTTT«) Tis Grzanication consists of action squais ef twenty .

to twenty-five mea, each squad being uncer one leader. iTI was expected
to return fron Rone curing the weexend of 23-22 January with arms and funds
for this organization. Ia the opinion of source these arus and funds are
supplied by pronivent Masons in Rome and Milen. Source stated that the ore
ganization is ceing ferued with tne knowleare of GAPTERSSQIDRICH, although ,

the latter attempts to evade any responsibility therefor. .

be The action equad Ivacers ot caily in different locations to aiscuss prozress.
wincipal tack appears

At the present tim trey neve no headquerters. Their
to te tne formation of plens for demonstrations on 20 Marcne They State that
20 March will oe their day of revenge against polices ‘ice following persons
are leaders of action squads: .

Constant ro
Aurelis
Pasquaze
oo. /orazio 2 *ECOLD
VSE:NA (fu), brother of Diilio ‘Sk
Natale /SzA



--- Page 26 ---
14-0000

© g77Ae3769
5 February 1954
paze 2

Se The following data is fren 750/0/309(&), Gatveé 19 January 195i. Source
is FILS. Date of information is lé Jenuary 1954. The following 'SI
members rés in tne puflet Gallopin, in Piazza Golcoais

Constantine PS MARCO
harelio D'sless-0
Pasquale SUQAILT

a Orazio EMSCOLD (armed with pistol)
SANNA (2nu) (armed with pistol)
Katale £2,

Subjects discussed MANSETTI's trip to Ron2. SETTI nad left for Rone
on 6 Jeacary, arriving on 15 January, and haa welepnonea Trieste that
he would "ering back the goods." Tne meeting slso discussed plans for
demons trati: on 2G Yarcne It was cecided to use acid in snall bottles
in linited ctantities against the police.

y
6 or: TEDESCHT (fnu), manager of the Ridotto in thea Rossetti Theater, keeps
MSI arms stored tnere.

!
i
i
4,
.

= ited {Preach

Yicnael L. Rosemont

30 January 1954

ae Distributien:
: 3 + Headquarters
: 1,2 = Rona



--- Page 27 ---
14-0000

ete dy

a ecorr > apeen _ ; OS
; sf eee AL ~ . ;

: .
. washington (1)
...Rugistry (2)
WLACE CRP TNT
Scurse Over .



--- Page 28 ---
Date_of Information Jaly 1952.
Lol tnlormation |

The S.7.2.%, “echino

Bolleved reliable °

wht;

sod on documontary evidence.

f2-7-3%-

ta


--- Page 29 ---
Pirn, “srich designs cchincry for construction in other fuctorics,

hes ite t.¢ nierl offices in Vise Jaan. 06 xnd its

alos Gevertacnt ia

Jia %, Prices. 3, - ila. -

2 The u nager way apsse = E28, 2 Gera ter vanoger of a .

Gersan cochins tor] factory, He is assistkd wnre\b TISAI and by other a . ‘
‘ technicians. ae a .
cs :

3. , the firs eceicas and/or -redue.s on a sub-contracting basis tue ”
following types of raciinca ©
Heohinc tosls for the mauf.ctur of cicroa beorin: balls, steel
. : oo. bearin:, bilis, cylincriesl roller tc-rinzs, eonicas rolicr be rings,

ceges Tor ball bearings, cxtcrdal wd internal rings for ball

Pee. coe bearings, sczing needles, bicycle acccacorics, fount for typerriters,

cecentric prcescs for hot and cold steaming, scndpapcring cachines,

oocelal grindcrs, oscillcting grind:rs, x icctara, rotary rol-ing

tills, control instruncnts, pnacunatio hi+<“rs, splining azchines,

reotificrs, prcaccs, drilling seehines,, polishing aachincs,

he ‘ Fith the cxceytion of som ver7 e.nll itccs, the cachins desigicd

:. +. by tbs firm arc not cover.d by patcata,

Destination of Outrat. .

The fira's vroducts arm. sald on the home -morkct, :


--- Page 30 ---
14-0000

EO? SiCRZT

FROM ¢ No nane, HAVANA, CUBA.
TO : SR. LTS TENSscrr, PICHTNCRA 969, BUSIOS aAIRZS, ARGENTINE,

@Btb July to 14th auzust 1942 ¢ Spanish 734
OPINEO" A'S COMDITE“NS IN_SPATW 1 PoP CIE D SY OMISTS Nyy

Taia cever conta'ns Rerorts Noe. S80 - 3, SSE - 8 ami 371, compiled
from interviows wth -ersons w » have recently left Spain, and describ the
attitude cf the Sranish peo-le tc the war and to their Gov-rnment, the extent
of Garman penetrati;n in Scatn and of Spanish aid ‘o the acta, the activities
and standin: :f nulitical parties of the Richt and Left in Spain, and fenerd
living condi t! ons in the country. Thie ercup cf reports mntains o-intons
of both Coz,suuat anc Palanist sympath.sere. :

PREVIO"S RECORDS: ) 3S 6 ;
. . fe) .

TRI.10001/42, TRIL116°3/42,
TRI. 24527, and TRI.16201/42 cover groups of reports on the sam subject.

8/4555 covers a group of reports on the Bpanteh politica,
: scene, possibly from the eame eource ag the
above, which may te VICENTS URIBE, the Conmuntet
leader, whose headquarters are in CUBA. See
also BER-14867/42, BER.14974/42, BER, 19252/42,

Addresees, LUIS TEDESCHI, is shown by TRI.i882/42 to be a cover address for =~
@ US2.8. (CNTLN DEMOCPATICA ESPASCLA) Manifesto eent fro: Cuba. He may

@lso be tne TEDZSCIT, LSTADAS "'D03 8568, who is given as a cover eaddrese

in the sow messaze in TRI.14725/42 (secret).

RZPORT Wo, 350

> Results of our first converaati n with a :cung man from TORREL-.VedA,
SaNTahDme, about 28 years cld. At the ceginnin; cf tie war be was in the
army in KOROCSO and spent the whole war in Frenco's army. Ke comes from a fanily
of small yeraze=cwmers, Waither he n.r any of :is fanily nave celonged to any
political party cr syndicate although bie syxpat:ies have aways ween on the left.

SPANISH ATTITUDE 30 THE REGIES AND THE WAR. —— He says that the immense
majority of the Sanish peorle is against Franco end the Falange, workers, peasants,
e@esployees, bourgeois, big and small and a large pronortinn of the soldiers
end the Ryquetes. Ee says that everyone hopes for the vistory of the Alliss.
. In it there is a blind trust, especially when the U.S. entered the war ab the
1 U.S. and England are the nost powerful countries in the world,especially with
: the assiotance of Russia. Only the Falangists desire and plan for the victory
of Hitler, sven though "there are many Falanzists too who taxe a very black view
of rin", He says the majority of people sympathise with England. They have s-:.
complete faith in the kictory of the Democracies. There are sup orters of the
USSR, but the immense majcrity, according to cur informant, do not like ®conzurd em®
and prefer Democracy. He is obviously rather muddled by the Falangist pro agunda
against the 0.S.S.R.° Be says that the etrame of the U.3.3.R. into the war gave
Fiese to harpiness all over the world, althzugh there had been a creat deal of
: eonfusion before, through the "Treaty of aid between Russia and Germany. But this:
";. confusion disappeared with German ag:resaion against. the 0.S.5.R. He says that |
the German defeata on the Russian front raised corals. end. renewed everyons's =~ -
confidence in victory. Hitler's adaission in his speech of how cuch-they hel: . :
suffered in Busgata in winter, ani. that they were cn the. edge of catastronbe,- ‘
' produced great Joy amon¢ the people. Me says that the entry of: the-U.a& inte.
- the War cased a very coba Depression; aod incrmsetifelilats confidence.in..
. Wietory although Pearl Harbour caused some dencralisat: on.” Be. says thet. no one
: wishes Spain to enter. the war, except the Falangists, - ‘Franco doses not’ ‘wish it

ea ei Sc be



--- Page 31 ---
1400000

8/4612

himself, and desires neutrality «ut gince those who command are Serrano Suinar
‘and the ‘Palangists, Franco hac n> choice but to do what Hitler orders hin, and
there is serious danger of war for Spain. He says trat the Anglo—Soviet and the
Soviet—Acerican pact are nsw through the Palansist >reses which has. spoken of
_them, They made a very good ispresaion on the pecple. Asked if he knew that”

the said pact stivulated tiat after the victory nations would have freedom to
decide their destinies witout foreicn inte-fersnce, \a says yes, the press
published it. Aco t tus Second Front :.e says t:.at everyone trinxs of it, and

is hoping for it to o en if p.ssible tiroigh Spain. That the day they disemark,
all tha reo-le will rise. assed what the pecnle wold do in case of a laniing .
in Prance, he said that iis o inton waz that if that happened the Soanish
peorls would rise, even tue @ invasicn wis not on their coastz. The agreement
about the Second Front is aiso i:nown. He says the reodle wno are wost fervent
Stprorters of tre Nazis are Scrra:> Suner, Pr'vere de Rivera, and a certain
Count wiose name he does ot .now. He often spys tay he -noas nothin, of politics,
because he only read tie aports “eas in the raners and did ot Want to xaow any=
thing about the Falange. He says tnat there are many preparations for war; they
are maxing fortificativas cn tse ccasta cf Calicia and placirg a considerable
amunt of artiilery there. He says that the p-litical force of the Falange and
the syrdicates ia "artificial": ev r:one hates them. The ;:eo;le belong to the
s;mdicate oacause tiey can't nelp it, tet they de not pay their dues or t ake

them seriously. Discontent has even reached tre ranks of ‘le Falance. Many
clerks, students, and peo;le w'> joined ‘+ thinking they “were going to sveal the
music® are now v-ry discontentei, and do not pay their dues, ani when they are
threatened with being expelied ‘hey say tnat is what they are waiting for, for

the Palange to play at "fisticuffs*® There are many officers in the arny wo

are rot in agreement with the Palance or the idea tnat Spain is to ro to war.

The cost violent op ositio:: comes from queipo de Llano and Yarue. No one knows
where Queipo is coing and Yavue ‘s thcught to be in exile in the Prov. of Pontevedra,
Both were cashiered, queipo for protesting against food leaving for Germany and
Yague -because in a speech at Zarazoza, he said — "we do desire a great and

free Spain, but without any Flue S:irts, Red Shirts, or prisoners."

Al. the sergeants say that they are very discontented, hecause they earn

5 pts. wich keeps them very snort and o: tue soldiers he says-*in a word they are
bungry, many years in tarracks, am then the danger that they tight be sent to
war", He says that they ar2z well-uniformed, just as well as Defore the war.
‘Thoy have dismissed the 1941 Draft. He thinks that there was very little synpathy
for the Division Azvl and tne seople lauched at those who volunteered. 40

were forced to go, cthers went cecause they were hungry, and there were? v> unteers.
He says that survivors came back i= a state of canic, there was a lack of food

and equipment, several of them mutilated themselves in orzer to escape fron

this inferno. All say that the Russiens arevery wellearmed and fight with

great courage.

HELP 7 THE NAZIS. — He says that his opinion is that a great deal of food is
taken to Germany, althouzh he can give no details, bat if there is no food and olive
oil in Spain where is it? He says that in Torrelaveza the "Fabrica Continental®

is working at high pressure, maxing tyre covers, while in Spain transp_rt is held
up for want of then.

TH2 CHURCH. — He says that it is not true that in the Church there are anti=
German and Anti~Falanzist sroups. The supporters’ of the Re-ime are the Falange,
the Germans and-t.e Clergy, in that order, The Church wishes for the triumph
H . of G,rmany, in spite of her antieCatholic pclicy becuuse they b elieve that in ~~ —-—----._.. ..
i : . that case they will be able to preserve their pcaition of influence. Ha says
ao . .. that English and Russian news canbe heard althugh it is-very difficult and is
a . _ forbidden although there is no watch or inspection. He says tl.at everybody is
against the Falange and submissions to Germany, including the nonarchists and the
Fich on whom toe Falangists icpose large fines for racketeering. Many of the
. monarchists, bourgeois etc. are on the side of Brglani. Democracy is considered as:
& possible substitute for the Rggine. A democratic Republie like there was -
before the war. A Regime of peace and work.. Speaking: ofthe’ solution of the - .
- present situation, he says that they want a regime.of peace and not a revolution: |
:; Th@t he contradicts himself by saying t ait will not. be achieved, by: eaceful ~
‘"" means. Be says that this would be the best but that the deaths
crimes Bust be avensed.



--- Page 32 ---
14-0000

Lis from wnon they tox is onl; ;iz,

eps mee tin mma ratae erent

‘of the Civil Quard was shot for having gone for a walk along “at his-owmn risk®, |

3/1612

The peo;le are very united and there are xt the old differences :etween the
parties of the Frente Popular. The policy of Nativral Uni-cn is unkncwn, te has
heard 1. cne 8; eax cf it.

DETA'TLS F THS PiCPLBEIS S:RUUGER — He says ti.at he thinks that secret
organisations functicn, especially in Bilbao and he says particularly "It is”
a city of brave sen", Hs says that notices rainted on the walls are aftan sen
there. He culy remembers one "Less Franco, nore w.ite oread™, Asked if _
the n.ticas were sizned vy any party se says oc, because .4 would ‘ive away
the peple wto had done it. He says tiat né mows, Decausz ice was told, that
in Bilbao there were iilecal pamphlets ami even a newspaper i: cire “ation,
but he does not know their content. He taincsa that there ust ‘ave been a
clandestine press, vut‘as he was iever an idealisi th: peaple who Jid t:.se
things would not trust h.m, and as he is o.t of everything ne foes nt know
any details", He says he tuinks tial tnu peorle sorking in “ilbao are
nationalists and com .unists, especially the latter. That a fae -nihs ace
two That an gupmarines, dadly aamayai oy English planes, came into Sa:tander.
Two ‘hundred persons were arrested for discuseing this, ami wany peorle

- thoucht that the secona front ha: already begun. He gives re rors details.

He says that Serrano Suner was tna object of an attack in Yadrid when 'e met
Arress, ami when tne latier tried io protect Suner he was sariously wounded
and had to undergo a critical o eralon. as! ‘f ha thoucht there was
sabotage etc,, he says uc = toe digorganisa of tne train servicas is dus
to all the employees being new and mt Knowing their business.

QUERILLE"O3 -- He says that Bl Carinoso® was wor<'ne in Santander and
the” Rallwaynen® toc; that "El Carinoso" cane fran Uercmes ani had his
headquarters in Santander. That i.e was recently ki llea throuch quarrels and
Smbroglios caused vy iis girlfrient wis was fro the J.C. and rad arother

‘hover, and it was be who was arrested at the same time as El Carinoso. I: was

he who inforzec against them all. Many peo; le love the werilleros, althe:ch

there are many pev.le x. halp tlew ‘thrvuch fear, as for exacple a relation of

in seneral the Guerilleros cehave excellent
ly. "Bl Carinoso® ras cnce in Barcelcna, where te went in a cad to get tis

teeth fixed. El Carinoso Was sot a politician tut tcok te tis sotntains in

order to avenge the death of iis cousin who was assassinated by the Falanze.

That they often, like t.e cuerilleros of Asturias, disguised themselves as Civil
Guard, wert dovn to the villages, and arrested the Falarnists. But where there

‘are Dak most Vuarilleros,and the c-.t active,is in Asturias. Six months aro,

about three hundred :uerilleros were ready to embark on the ccast in order to
leave Spain. But ehere was a svarrel ana a terrific fight vetween these cuer-
ileros ani the forces .£ authority, with many dead, and after that they
retreated to the nountains, He says tlat the politicians sommexenem pho are
most po ular are Prieto and Asana. Some speeches of Prieto!s tave been cir—
culated through Bilbao, iut he ddeg not know what they say. ‘here is also in
circulation an article, reproduced from an English paper, reprinted by an
eaployes in the Real Comp. Asturiana, de Ins. Resiblicana. The article refers te the
powers ani resources uf the Allies and their chances of victory. He says
he does not know of any activity of the comunists, that this is obviously the
activity of other pyople who are nct communists; tha. for exammle the man who
reprinted the article and those who read it were all on the Republican Left, and
if there is any comzunist activity it is so camoufla-ed that no one knows who is
the autours—He says that during the crossing they were detained by the En-lish
in Sermuda and in Baltimore by the Americans. That the Enziish made a short
exanination, they did not interrogate them in front of everybody ani left

“them the. letters they carried. In Balticore they were interrogated one by -ne

and wore asked about fortifications, food, if they sent it to Ggrmany, etc.

When our informant said he had Seen in Franco's arny up to the war: they asked | him.
why he did not desert to the Republican arny.

* SOLIDARITY. — He says there is no organisativn for solidarity,- that. ‘this. only
_ exists between croups of frienis who have a relati-n or acquaintance i

prin.
‘They are pot. allowed to visit. the prisoners wore than once a week. He ‘says that.
the ki. 720es on, ard that in Vog,.a few days b:-fore he 1éft, a lieutenant

ae Be ho te



--- Page 33 ---
14-0000

~4- , ‘ 9/4632

REPORT No,351

MARTA RODRIGUEZ, about 28 years cld, Comes froa a confortably-off peasant
family in the Province +f Orense., Sheis very sluggish and at evary question
rezeats that she dows not know and that women do not understand many thin 66
She had only a little nure than an hour to avare as she was busy in the evening
and had to leave for ths interior in the morning.

aR — She says t!.at she was surprised when she arrived in Havana as she thinks
there is nore enthusiasa in S$: ain than here ani acre confidence in an American
victory. The peasants “like evuryone else" would like the “Anerican® to win,

even ti.ose cn the Right are sure the jermans will lose. Sha cannot explain the
nature of Franco's assistance to Hivler, ehe says only tuat "as it was the

Germans wro won, Spain owes them nore tnan it has*®. Shs cannot te sxplicit,
eLther,about the dangere of war, but shé says that Franco's swldiors, the young
men in zeneral,and as a cuncrete instance a wathar of hers wi. servei five youme
in Franco's grmy, sayQ'trat they mil go up into the acuntain and choot befcre

golnz again t+ the war. Adout tne Division Azul sha knows on. that when it

was first formed a volunteer left from her district. He was a. outlaw who -
hed committed crimes and she says t:at he went throuch fear of the consequences.
The people do not like the alue Division. Tney were aot aske! scr anything for the
®yoluntderst.

FUTURE PROSPECTS — She insiats that there is great confidence that it will soon
Change. So much so that a Republican who was lidden for years and afterwards

discovered told her to tell her husband "Do rot leave beacuse things will soon change®

The villaze las a hundred inhabitants, and she says that they all hope it will
change; but fron what we cm gather thie confidence is based entirely on an
Allied victory. She aays that 1f tne English upened a second front in Spain the
peozle would revolt, but she says she t.as heard no o;inicns on this point. The
peo:le speak without fear. She relates that the Falangists tried to take a
pistol from har. father and that he hid it. They threatened hia, they took him in
-@ car telling xkumctexdaxmurk him that they ware yoing to knock his head off,
but the old manr emained firm, telling them to do what they Jiked. They did not
do anything to him nor dia they gst the pistci. As an example cf solidarity
against the Falange the old man said he Lad sold the pistgl to a man who was
going to america. They told him to prove it, the oldbrought as witnesses two
peasants who lived more than a leacus away, without having agreed on a story
first, but being quite convinced ti.at the peasants when they saw the Falangista,
if only for the saxe of contradicting them, wuld say that what he said was true.
A little later they sent nim a notices for a Falanrzist meeting and he refused to
go. She does nd know if tne other peasants did.

ARMY — She knows t. at a short time ago they disi:issed tne 56 (1956) Draft.
Her husbami was on service in Orense and deserted and went to Cuba. Immediately
the Captain of the Company and a lieutenant went to him house to make inquiries.
His.brother told them "In his circumstances I do aot ‘mow what I would have
done®, and the captain and the lieutenant went away saying - "He is right".

PEASANTS. — AS wo have already said, she belongs to a family which is om
fortably off, they have several labourers in their employ. She says that the dw
la bourers, and the farmer are ecually gainat the Gevernuent and the Germans,

To illustrate tne situation she says that the daily wage is 20 pts. without

food, .and_8-with-food.—They-eld-prefer-the 5 and food, because otherwise they
have nothing to eat. The peasants are very discontented, and show it openly

‘t the Falanzist officials when they come to inspect the harvest: and when they
‘Bix the prices, saying - "They havs no right to do it, it is an abuse®, but it -

appears that it mea no further then this. _ They have not requisitioned anything
but thayforce them to sell to the official: buyers who iseue permits t authorised

“ buyers. These individuals take the produce to large shops and amass recal
fortunes. A quintal of potatoes, -they have to sell at 30 pts. and they are sold.

. afterwards by the dealers at the etandard rate of four or ‘ive ptas: the kilo, that

ta to say ata 800% profit, to private people who require thes. And if the. wo,

peasants take their produce to the market they have to sell.it at the standard rate to. |”.

the dealers. Mo peastnt takes any rye to'the zarket, they. prefer to run the
Fisk of seliing it to private peo le. This is. the only way in which they can


--- Page 34 ---
14-0000

ty

ee Be - . Sten:

get other products. They have imosed a new tax; they have to pay 15 centises
for each vinestock. They have given up the “onedish meal® and they are not.
foreed to contribute to Awdilo Social. She sa: tiat the Sovernment does not
know what 19 -oing on in the country. They distrivute the sulphate, nct
according to the numoer of vineyards, sot even according: to the number of
inhabitants, sc that her district which is wine country, geta less sul->hate
than the next ore and produces vary little wine, alth ush it has more
inhatitants. A kilo of sulphate is worth $9 ptas. - before it was worth SO
centines. She says that they were taking a fow trings-to ancrica anithey made
thas pay in Fielato, in Grense, and in Vigo, and if they }ad passed throuch
fore provinces they would have rad to pay again,

REPORT Yo, 3552 _

Information volunteer:d by three Galiciar easants, of wemburs cf politica
parties, They remained throughcut the war in Franquist territory, alth-ugh only
-one of them fouzht in the arzy. Very backward politically, antievraniulat,
ard more anti-Palangiat. "ith the axception oi one who was in Asturias as a
soldier, the othera nev-r left their village which is a hamlet in Galicia.

SPANISH ATTITUDE TO THE ¥AR AGAINST EXTLE:, —- The majority of the Spanish peorle
with the exception of the very rich and the Falangista are azainst Franco ani the
Falange. They explain tiat Falangists see what is coming. to them threugh the crimes
they have committed, and they are the people who really wish for a German
victory, with the object of saving their skins, and the mcnay they have stolen
from the peorle. In Spain, in general, nv one wants the war, eince they are
exhausted, according to our informants, except for the Falangists. I, is said
that Franco ie ea partisan of neutrality, and daily visits tle British Acsbassador
at his private residence and tas interviews with him. In spite of this they

‘gay there is a danyer of Spain being yushed int: the war acainat her will, because
in Spain tho Germans are she masters. All the wrld believes that the Allies
will be the victors excapt the Palanze. S8efore the attack cn Rusd a zany people
were demoralised by the German a_vances and becan to "think.them invincible®,
When Russia ent-red the wer, enthusiasm and confidence in Hitler's defeat
inereased enormously, but that was especially when the Russian victories began.

They say: ~ I do not i:now what would have happeded to us but for Russia;

the Hasis would be masters uf the world. Thay aleo say that the Hasi army
will not stand another winter of war, that they have suffered such losses that
the.next Rugeen winter offensive will defeat them although there ia no talk of
a Second Front. They are sure that the Democracies will win the war. They

- admire the renistance of the U.S.S.Re They say that G,rmany bas already lost the
war as a consequence of the losses suffered in Yussia. The entrance of the U.S

- into tne war contributed to increase the already existing confidence in victory. S.
They do not know of the Anglo—Soviet and Soviet-american agreements, nor.the = = ~
agreenent about the second front. One of our informanta asked us what “0 Hitler
19428"meant and when we told him he said that they algo said it in Spain, because
in order to achieve it it was necessary to open a second front. They think that
4f there was a landing in France the people wuld rise, They also say that .
there are rumours that they lami in Galicia and in this case thewhole of Galict
would revolt to help the Allies. The same thing would happen in any part of Spaine

The"DIVISION AZUL® is hated by the majerity of ths people. They say that the
majority have been“forced to volunteer, amd explain how the recruiting is donee
anyone_who_does_not—want_to-zo_and fight Communism, take a stpp forward. Some... .- --
enlisted becuse of the desperate situation they were in. Some enlisted, too, dec -
because they: were stalwart Falangists. .When the recrutts left the province.
a great many people went to see them off, calling them “sons of bitches" and .
insulting their mothers. When one contingent of "Volunteers" cama back from the -
Russian front at Irun they had to leave the train because the reople were stoning.
them. May people mastcum came back maimed ani with frostbite. They tell .-. ss
- terrible istories about the Oermans and the horrors of the war. They say the = *
Russians ‘are very brave and. fight with creat ccurage. That they heve large supplies
Of am:un‘ition, and that things. on the Bus:ian front are not ike the papere said
they were. They said that ‘the food on the Russian front was very scarce md bads
‘It tas:'sent to them from Spain ani they suffered many hardships. They:all
Wished: to return to Spain-as soon as possible; they rupented of having enlisteds

_Stlero’ hour ‘for Ritler in 1942 %



--- Page 35 ---
14-0000

~~ 6 » . . 3 %eei2

HELP _GIV2N BY TUG FRANQUIST REGIME A'D TPB FALANGE 7 -ITLER. — How and then
thoy send reinforcemsnts to the Division Agyl,in yrcu:s of a thousand or :
ons thousand five hundred, ‘They say that/tn tfder to r-place the casualties and tho °
“those who return crirpled. Even the Falangists themselves say - *the Russian - 0
front is a very serious matter’... Those whe are recrsited to replace losses , 3
in Russia are racr..ted by force, by the process already menti.ned, Al) airmen
have to serve some mcnths on the Rastern front as “trealcing". They say that i
lately they were training avout 150 pilots toa and them to Russia. The war ‘
factories sre worki:cat iigh pressure. The Germans are directing tie erection:
of an asrodrome in the province of Lazo. In Gal cla very few Sernans are to
be seen, Military instruction is obiizatory for cove and y-uths in the
"Frente de la Mliventud*, They dso train ycuths from 15 onwards to serve in
aviation. aA friend of the informants told them that there pessei daly through
a city in the North fifty card loated wit war natertal in the directicn of the
Prench frontier. German submarines refuel at fedendela and Vizo. dH, says that
English eeroplanes often maka recomaissance flights var the neroours of Galicla.
They auscribe Serrano Suner as the zoat subservient to the Nasis ei in ceneral
to the Falangists who nave crimes behind the or wi.o have vecome rich through
‘roubing, the peo: ie.
Those w:.0 @0 to work in Sprmany aie those workers Uno have ndwork, or even
if whey have any live in the createst poverty, They belleva that by roing to
Germany they will be able to solve their economic eituarion and that of their
families, The groups asnt are not very large,accoriing to our .:formants, at least
in Galicia. This ia understandable because the Germans preier specialists.’
According tu ow informants, three workmen came back {rom vermany who say that
in Germany the situation is terrible, They hardly eat, there is great poverty.
They have the impression that Germany will not resist long in consequence of the
situation thers is in the country. They also say that a sroup of Spanish worlossn
.Were throm out of the country decause "they c aused troutle",

FRICTICN BETAZEN TH2 RULING CLASSES — He does not kncw of any dissenrirn in the
army except the case of Yague ant queipo, and gives daca which is already kn-m.
The soldiers in veneral are against the entr; of Spain in‘c the war....They live in
very bad conditions, badly fed, daily clothed ard ill-.reated oy the officers,
especialiy by the recently recruited Falangists. Thay all wish to Le demob. ised
as soon as possible. They have demobilisec the '29 iraft. By their conversation
we oogerve that the soldiers from the "national" and thes "Red® zones receive
different treatment. In Calieia there are rany soldiers from Catalusa wo have
already spent sev-ral years in tna arny. They cv not sake it difficult for
youthe of nilitary age to leave Scains they cited thelr own cases. One of them
is 18, the other 24 years old.

‘THE PSORLE'S PST STANCE TO TPR WAR AND THE FRANSUIST REaTke — They say that
‘thore is no resistance there at all, because no one can act, ami passivity is
the opinion and state of « nd of the people, ‘hen we insist they say there i
have been various tran smashes and some derailments which they think were due >
to sabotage as well as to the defective material. Everyoody knows the British :
and Soviet war communiques and they are discussed in private conversation. Some . :
people teke them down in shorthand md later c.rculate them, Ha says that in Vigo

there is a secret transzitting station, out it was discovered oy the police and all

tiose connected with it shot. They were said to belong to the republican Left

(*Isquierda Repuodlicanf) and aonz tnose stot there was one doctor ani other

; inteliectvals. He does not “nom any “cre details, Weaen cozplain loudyin qusues : i
/ Of the stortage of fcodstuffs, Me knows because the ruzsur went rund there that
' Pricto-sade-a spesoh in the Wilts House before Roosevel:, and that Roosevelt _ |

embraced him saylng that the Anericas were behind the Spaniards. This speech too Ot a

: _-, is eircvlating -in clandestine copies, cut re never cccld see one. He says tcat
po --/ there is no organised plitical activity because this is impossible. Hé tells
2° + + several Jokes which are going the rounds, and quot.s this ones -. "Recently .
B - they nade a film called “We Thieves are Hgnest Men". Beneath the announcenent of
ie +, this film in Vigo, someone wrote "The Caudiilo's Own Words". Es says tke press —
bee Give nost space to the English War con-uniques ani tre U.S. war news bulletins... -

UDE OF THE PEOPLE TOWARDS NaTI NAL UNI2i, — Talking of. uptty. :
_ Mey way textually "There, there are n- p 85 @ are ony anti-franquists,. -
and ‘all the. differences between sections of the Pgpular Front have disappeared.



--- Page 36 ---
" PUTURE PROSPECTS. —— He thinks of the Repub:

““ORNERAL SITUATION OF THE PEOPLE, — They spoke of the terrible poverty endured by t

‘Bitler, and sey Germany may break up this very yeare .

' The subject is a person of quite good economic position. Be ia the sons of

_ politically of the persuasion that Was regnant there at the moment, he honestZy: - ——-----——--
. Franquist Spain was a paradise", Later he !.ad the opportunity of experiencing — <
“ honourable behaviour as Consul he was often insulted and was even threatened with

... With Palangiste in high positions, Bis term of office, to use his cm ©
" @xpression, was more suéfessful through his friends than owing to his position. —

the politiclans vith most

ister is known and hes a following in Galicia. grin is the most, hated

prestige are Prieto and Asana and Negrin, although Me

by the Falangiste™ " . ; 2.

ie as the Regime to substitute for
es ublic will

Fascism, but without a revolution, and he immediately side that cole wild vevolt

come because when the Germans are at their weakeat the wt 1 re pa they

and avenge the crimes of the Falangists. The people's. bleo te0e whon ne

gee those tho assaseinated their relations dressed up rere. those no ee ar

Palange consists only of professional assassins and ro a rote alonge at

the shirt can be recognised by their faces. Those who join : apes

first now do not want to know anything about it, and do not want anyo 2 veer :

the shirt, There is friction between Requetes and Falene ars ene. . F

hate the Requetes lese than the Palangists. They eay that the 8 cols | each :

only militarigm and religion. There are many Little boys who “2 and vetien

read, but wno can epeak of military o;erations with maps, artillery ‘ be ; e

A teacher who was dismissdd and came back to his post, told our informants at

the Mnistry constantly sent& thaa bo.ks of military tactics, so that they co’

teach them to the children. The summer capa for children consist of sending

boys to camp and teazhing thes drill,

the people, and the high price of food; wages have hardly: been raiged in comparl=
son witn those paid under the Republic, The Committees of Supply get hold of
agricultural products and only leave a small quantity per person for the whole
yearts supply. Alreedy in their village the Falange had listed the crop although
they had not yat requisitioned it, which they had already done in other parta
of Galicia. Yalangists speculate in. focdstuffs, selling thea at high prices
and so get rich. He saya that in Vigo o large quantity of rice wont bad and hed
to be thrown into the sea because they would not sell it to the people at lower . .
prices. The rationing 4s quite inadequate. They wars a whole year without seeing | 4
olive oil, Baturally on the Black Market it could be bought at SO pte and more. :
Ina year they only had bread twice. A very small mex) in a restaurant costs :
16 pts. Two courses and dessert 25 pts. Ons of them was charged 75 pts. for
eating and sleeping in a pension in Vigo one day. A pair of shoes costs
25 pte., a poor suit 500, a dosen eggs 18 or more pts. The pecple hate the
Comaittees of Supply used by the Palangists to make themselves rich. They
say that there is the greatest immorality in all official organisations and
everyons steals. .
‘In the prigons there are still many people. They treat the prisoners very
bedly. In the prison of Oviedo, which has a capacity for 600 there are sore than
8.500 prisoners. There are batallions of forced labour (workers they call them),
they grant some pecple conditional liberty but they send then to districts where
they know no one and where they die of bungor, -
Qenerally thease three young men have great confidence in the victory ever

353

Information volunteered by an exConslar official of the Cuban Government
in Spain, who arrived on the *Xarques de Comillas® on the 25 th of July 1942,

Spaniards end owns some properties in Asturias. He went as Consul to
after_Frmco%s_troopa_had taken pesgession“of'it. A man of. moderate views, oe

believed, doubtless as a result of Falangist propaganda in America, that

"tine inthe eae

what Franquiem represented, and still represents for Spain, and owing to his ©
expulsion, He was closely connected with of ieials of the Fascist. Regine and.


--- Page 37 ---
14-00900

8/4612

: gozarice $e THE muses sa — - ‘wos of the ‘Spanteh pecple are against.

' the Franquie’ res at to assese accurataly the-solution desired

by thie ninety percent La wary diffMeult, Somo wish, specifically, for the

restorati a of the Rasublic, but he aalntans that what everyone is longing for
change in a Reciea, smothing to relieve the really chaotic situation

Spaniard peers tie Veamnolvee, (Be did not know life under the Republic,

and therefere wasn be talaed with poople they always underlined the enormous

Gficrencs were wea betuee teat life and life under the present regime).

The Palanciat uaity oy coast ef ia a myth. Division in the Franquist Camp

grewa daily, The Falancietea arite lempesne in the stroeta and-s0 do the - -

ReQuetes, bat their elegeas are contradictory, The Falangists accuse the rest —

of being eure end craters te tre Geetrine of the Palaige. For exazple, ho talked

te a Falangiat liewtenant = Une naa cane frea Cuba to fight at Franco's aide =

in the cafe “EA Gate egret in Hacata, a feu daya before oxbaricing. He scemd

to bo anheond cf the preseat eituatian in: Gpaia, He azoused himself by

Popeating the Palansiat tag tat the Folaage had dean betrayed, (This cust refer

to tho’ Hansrehicta,Bequetes, aad ether reacticaarica), Tha Palanglata are

avaro of the prozest eituatier in Satag Gerhape that te the reason ehy-. they are

eceking a eclation which Wild preserwe their elase privileges, In hia ou

phrase ~ the Prearrdat rezine bance fvea a very thin thread, which aust ansp very

goon, (Perhare thie ie st saly the wee of cur inforaaat, but alse of eons

ailitary and civil lestere with wea. ho cas clocely connected). For this reason,

be aays, they have t¥icd to give te lenressica of a change, taking advantage

ef the SCanzra Gerperativa®, and, if it ie treo, with the restoration of a

Palengist-thaeredy, .

.

nh ON THE HOUUECHY, —- There ie, he saya, no pudlic achivity with thie goal. There
3 doa not exiat what woe aighteall payohological receptivity for this measures
: bat unieacdbtedly muzetiations in tiie direction are being earricd on by high
officials of the Frasqaist Recimo, He was in Madrid on ths 22 = 23 Jone 1&2,
at the tim of the wigit ef Den Juan. Mis visit was not given any publicity,
tet there vere widespread police precautions, Tho streets nearest to the palace
were clesed to the peblie and a atrict watch us kept. There were also arrests
ef saspici®as persons, those win hed been in prison etc, But the press gave m
eign. The presence of Len Juan wes public property. The people seemed com
pletely indifferent. ‘The soharchiste displayed no activity either. Perhaps,
be added, they tooz procmtionary measures with some poople characterised by
their adhesion to the Hoaerchy. Hla ippression is that if the ronarchy were
FYestered in Speia it would be in allience with the Falangista, but the peo-ls
would gtill have the impression that the situation had changed. He maintained
that there wuld be the semblance of a cop dlotat, apparently directed egainst
the Palange, but Francowald remain bead of ths army. If so, Bhingatmld, funde=
mantally, reuain tem as they are; that is, ths Spanish State would still be
gubardinated to Hitler, and without changing the policy of “partiality®
they now maintain, to ono éf "neatrality® in the ware ‘They would take this step,
. - in bis opinion, only in the lant resort, if faced with a second front in
ioe Europe, and on tho appreach of Bitler's defeat, which would, naturally have
on immediate repercussion on the countries subject to the Nazis in Buropes-

: Oa THE COMPLETE SUOSEEVIEICY OF TER PRARWIST ROOIWE 40 HITLER. — Im Spain
- ' the Falangists do not speak of thair position of “Heutrality< in the war but’ of
Sartiality®. This is thetr attempt to justify the help they give to ths
_axis.__There_are_Ggrmm submarine refuelling stations in Vigo, Redondela, and
“en the Galician coast. ‘This is public property, bat every now and then the ; oe
press publishes a complete denial that axis submarines refuel'in Spain. These
denials are very frequent but they do not give such proof. Those who can see
tenker-Lannches. carrying on this work langh at these ridiculous denials. Also
poe on more than ons occasion Garman submarines have been repaired in Spanish
nn dockyards. “Ta Galicia it is quite impossible to get a pot of Jan.. All the
ee -, preduction, which is. encrmous, goos to the Germans.’ There are places.on ths
- frontier, through whith trains pass with produce for Hitler. There are forti-
fleations and artillery on the coasts of Oalicla, where the deruans are in -
comand. There sce also now aerodromes; som alreaty finished and. some under
- eonatruction by German: technicians. They fear an Allied invasion in Galicia.
: Hitler is sselstel not. only. with food ond primary: natertals, bat miso with nen,



--- Page 38 ---
14-0000

apn areca

: - / : 9 = 3/4822

"Phere is continuous propaganda for the sanding of volunteers as workers to
Germany. Unwiliing contingents of soldiers have left for the Blue Division.

THE DIVISION AZL was a Falangist manoeuvre to give political icportance to some =
Palangist leaders. The manoeuvre turned out very badly, Tris Division is the -
most unpopular innovation of the Falange. Our informant talked with 11 sur-
vivors of the division, who had returned from the Russian front cn account of
their wounds, me of thom was 18 when he left as a volunteer, without the
consent of his family. He asked if he would return to the front again and ho
answered categorically *ky eyos hava been opened. I will rever return®,

They all speak of the bad food they are given ~ mainly vitamin pilis and pots

of jam, They speak of the courage and fighting spirit cf ths Russian arzy, but
above all of the contempt with which the Ogrmans treated thea. Thay regarded
them as inforior beings and they alao said that when they -aid complimsnts to
the German women, a Spanish custom, they answered them disdainfully as if they
despised them, There were cases of solf-cutilation in the raixs of tie Blue
Division, At any rate their panic was obvious, amd they refused to return.
Everybody speaks il] of the Division Azul.

- " Tte com:ander Minos Grande, ig the nost despised of acldiers. Contless
Jokes about this division circulate in Spain. Our informant knows several, but
cites tho following as anerample which came frou the Clib Benevente=arniches
etc. "El Gato Negro" in Madrid. iinos Grande sent a telegram to tim political
address of the Blue Division at the front - this was the address; }'.2.7. CR5S,
M.G, The telegram arrived and no ons could decipher it, tut finally a wlife
said = Tris is quite clear", and read the following words — "He were all
deceived. Ssrrano Suner ia the only one responsible. Many thanks". ("Fuizos
enganaios todos. Unico responsable S,Suner. jchas cracias*),

, ON SHE DANGER OF WAR FOR SPATH AT HITLER'S SIDE, — His izpressicn is that Spain wi)
.- will 'contime to assist Sitler aa she is doing now but that she will not enter
: the war. Some of tha Generals are in disagreenant with the present poliey -
emong them Varela, Armda, Yague, Queipo etc. Asxong the soldiers the feeling
against the Pascist Regime ie very marked. They complain of bad food,
treatment, clothes.... too much time spent on marches etc, Queipo, on his
returnfron Ifaly was rude to Serrano Suner and struck him for which he was seat
back to Italy. Gsncral sranda spent a aonth at Gijon and talked to our informant,
Thay had on interview. Our informant has a real admiration for Aranda, wi.o, he
says, is a gentleman. He says that Aranda ap-eared to be leftist. anzcng his.
renarks ho renembers the following words. "We Spaniards are robbers, ¥e ars, and
we have been for some time. If you walk through the Castellana of Madrid you
will-eee the suxptuous palaces owned by Hesler(7) ani Pramo de Rivera, etc. built wi
with the blood of the Cuban people ‘and the poor Spaniards who went to defend
the Spanish colomies, The colomitm ware lost but the military leaders, whose duty
it was todfend thea, enriched themselves. How it is the Same thing over again.
¥o made a revolution in order to bring progress to Spain but we have spilt
blood in torrents uselessly. The resalt was not worth the expense of so much
blood end so muchmpregsion®, . -
In his conversation, although he said nothing against the Ggrmans, he showed
contexpt for the Falangists who are enriching themelves; he sheved particular
foar of the treataent meted out to the soldiers in barracks, Hla impression
is that it was a result of the seriousness of the situation through whieh the
Framquist regine was passing and fear of what the outcome might be. .He said
nothing about the state of the war, and whether he was a partisan of England.
th the conversation he had with the General Lt is possible that there was another
~ aspect, which through discretion he did not repeat. , .

™.

~

: oo HUNGER SITUATION. — The siteation has becone notloeably worse durin the last
: an Bonths. For several sonths already the rationing has beer practically mi. :
_ '. The rich buy everything on the. Black Market. Our informant, with his wife —~
ley. | «Gnd five children spent from 9.600 to 10.000 a month on food alone.’ He. says that
p7 during the year his expentiture on food — he does not drink nor smoke — eas
TIA. 2 £80,000 pesetas. Of course he had a special Clothes budget - 600 pesetas for .
ie +) (* +. suht and 180° te 200’for a pair of shoes. When asked how the workers.live who —
; Carp 10 to 15 pts. salary or perhaps less, he Says very‘baily. They do rot eat,
+ god wits that besides. they camot earn nore. I, the wrkers and the pecple in.
jeneral had a greater purchasing power, life wild be impossible in Spain as they:



--- Page 39 ---
14-0000

; . : . ot - the

would also buy on the Black it ket and no one would eat. Therefore

privileged classes can eat, and they can only do it if they have 8 ebro

They accuse the Falangist leaders’ and the Government of racketegri ng bed
. Black Merkete:. Dusenge fortunes have been nade in a night. “They co tobe |
poor and wake up millionaires This is the only explanation of the fact. : ; 7 : ;
one fs allowed two packets of tobacco at 0.80 per person per week, and in toe Ot
the Compania arrenditaria de Tobacos, which is a state monopoly, ond person os
can buy from 100 to 10,000 packets of the 0.90 at 7.50 4 packot. He also 7 H
relates the following instance. Petrol is scarce in Spain. -A litre costs —
15, pts. Care frequently stop in the streets for lack of it. He cites a case
whieh happaned in the sfreet of Gijon, A distinguished. military personage had
no petrol Hs saw a tank-convoy of Campsa pase and asked. the- chauffeur for a . 3
few litres, and then he refused, he ordered them to give tt to Mm, as a °
superior officer. The chauffeur rofused-agein, and in a panic explained that he
could not do it because he was not carrying petrol but olive ofl, withcut
being able to explain which miiitary leader or ieaders it was destined for,
although he knew it was to be sold/ contraband. 7 .

SITUATION OF THs PRISONERS, —— Ha cannot calculate the number of prisoners there
are actually at the moment although be asserts that it is at any. rate enormouse
Ey reason of his position he has vis ted prisons and fortresses, and is terrified
at the terrible treatment in the "Comisarias® Civil Guard barracks eto. Om

more than cne occasion he says he haa saved moro than ons Republican fromo rtain
death, The prison that he knows is the Coto at Gijon. It is at tho moment
completaly full. The treatment is inhuman. Thay do not give the prisoners

a call number but allocate them only a equare meter for slesping, atanding sta.
That 1s to say that when a prigoner errives he ie given a metre of ground. Nor
do they give them a mess. Lately they agreed to give them a peseta dilly for
maintenance. Es does not understand why there are not acre deaths, as with

one peseta a day in the prieon canteen one can only buy bread. They gook tho
hiiners who were prisoners to camps so that theymuld wrk in the mines. they
gave them 504m, day wages for bachelors and a peseta for a aife ami 50 cts.

for each child, to the married ones. They keep them working ten and twelve hours
égily in.the mine. The nuaber of shootings has diminished, If is imputed to the
fact that “almost all must have beentriei% —

THE CLERGY —. Ho eayo that the clergy have never intervened in poditics fron the
° pulpit as auch as they do now, sometimes inveighing against the Franquist
‘Gevernnent, and et other tines, naturally, defending the policy of the Falange,
Rumbers of the priests and monks continually ex:ound their view on the political
regina and the points on which they differ from it. As a characteristic example
he relates that about two months ago in Gijon there was a house used provisionally
as the Church of. San Jose, which was destroyed during the War. A priest, —
“pfofessor at Salananca, gave fivo lectures. In these lectures he spoke almost
exclusively on political questions, and attacked the Franquist Government -
for their method of suprly and distributing tie foodstuffs among the peple, .
saying thet what was wanted was rore rationing and less Frmquist reguistions. —
He also advocated the necessity of a pardon for all comiemned people and other |
things that our informant does not remember. 500 peocle went to the first lecture,
but tm the second one, when they heard what the subject was, was attended by -
literally all Gi jon, - . ee ; .
RECONSTHUCTI“H, ——- Reconstruction is only dome as a catter of private en 4 .
by proprietors and churches. In Madrid, tks Montana barracks, the prieon, the :
workers districts, damaged by the bombardments, remain as they are. Nothing =. ‘
: has been rebuilt. Tho arguellos district has bean partly rebuilt. Every owner :
. has taken-in-band his own property: The Franquist recenstiiuetion policy 1s a myths -
: The peo;le mock at it and make- jokes, among them the following - In Gijon they muad =
erected a building marked "Reconstruction Office"sin the hallway there wero
_ two doors, one sarked “for partial destruction® and the other fer-total. destruction’. ©
_ So @ well-known Asturian who was visiting the office about his hovse which had | .
_-been partially destroyed went into that department. Once inside, there were two:
‘more doers = "for those who have. some resources, and for those who have not". |
Be went through the first door, there was another room with two doors - "fer
those wio are Falangists,-and for those who are not®,- He went through the second
door and found himself inthe street. - so



--- Page 40 ---
14-0000

PACTS ABOUT PEST STANCE. - _ In Spain acto ‘ef sabotage: are carried out on the raile’
ways, factories, etc., although he cannot decide whether these are organised.

actions decreed py illegal organisations of Spanish Republicans or amspon= -

taneous acts of workers who are onenios:of the Falangist regime, He does not - : 4

know any concrete instance cf thse activity of the workers orgarisations, C.P.3.  - Lok

ete., but when he was in Kadrid on the 22nd and 23rd of last June, there was : oy

a film on called "& Thieves are Honest en%, Thare were thousands of Lampoona ey

dond on that, some very clever and suggestive which were scattered throughout oe a

Madrid. According to our informant, one day the lampoons appeared printed in , : 2

the sane typo lettering as tie poster, with the following - words of the Candilio, . 4

from a recent speech*®. For t:is reason there wore arrests and a number of . we, 4

beatings in Madrid. He also saw how the people had lost their fear. In . i

the Oran Wa in Madrid a man cried out that he was not only red but conmunist, x

and he muld not endure this any nore. Apparently the people told hin to be

silent put he did not take any notice. The R.A.F, bombardment of Colognes,

which was known in Spain fro the English bpeadcaste, was calebrated almost all

over Spain by the people who stayed up much later than the usual time in the

etreeta, drinxing in bare, otc. Be says that oven the police took part as

thoy are largely anglophiles

GUERILLEROS — He says that there are many in Asturias; there is a state

of war. ‘There are Moore and the'Tercio!. Ths guerilieros appear occasiondly
in the villages and avenge the deaths of antieWescists who have been murdered
by the Falange. They take food and clothes. Once his car was stopped by a
group of them in the street of Llanes. They wsre drossed es Falangists.

Fhen he showed his papers as Consul of Cuba and proved ho was not the previous
consul Pena, a known Falangist, they saluted him and said = “Long live the
people of Cuba®, He says that although they behaved sorreotly he was rather
afraid, He knows that a short time ago the guerillercs of Campocazo had Tight
with the Civil Guard and killed several people, among thet some well known Hane
giste in the district. It appears that the Querilleros are magnificently armed,

FUTURE PROSPECTS, —- He believes firmly that Hitler will be defeated this yoars
Me has great faith in the people of Spain and France, oto. Hasiadominated
Burope will sriss, since this life cannot continues “even one winter more’,
He is confident tiat the U.$.5.R, will not ba defeateds on the contrary the
Soviet battlefronts will be the end of Hitlerism. Hse believes that England

. and the U.S,, in opening a secomi front, will count on the help of peoples
Fergocet by the Hasis, in France or in Spain, ond things will move rapidly.

The Spaniah people ure waiting for the invation of the Allies in order te take
‘erm in the streets ageinst their rulers. The Spaniards trust in the Allies
and hope that the Second Front will not be long delayed. Soviet and English
broadcaste. arolictened toy they fcllow the progress of tie war. They hate the
Germans and the Italians. These who before supported Franco ara now his
enemies and partisans of the defeat of Hitler. Tho Spanish people hope to
escape from this situation by the defeat of Hitler ani trust ih the Restoration
of the Republic.
Cuba. -—- 28.7,42,

REPORT _No,355

- AHORL MARTINEZ, 26 years old, is a student from Bilbao. He is not a consistent
Fascist or anti~Fascist either, as his opinions/fither confused,

Ra — He says that no one speaks of the wart

7 Spain will not enter it. All ths world thinks : : ‘

‘that Germany will lose tlio war because her enemies are very strong. He says . i
that nothing is said about the secomi front. about the Blue Divisien he says : 4
that. the pecple are against those wo went to Russia, chiefly because they think - ‘

-- them mad. Eo ta ked to a frie of his who cane back from Russia, who was

_ thoroughly glad to ba. back. Ha said that our entire war was child's play

' eompared with tis one and the way the Russians fight. Hesays that aom .

: dettiste werein' the Division through hunger, and some were Falangist adventcrers, .

‘and in spite of its being said: that all are volunteers it in obvious that many

wers forced into: it. He says that. in the Gibraltar demonstration, there were



--- Page 41 ---
14-0000

N

‘ only £ 8, *tho do not know what war neans".
only See ean ne pretends to be slow ard tries. tug et cut of the questions
with trifling answess, We think it io because he feels constrained by @
Felangist who ie with Him, He declares that be 1s against Serrano Suner, but.
be eays he is quite favourable to Franco cacause he promilgates laws wich
favour the people ard is a partisan of neutrality Lesides. Whea we cive hig _
examples, especially that of the Blue Diviscn, fo chey him what Franco's neutrality
gnounts to, he maintains that they are all volunteers. Hy says they are always.
wpoaking in favour both of Germany ani the Allies, because Franco wiehes to _
stand well with beth aides. Ee says tha: when the state of nom=bdelligerence?
was established the people were contert becanse before that they were afraid
of being involved inthe war. This fear, he enys , 18 :ot 80 strong now,
When aaked what he would do if he were in Spain and the Spanish people were _
involved in the war he answered - “Iwovld g to the sountains or spend a
bullef on the first officer wo tried to force ne®, He says that many ‘antarda
would do the same if Spain were forced into the war, because it wuld be so :
terrible, . . -

SUPPORT GIVEN BY THE FRANQUIS? RSOQTHE TO HITLER. -—- He dogs a& know the proporations
ef this asaistance but he says that volunteers cmtinue to loave for the front.

In the sane way he thinks that if the Ogrmans did sot take provisions f2'on

@pain all the needs of the country would be suppliet. With this ‘doa he ecm

plains againat the Germans ard against Serrano Suner above all. Falangists in
uwittfora are now only seen in parades,

WORKERS POR GERMANY — He says that a few months ago they sent a great quantity
of workers to Germany, They were almost all Galicians, and very few fron Bilbao,
A little later they were returned because "they were being deceived", "petting
into difficultiss", When he was asked tobe more precise he egid that when they
got to Germany they asked to be returnsd to Spain, and so they did with alnost
ell of then, .

TEES — Hs says there are no persecutions or executions, when the execution
Larrenage aas mentioned he said that the people had no knowledge of those
erines. About the refugees he says that the people talk of thelr Ssturning to
Spain then the war is overs

FRICTION. — n this point, without being questioned, he says that the Paquetes

_ end Palangiata cannot meet, because when the tw parties were amalgamated tho
Roquetes were pushed into the background, and that is the reason they prefer the
monarchy. 1 thie point he says that he has heard nothing about the restoration
nor about the differences between certain leading factions in the arnye

RESISTARCR, =~ at first he said that no one speaks about the war or any other
problezs because the peonle are afraid. Bu~ afterwards he said that people
regarber the Republic and hw well they lived than. [Hg does not report any

exemple of resistance to the war. He says that the Bativonalists have a lot of ine
fluence, but rot so cther parties, among them ours. Prieto has no influence a ther.
In gemsral it is obvious that he is ignorant of many things or dees not dare to
speak of then, . : -

‘ i

UNITY — All the anti-Fascists are united, but he gives no details.

FUTURE PROSPECTS_—~ :When the war ends with :he victory of the Allies Franco will
fall, ani he thinkg that the Resublic will return. He thinks it will happen soon. .- --
because the situation is unbearable, altkough “there is no need to think of Rgvolutio
He says that if the Oermans invaded Spain the people would rise. As wo. said, he :
is atpiying for his bachelors degree. His aatriculatim costs, i:cluding the price ,
ef deals, about SOO pts; before it used to cost 200. He says that studying has

. become very difficult. He saysa:that all students belong to the 3.2.0. although it.
is itt obligatery, but they are coerced, ani they. Join in order to. be in a good

- QH CONDITIONS oF LIFE —. Bs explains that in therationing they allow a K. of
. Po-atoes per person a week, a-quarter litre of-:live oil, 200 gr. of vegetables
_@te. Fo one mae on'that except those who have a lot of money; the rest go

i .



--- Page 42 ---
14-0009 +.

ao cere

hungry. The, workers, who aré paid the safe salary as before, cannot aoe
to deal on the Hlacx Market and he says ti.at there have been ceses & es
Hornos where workera have fallen dead from hun-er a* work. This cated _
discontent althscgh it ia not, openly expressed. How they have appo att ne,
wardens in tre factories in B:lbse, andthe workers receive larger 78 ~ * ons
Here bo ia contradicting himself, because sonotines he’ says teat ose wre
were denanded cy the workman ( whieh would be @ dexonstration o res : ane)
and sometimes he says that the directors asked for chen. He says ‘ tnorease
of everything te cannot understand why when food production is on. tne & oon
tho worksra are so badly fed. Later he says that they wateh thes osely
_---ferce them to work without csesing. Ha relates (akthcug:. we enw no details)
that the middle class does not feel the pinch like the wer kerse

N 59, — They exist fund go they did before. He cites the
FOSULAR CRON ISAT Ee ee excurriong. These organisations are not con=
trolled by the Flange. Young people are as gay as before, ami dance and go
to the mountains.

ARNY — ‘Ee refers above all the discontent of the families because their sons
have tc spend four years in the army, He says that thoy desonstrate their
discontent and that they all want to be demobilised. But this open discontent
ia confined, he says later, to private conversation, .

REPORT Fo. 3560

Cr LUIS 7 Ru “= a Mexican student, who has always lived in Gijon, Spaine His

jy 10 comfertably off and he is going to Msaxico to join his father as he
lived on what his father sent him in dollare amt when this waa forbidden he
decided to leave Spain. He is an ardent Falangiat. is ignorant of all probless
of ihe working and niddle class. He only associated with people who were very
well off, and especially with Falangist students. He is very cultured.

‘Be says that he was in‘Qijon at the bezinaing of the war and remained there
till now; as he was a Mexicm he was molested by neither party. .

HUNOSR —- He roumily asserts that there is no hunger, only a scarcity of certain
articles, That withrationing °there is not enough for one mouthful? but that
he never felt the want of food, That the olive of] raticn is 1/8 of a litre
core overy 15 days, and so on for all other conrodities, that the rationing of —
, . broad (black bread, aince white can only be got on tho Black Market) ia arranged
in three categories, and for that there are three classes of fards — poor,
widdleclass, and rich. That the ration of the poor is larger, as they have lesa
money for buying on tha Black Market. That at Belmonte, Asturias, the rations
axe double what they are in Gijon. That rationing is different in each provines,
and even in different places in the same province. He says that no one igs
interested in politics, that everyone's daily preoccupation is food, He says
that “it wed to make him laugh to see well-to-do old peoplw who in all their
conversations spoke of nothing but the price of beans and bread etc,® When ho
was asked for facts he says that it is obvious that the poor (by which he seans
the workers) who earn 10 or 12 pts. cannot buy anything contraband end live oa
their rations, which causes them to suffer somewhat from mmger and be very
discontented. Ho says that the fix hunger is caused by the war and the blockade,
because as soon as the Spanish war was over there was ebundance of. everything and
free exchange, end as soon as the European war began there was scarcity and
rationing. Ee also says at the same tine that theause of the scarcity ia that - 7
the Government has bought thousands and thousands of tons of food in case_the..... |
situation gets any worse. That this is good palicy of the “leneralissinots® and - :
| that the Falange is doing a lot of propaganda, saying that it is much better to
' |": Keep the food now, whan a lot is coming from argentine and the'U.S., than to.”
, @at it now and then if the situation gets worse, have nothing. That the people .
ae . who are ®gocd stuff® accept it, but most people protest ani complain. . Be says
+. 1. ++. ‘that mother cause of hunger are.the Provisions Committees, which, like. those

: ef Gijon, are composed of bandits who sell as contraband the articles they are

_ Supposed to: divide. among the population,

prea CR INTO: THE WyR.— He says. that Mpain will not enter the war, that thie-1s
: opinion o everybody. That all: prove the foreign poliey of; the Government, -

2 eth ent ates te



--- Page 43 ---
14-0000

~~

™~

SNA
,

* that it is very cold but they stand it very well: and are ‘auch congratulated by the "

- Were congratuated. 7. the Masis and often appesred in the Ogrman war comituniques.
.. ° That’ on occasions they established. aalient:on a river | -reateted: for more’
a Samm ten dary. fat as Shay fought thay once od. eang act Ok many Spentards ©

i on " - reer ameniadeb einer ie
-% = . 8/4622

which is wry intelligent, as it knows: how to maintain a balance in the :
eituation.and remain neutral. He says that. the Spaniards are very favorable

to Germany because they could have penetrated ints. Spain and taken Gibralter, |
thua closing the Mediterranean to the English, but that it is ®a German idea
that one wget be pleacant®. after arguing-a little with hin I said that Cermany
Right not have inveded Spain becanse she was not interested in dispersing

her troops, corsidering that she needs thea all for fighting ageinst Risaias
.Later he confessed that all. the Bpard arda would fight. egainat the. Germans ‘tn
case” thoy inveds Sain. because’ the Spaniards are very fond of | their: Ando
pendence, ani would fight anyone who wished to enter Spain. * The. Spanish Covert: _
ment ia a partisan of neutrality and the immense majority of the’ Palange —
think that Spath should send volunteers to Russia but "not enter the war®
because they do not know that many thousands of Spaniards would be killed,

PREPARATIONS POR TH3 Hah, — Ho says that in Spain much petrol has been stored and
that new tanks are under construction. I says that this too "La te being
kept for the dai timsa®, and in case myone tries to invade Spain the '59,

"40 and "42 drafte cre mobilised. the 41 draft has been sent hom. The '42
draft was called up with a three sonths' delay. They spend two years in
military service, There is also a prowailitary service Hr Youth Ofganisations.
This io not obligatory tut it is sounted as time spent in the service end for that
reason every one doan it,

yavagtoy — He says that there are no Oermans in Spain, Bp has seen none and 80
on, If there are any they are disguised’as peasants. Be ie not certain that they
are maxing fortifications in the north of Sain. Jijon is in fact defended by tuo
ships, one of them a "sulta~tacos® and if there was an English invasion there
Sthey wuld be the mastara%,

— He says that it is not a fact there are more factorics

re t Be Ber tag Spain which were not there before, and they do not work for

That the Germans say in their propagenda that they masn to suspend
Shas ment masufacture » be@ause they have enough, That Germany is selling a
Quantity of war material to Turkey, which is a proof tha. thay have no need of
it, therefore armaments are not mamfactured in ‘Spain nor exported, But he
takes the cprosite view, that Spain receives material from Germany; there are .
frequent consignments, mostly tanks. that Spain docs semd,not, "as soms easy because
the. Germans take it", but because the Government gives it bery willingly, is
food. Every Gay many loaded open cars leave Spain and tha people talk of it and
are dig _sontanted, but those are only thoge who "tikink with their stomachs%

DESPATCH OF WORKERS, — He cannot be accurate about the quantity but many thou-

have gone, volunteers. Hy, says it is quite natural for a man with
no food or job to go there wherethsy eat woll ani can send money home and because
all the "pocr® are like that. That is the reason thay "go as volunteers and are
gled to better their position®, .

DIVISION — 40,000 went, all wlunteers, among thes som qiite well-imom
Pp nguished Falengists. The :umber of voluntesrs was so great’
that they hed to close the lists and there are many thousands still w aiting
for their turn to go when they send reinforcements, In April 3,000 who had been r
relieved cams hone, tyat they wore all very happy. Eq had many friends who had |
gone and others who were realy to leave Our informant asked themif thay had

- had many losses tut the legicnaries said that this wat a lie, thay had had 7". °
deaths. ‘0 had been many wounted, to the’ point that not one of. then hei not.
been- ed-at—] Least-once.:_l] those ho cone homs have bean. wounded. They ee .

Qsrmans. They wear the German uniform and thered cap. They say they behaved
adrvellously in Russia and gave the Bussians a beating, “That the Risstans. are.
_ brawe, that is why they attack themfrombshind, but that thay do not: know har
to fight end. do not have good officers, although they have an abindanse of. =
‘material. They attack in masse formation and do not csre about. thear. Joases,. so.
that very fer reach the trenches!’ That nen of. the division always. fou ght in a.
nunerical superiority: of ten to sone and. caused the Russians: many losses. - “Thay


--- Page 44 ---
14-0000

' ; only. thing there are afew. robbers; the. so-called Querilleroe, who rob, kill

gacre S/T

sameeren po eae ane

- had been decorated with the iron-cress. Our informant thinks that they

osses than they confess to (all t-ose he spoke with were Falanzist

wetenie), and that in the camualty liste published only the names of the..
moet important are given. .In Spain everynne admires the courage of the
Lezionaries.and praises them twice as wuch as the O,rmans do. He trsista
that they are all volunteers, and says in tis own words - %a few ideaitsts
and the rest, the immense majority, because they were in a bed ~caition
in Spain and could get nos work or food. They want into the Div. Asul in order
‘to earn a good living because they are paid at the Gorman rate and a war
bonus, plus an allowance and large indemnity in case of death®. Besides,
if they are brave they can desert, when they go on leave they have millions of
pts. in thelr pocksts and can “put on airs and pose as heroes in their uniforms
and their iron crosses in Spain®, He says that althcugh the lists are closed,
there are thousands who are ready to leave at a day's notice, and trat he
Simows several.® They said they celebrated Christmas very happily in February
as they sent them tobacco and food from Spaing

Ba says thet in Spain there ia a lot of talk about the war, although
no one bothers about politics at all now, and only Gout food. There are all
sorts of parties, pa tisans of the Allies and tho Germans, and azong his friends

- the people are rostly partisans of the Osrmans; ha Glso thinks the majority of

Spaniards sre on the side of the Germans’ and epong the 150 in his pniversity
hall only two were partisans of Democracy and they had fierce e guments in
loud voices until the director cams, fhe partisans of the Hazis maintained
that anyone who wanted England to «in was not a Spaniard because bf the
Desocracies win Prieto will coms back ami all the Reds-of the Republic, and
there will be a government of Leftists ard in this fashion they attach the
defenders of England. The students say - “we are very ford of Ogrmany, because
sha helps us to be free of comaunien ani ie now defending us against it.” E
tays that this appeals to many people tho also hate conruniem, : La

SECOND FRONT, — He says thag$ no one believes it will be established. The

cannot invade England, nor can the Engrish invade Burove. All .
Spaniards would unite to defend themselves from the English. Theywuld do the
same if the Oarmans invaded Spain,

ON THE WAR.— He eaid that the Spanish idea was that it would last five or
eiz years ani that whon they were all exhausted there wotld be an armistice

or negotiated peace. This is tie o;inion of the people on the Right and the
Palangists; ha does not x.ow the views of the rest. Franco said in a speech -
®Yf the Russiens maké a breach and arrive at Berlin, he will send two million

- men to fight comrunisa® They do not attack the Republicans much, but blame the

Rusa@lan egants and the Coazunists for all tnat is hap-ening ip Spaine He says
that in Herdaye there are hundreds of acro-lanes @id many fields full of ©
tenks. Ths Germans have war material on the frontier in fantastic quantities.
He thinks that,le in order to be in a position to asaist either France or
Sein if it were necessary.

FRICTION ~= He says that there are. no disagremnsnts between the Requetes,
Falangists or Catholics; they are all united, and if there were an} friction
there are no scenes or qua rrels betause the “Generalissimo would shoot them.

— He says that it was a failure, that at the —
beginning sany pecple were excited by the propaganda, then they got tired and
practically the Youth Front does ret exist. . : . -

STUDENTS, -—-—_Thosc-arco-all—khax-very haspy to be members of the S.E.U. because ae
they avoid military service. The $.8.0. 18 obligatory . Thek only corps they :
have to belong to-is the University Wmlitia. In sumer they goto camps where

they have military instructi ai and are commanded by students who are officers —

' with some officers fran the srmye. :
'. RESISTANCE OF TYE. PPLE —. There is none at all, ‘In Spain there is a.

totalitarian Government favourable to the. Ogrmans. In totalitarian countries

: \ ‘there are no protests or any resistance because. anyone who resisted wuld be
- ghot.. There are discontented people but ‘they are silent, they dp ntt speak

‘peeause they cannot. J have.seen m inscriptiotion: the walls of Gijon, the.



--- Page 45 ---
- 6 = 5/1612

Se aaind: Salar ednat abet Relrneeiaeen: dibicinaante matmmeememeniemeaa eeiamaareeateemarceoammnenemenemetnemniate eon maton

S gta Bu , hint. -
and assassinate. ‘Taree sunths ago at t6@ Puerto de Somledo, they oe py

: this treated.
gunned a bus wit: traveliers in it a:d the Civil Qaard re .
are assisted by tne discontented peasants avi their fanilies. m they cane
to Franco, «ith their Lande free of blood, he would pardon then®,

TERPOR — at the ceginnl.g trey sot many pwrle, especially to pay ont ‘
personal scores. Wow it is done through tre tribunals. It ie a fact the
shooting continues, but only for those ondemed to death. -.-

FUTURE PROSP2CTS — Perhaps the end of the war will solve all these problems, .
The Gove naenta of Spain will icpuse peace, law and order ‘as -.soon 45 the war

is over. -. x

RESTORATION OF PT \ RARCZY, <= All a jie; all respectable people suprort
Franco and t=e d.sagreemsnts there are between the partie: do net constitute

@ problen. :

. DISAGREZMENTS IN THE ARMY -—— He says there are ncne. Quelpo was sent outside
Spain diplomatically, as a drunkard and a rascal, 88 all the army le with :
Franco and Hitler, wiv have aaved Sain and Burope from Communism,

PECONSTRECTICN <= He bays there is a lot being done in the way of reconsteuction,
In Oi jon ther Tava built hundreds of new houses and the town is wry cuch changed.
The people wi.o have rcney are afraid :% will lose its value, -dally, and eitver
build or use the money for bubiness, 4.3.42

REPORT No.357

. JCSB FAGOS, a peasant, resident in Cuba for 11 years, returned to B8pain
in-1940. At that time ne was a Franquist. He ie veyy backward acc extremly
suspicious. At frst bo refused to speak, especially when he was tcld that
he must talk to a journalist. He knows very little, since he lived in a smell
village in the district of Bstrado and only left it to embart. He oftenmys
that he imows nothing, and can orly give informati:n about his village that ia

a not political. Is a ncderate antieFalangist, and continues todfend Franco, of |
. whom he has a high opinicn, in many instances, The first thing he asserts is that
in Spain there is not so mich hunger as they say here. There is a scarcity
caused by the war tut it la iuet the same as it is everymhere, those with money
eat and thoge without go kungry. I$ is not true that they requisition the
". peasants! cro-s, et least in the part of Spain he knows. He says that
- everyone says in Spain that they contr] the crops, and even if they force them to
‘sell at the standard rate they leave the peasants enough to eat. It ia obvious
‘that’ everyone maxes fun cf the order and hides the produce "but it le not that
they requisition them, but that the Government contrcls produce and they

have to sell it at fixed rates.” He says that he has a trother in the srny and

the soldiers are very wel. fed. The ficd is well prepared but rather scarce.

In Bstreda they get the xem two regulation loaves just as before the war,

but in Coruna treai is searcer in the barracks. What everybody wants is for

the war to end, anyhow, wi-at is wanted is peace and tranquillity. yen asked

about the second front he says everyone is noping for the English to"ccre ani

give orders in his house Sut when the people are so anxious they want som-~-

thing to hapren to change the situation and see if it isproves®. On further

Questioning he confesses that 90% of the pozulaticn are against Franco - not on ’

his own account but cn account cf the b > and =xisery there is. - :

There is .0 repressica. People ars only exectted legally, through the =~ a
: tribunals: : oe if ae ae
: : He says that no one wishes Spain to enter the war, and Franco, "if he could, wr
would have bean on the cther side already, but as he has the Germans cn the .
- frontier he can:.ot do it" The rich arn’ the nenarchists are discontented, and
". there are many peopie who were deceived and do n.t like the present. regime. .
7 -ASked whether the peorle suzrort the Gyrmans of the Aliles, he says - -
gome on each side.. A little later he says everybody hates the Germans and is

ye, abich is natural. He says Be “ices not want, the English te ©



--- Page 46 ---
1400000,

eae eg /a622

Te prvnsrof AZUL, he says was voluntary, at least ethe papers: say 60.
though I do not know®, (His most frequent phrase is “the ;-apers Bay 80
but nobody knows#).: Bo asserts that there wore many. volunteers and one | -
went from the municipal government of Estreda, his villages he was the
assistant to a high officiel. He does :.ot imow anything about the. sur
wvere: Ra gives the addrees of & Cuben tho arrived in the SComillas® with
an amputated foct,’a voluntenr in the Hles Division. (The father -of,
when quostioned at the port, aaid he was lane thr-ugh an accident).
He confirms the stories about Quetpo and Yague, In Vigo he beard tho
following story - The Governor of Burges was ieprianed for black marketepring

~ and a son of tis, a lieutenant in the army, weit to Madrid te see Serram

Suner, who refused to soe him and told }im to see his secretary; the lieve
tenant refused and was referred to the Alde-de-Ceamp. The Aldede-Camp
unfortunate!.y asked him what he wanted and the Governor's gon said ~ *I
wanted to pit two bullets in S. Suner, but as I can't T*lLl put them in
you instead he shot hin and left hin deed, ~

In Vigo a bad meal cost him 20 pta, He does not know anything about it,
but the people sa the Germans take evarything. hen we ask hjs opinion
about the scarcity of rice, olive oll, etc. he ends by saying that he thinks
too that the Nasis take it.

FUTIRS PROSPECTS -— He says that any rogime will do as long as it is not
thig ona, No blood to be spilt and "those in the wrong® to be pardoned. There
are many people in the wrong who joined Freco, but have now repented. He
says that those people fear the fall of Fraico because there would be row
tribution, and many people sould be killed, but if the Republic could cone
without bloodshed everyore wuld be delighted.

& cow is worth 3.000 pts. The Civil Guard turn a blind eye to the con-
traband shles of the peasants because it suits theme ~

REPORT Fo.358

Report from a youth of 17, a Cuban, born of Spanish parents, whe
was living ia Santander fr about ten years with his grandmother, He has
no pokitica convictions and in sone respects is rather influenced by Nazis
and reactionary propaganda, He is quite a wide-ewake intelligent boy. Hg
talks wth no reservations and seems to be telling everything he knows,

PTITUDE OF THE SPANIARDS TO THE WAR AGATHST — He says that in
Spsin there are tw p. 8, one wich gupporta the Ggrmans and wishes
for their triumph and the otber which sympathiess and hopes for the victory
of the Allies. wh the first clase 3, Suner stands out, it includes all the
Falange, some generals, and the middle class, government employees otc.
fhe other class includes the majority of Reqadtes, the rich wose money ia
in London, the workers, end all the poor in general. Eg says that in Spain |
it is only permitted ak in favour of the Germans, ani that the partie
sans of the Allies ape. Secret afd seoig-trusted friends, With the -
passage of tim, owing to the the Ggraan Campaign in Rusgia, which the Palangists
said would end in a week, there is growing a loss of confidence in the —~

German triumph, both among the partisans of the Allies, who were dispirited at . a

the beginning of thé Russian cazpaig, and among the supporters of Germany .
themselves. He says that in Spain, except for a couple of ‘Palangist *focla, no

-one-wante-the-war;—not-oven -the.aray chiefa, much less the soldiers, :.-Es- paige a
really thinks that if they gave the order to march, 90 ohe_would protest, but

he éces not insist on what would definitely happen. ‘The German’ defeats in. -
Russia, which are considered very important in Spain, have”, “greatly contributed -

‘to raise the morale of the enexies of the Falange, who ere now-resisting it:

openly. Gin refers to the: Requetes and in guumhx gentral-te the partisans of.
England sho ‘are very musrous), ‘The entry of the U.S. into. the war was not.

- eonsidared. very important, because German propaganda, which is very widespread
gaye thst the submarines sank.all the ships wien campe to Burope and’ that. a
| there was very little use in producing @ quantity of war-material if it never

Feasheo'Bareye Mer aihe thas Sie people Fealiged that She Germans were - :

Se RCe VN Meee TenenC: SNe

. the legionary,

sehen SR AN te oe

ma!



--- Page 47 ---
14-0000

ack

. and assassinate. Taree zunths ago at tte Puerto de Somtedo, they ata

. gunned a bus wits traveliers in it ani the Civil Suard retreated: ies Y me
are assisted by the discontented peasants ani their facilis. I y .
to Franco, «.th their hande free of blood, he would pardon then,

TREOR —= At the dezimni:g they s.ot many people, especially to pay ont ‘
personal scores. Now it i@ dane through tae tribunals. It is a fact tha
shooting continues, but only for ticse o:ndeaned to death.

FUTURE PROSPECTS _ Perhapa the end of the war will solve all these problems, ©
The Gove: nnenta of Spair. wiil iupvuse peace, law and order as soon as the wer ;
is over, .

RESTORATION OF TU i HARC — All a jie; all respectable people suprert
Frenco and the d.segreenentes thers. ere between the partie: io not constitute
& problem.

, DISAGREKMERTS IN THE ARMY —— ‘He aays there are none, Quelpo was sent outside
Spain diplomatically, as a drunkard and a rescal, as all the army is with
Franco and Hitler, wiw. have saved Sain and Europe from Communisr,

RSCONSTRUCTION — Ha says there is a lot being done in the way of reconstitustion.
In Gijon they have built hundreds of new houses and the tom is wry much changed.
The people who have cney are afraid it will lose its value, daily, and eityer
build or use the money for bubinesa, 409062,

REPORT _No.557

. JOSE PAGOS, a peasant, resident in Cuba for 11 years, returned to Spain .
in 1940. at that time be was a Frenquist. He is veyy backward ard extremly
-suspicious. At first be refus_ed to speak, especially when he was told that
he must talk to a journalist. He knogs very little, since he lived in a small
village in the district of Estrado and only left it to omar. He oftenmys
- that he knows nothing, and can only give informaticn about his village that is
not political. Is a acderate antieFalangist, end continues todefend Franco, of
. whom he has a high opinicn, in many instances, The first thing he asserte is that
in Spain there is not eo mich hunger as they say here. There is a scarcity
caused by the war but it is Just the same as it is everywhere, those with money
eat and those without go hungry. If is not true that they requisition the
peasants’ croms, at least in the part cf Spain he ‘mows. He says that
everyone ‘says in Spain that they contr.1 the crops, and even if they force them to
. gall at the standard rate they leave the peasants encuch to eat. I} is obvious
‘that everyone makes fun cf the ordar and hides the produce "but it 1s not that
thay requisition them, Lut that the Government contrcls produce and they

_ have to sell it at fixed rates.” Ee says that he hes a trother in the army and
the soldiers are very wel. fed. The iscd is well prepared but rather scarce.
In Estrada they get the uemst two regulation loaves just as before the war, |
but in Coruna tread is scarcer in the barracks. What everybody wants is for
the war to end, anyhow, what is wanted is peace and tranquillity.: en asked
about the second front he says everyone is hoping for the English to’come ani
give orders in his houge tut when the people are so anxious they want som-
thing to happen to change the situation and see if it inproves®. (n further
questioning he confesses that 90% of the poculaticn are against Franco - not on:
his own account but on account cf the hunger and cisery there i8.. :

There is =o repression. People ars only exéctted legally, through the
tribunals, = _ : . ”

Be says that no one wishes Spain to enter: the war, and Franco, "if he could, wt
would have bean on the cther side already, but as he has the Germans on the
frontier. be caniot do it® The rich ant the senarchists are discontented, and
there are many people wio were deceived and do n.t like the present’ regine. .

. , + MSked whether the poorle suprort the Gyrmans of the Allies, he says - -
; @ope“on each side. A little later he says ovarybody hates the Germans and is-
afraid of their encroachments except the Malanzgists. . : lo

Oar enn CAS ET

. ® arrive,' witch is natural.

"He says Ba ices ‘not want the English to-



--- Page 48 ---
“2/4632,

- 17 1

THS DIVISTOR An, he says was’ voluntary, at least the papers say 60

‘although I do not know®. (His most. frequent phrase-is "the ;apers say 50

but nobody knows"). He asserts that there were many volunteers and one

went froa the municipal government of Estrada, hic villages he was the -

assistant to a high official. Es does not mow anything about the sure

vivors. He gives the. address’ ofa Cuban eho arrived in the "Comillas® with

an amputated foct, a voluntear, in the Blue Division, (Tho father of the Legionary, :
‘when Questinned at the port, seid he was lame thr-ugh an accident). :
He confirms the stories about Queipo and Tague,’ In Vigo he heard to -
following. story - The Governor of Barges was imprisoned. fcr black marketesring

and a son of his, a lieutenant in the army, went to Madrid to sea Serrano

Sunsr, tho refused to sce him and told nim to see hia secretarys the lieu

tenant refused and was referred to tha Mdo-de-Ceamp, The Aidewdle-Camp -
unfortunately asked }in what he wanted and the Covernor!s son aaid ~ "TF

wanted to pt two bullets in 3g, Saner, but as I can't I'll put thea in -

you inatead2s he shot him and left him deed. -

In Vigo s bad meal cost him 20 pts. He does not know anything atout it,
but the people sqythe Gera:ns take everything. When we ask hga opinion
abot the scarcity cf rice, olive oll, atc. he emdie by saying that he thinia
{oo that the Hasis take it.

FUTURE PROSPECTS — Eo says that any regine will do as long as it is not
this ono. No blood to be spilt and those in the wrong® to be pardoned, There
are many people in the urong who joined Franco, but have now repented. He
Bays that those people fear the fall of Fraico because there would be ree
tribution, and many pecple would be killed, but if the Republic could come
without bloodshed everyone wuld be delighted,

. A cow ia worth 3.000 pts. Tho Civil Quard turn a blind eye to ths con-

. traband sdles of the pessants because it suite thems

REPORT Wo,358

Report from a youth of 17, a Cuban, born of Spanish parents, who
was living in Santander for about ten years with his grandmother. Hse has
no pokitical convictions and in sone respects is rather influenced by Nasie
and reactionary propaganda. He is quite a wide-awake intelligent boy. Hg
talks with no reservations and seoms to bo telling everything he knows.

: TTITUDY OF THE SPANIARDS TO THE WAR AQATNST = He says that in

Spain there ere tw p. a, one wich supports the Cgrmans and wishes

- for their triumph and the other which ayspathisosand hopea for the victory
- of the Allies, ji the first class S Suansr stands out, it includes all the

Faolange, some generals, and the middle elasz, government employees ott.

fhe other class includes the majority of Re@étes, the rich thoso money is

in London, the workers, end all the poor in general. & says that in Spain

. _ 4t is only permitted & ak in favour of the Ggraans, ami that the partie
- , sans of the Allies spo Seeret afd tmeig-trusted frienis. With the .

passage of tim, owing to the Geraan campaign in Ruseia, which the Falangists

said would end in a week, there is growing a loss of confidence in the.

German triumh, both among the partisans of the Alies, who were dispirited at
ae the beginning of the Russian campaign, and among the supporters of Germany = >>

thensslves, Es says thet in Spain, except for a-couple of. Falangist*focls, no

: one. wants the: war, not_even_the aray chiefs, auch loss the soldiers, He. .
oo -.  weally thinks. thet 1f they gave the order to march, yo one_would. protest, bat oe
he does not insist on that would definitely happen. The Oerman “defeats in . a a

pe Ruseia, which are considered very. important in Spain,. have® greatly contributed - .
‘ - "' to raise tho morale of the enemies ‘of the Palange, who are now:resisting it ©
openly. (He refers to the Requetes ani: in puumkx general _to.tha partisans of -
. Ragland utc are very mumerous), The entry of the U.S. into the.war wae not
considered very important, because: Ggrmat propagania, Which’ is very widespread,
‘gaye that: the submarines: sank -all/the ships Which campe-to-Europe and that :
there was very little ose * in -Produaing a qiantaty of, ar material if iv never =.



--- Page 49 ---
14-0000

s/t

exazgerat! DE, siaee in the Rust an’ Campaign they sell that the Rusetans

: were defeated alresty and nevertheless sonthe pasced and the war went on.
£ Our informant did not snow the existence of the Anglo-Soviet and Soviet~

} american pacts, although he heard some agreement spoken of, but he never . :

+ Inew exactly what it tas. Thsre was a lot of talk about the second frent, . no H

‘and it is thought it will be in France. hen asked ehat,in the event of oe oe : :
‘ the English landing in Spain, the attitude of the psonle wuld be, he says he. - , i
| thinks the Requetes would unite with them, Shen I told him I tiouzht they | i
: had sent se brothsar of mine to tie Div. Asul. he male a face as if they had.
‘ sent him to the devil. "I sm sorry, because those w.o go to Rusia in generd
, do not return, and those who do coma back arecrippled for life*, Ho says

that ge the Div, asul was joined by the unfortunates who are, with their

families, dying of hunger, ind advehturérs and robbers; some too because

they were soldiers already and did not dare say no because tley would have

cut their throats if they hed. He says that in the beginring a group

ef 40 left Sentander and a few months ago tenc ame Lone, armless, legless

or tubercular, the re#tdicd bf it. One of them, a captain, and tubercular,

told some of hie fasily and friends that all the Ggrman propaganda on the

Russisn war was anabsolute lie. That the Russiona never retreated until they

were killed or received an order to retreat. That it is a lie to say that

they have no leaders, and similarly that they have rio material. He mew

better than mybody what the war in Russia had already cost the Germans. .

During the winter they had lost rillions of men and a great deal of

material, It was torifying what went :n there. He says trat those who come

back from Rusaia are forbidden to speax of what they see there and therefore

it is imposaible to get more détails. However thay tell their friends in

confidence.

ASSISTANC2 CLVEN BY THE FRANCOMPALANGIST ROGIME To HITLER, — The reinforcements :
they send to the Div. asvl grow less each time. No one wants to go because
the stories of the survivors are gradually passed round. He adds that the
& Germans pay thea very highly. They give them 3.000 pts. just for crossing the
, frontier. 4 few months ago a few left Santander to concentrate in San
Sebastian. It is there that they train. While before, they made propaganda
out of those who were going to Russia, and sar then off at tho Station, now
6 : it is done secretly. :
11 foodstuffs ere sent to Germany, that is why there is fanine in Spaine :
. "I wish you cofild see all the things they send, Inmagine that one can't, get .
s . Olive o11, which used to be so abundant in Spain®, fhey say that in Bilbao
, and in Reinosa (7?) and other places the factories work for the Germans.
: .Aecording to him there are no Garman soldiers in Spain, only technicians.
Qermans in civilian clothes are “particularly common. He added that the
Ogreans spend mi*liona on propaganda and there are many newspapers, reviews,
pamphiets ete. which are distributed gratis. The pecple, as a result of so
much propaganda, do not ‘mow what to think on some points. They say - "If
what the Germans say of Russia is true that country. is doomed to disappear;
there is nothing but savagery there”. He says that some German propaganda
postcards show Roosevelt and Churchill dressed as prostitutes, and Stalin
in the middle embracing them. The people do not like this kind of propaganda,
as for the German infiltration into the ccuntry, he limits Mmaelf to saying - o :
that they are the casters in Spain. He gives no data. “He says that the - a t
Falange is very much weacened, that only timeservers and those who'do: =>. a :
; dusiness,thanks to the positions they occupy jn. it,are its supporters. = - eer oe
. (Whereas, when -Lt-began;evayybody wished -to be Falsneists, now no one takes - ne
: a any notice, and some people are careful to conéeal the. fact that they: > .
re ' - ae Falangists. ‘They say that the Requetés appear’ “very upsét. They wer
: : - the ones who fought hardest in the war and: new-the Palangi sts are taking
, advantage of the victory. He -says they” do not give. positions tothe |
Requetes, and when the Felanzists control. the ‘syndicates ‘they do. not ‘give :
then work either. : There is. a great deal of discontent among the Requetes, “and

they have already begun'to speak. openly against the. Falangists: and those whom :
Thay Mane: f r the: present: situation in Spain, » Th f

pms cee wm ATE CAEN EEN ALPES



--- Page 50 ---
ake thon nexbere against thetr will
- do not foin, or, if they make then members: against their ’
pay the duss. Referring to the despatch of workers to Germany,

. but he has the impression that they were decei ved, ‘like t!

‘operation, ~ .

’. wery.near the coast by
4. Says it entered harbour; listing ¢
“pot able to finish the sinking: beca

do not
he says the

salary and food as weal,

numbers were high because they offered thes a good fe rembers of tho

Div, asul. Ne does mt xnow any core details, = :
“yn the army there is a group h

CTIGN PRTWEEN TH2 RULING CLASS IN SPAIHe — , . .

Beaded py Yafue and queipo, who are opposed to Spain enterin: the wars oe
Cermana and Italians controlling Spain. He says that in conjunction. w 1
Requetes and other individuals in the arzy, they were. preparing & NP ad ot ar
against Franco, and principally against S, Suner, who is the worst hated ’
tut it was found cut and no one knows what app Bay to Yague and. Que poe. ne'dos :
Generel Espinosa de los Montero also had sumething to do with it, but he does _
not know exactly wiat tie part wag. Referring to Yague, he says that he was _
diemissed from the Air Miniotry whon he made a speech in favour of releaging — L.
the prisoners. Queipo refused to allow the qperuens to have any olive oil.

The situation of the soldiers is very bad. ey hardly eat at all, and are

very badly clothed. It is pitiful to eee thes. They all wish to be de~
mobilised as acon as possible. The '59 draft has been demobilised and he

thinks the first reserve of the '40 draft as well. He thinks it 1s because

they cannot kesp them in barracks for want of foods

THE POOPLE'S RESISTANTZ TO THS WAR AND THE REGIER — According to our infore
mant the atate of mind of the people is one of extreme hostility towards the
present state of affairs, although it ts sot obviously shown. The Reds

are in hifiing, He says that the only people who are openly fighting against
the Falange and the Regime in power are the Rgquetes. That besides the
pamphlets we have referred to above, there often appear on the walls, lampoons
and postere against the Palange. He rementers one which said sore or lese
"Famine and Theft, that 1s the Palange", ‘There appeared another very like it, but
he does not know what it said because they rubbed it out at once. He says
the Requetes also accused the Falanghets of being cowardly assassins who are
‘only useful for doing mass assassinations (#dar Paseos*).— ;

The. people take a sympathetic view of thess actions of the Requotes. In
the queues people tukmooagex speak against the Covernment and the Falange.
There are nany prisoners, When the "nationalists® first entered Santander they
killed pecple in thousands. The Palangists held many “passos®. They went on
killing, only less than at first. The prisoners died oftheir harsh treatment,
many were tubercular. He doea rot inow if they give them organised assistance.
Probably relaticna and friends. He does not <now of any activity of the party,
or the J.S.U. The Reds are very carefully watched. The only ones who do_
anything are the Requetes. In general cur informant does net know any of ow

organisations because he was very young when the war began. The only thing he says ~

ie *the Falangists are like those they used to call the F.A.I. They co toa |

‘house, steal, take a man, take him and shoot him, and then it is finished®.

‘We cculd not get my information about the Union Nacional, althoush he gives the
impression that he does not xnow anything about it. - .

He has no ideas .n the futurg prospects... He thinks that thie depends on
Englands there is talk that the pea eke® wish to set up a King who ta not a
Bourbon. He does nct -ncw anythi @ restoration of Don Juan. The Falangists
are enemies of the Mpnarchy and the people do not worry much about thie
problem, Referring to the attack on 8, Suner; Espinosa: de los Monteros,
Ambassador in Berlin, had on one of his visits to Madrid, a violent quarrel
with Suner and in consequence resigned. He reports that then he was aprointed
Captain General of the Sixth Region, Burgos, and on takbag over the poat he made
&@ speech in which he attacked the Falange. He reports that as a consequence be
was violently dismissed. A few days later a eon: of the general who is a
licutenant-in the army, shot-at S.-Suner several times, he thinks: in’ Madrid, -

_AFrese was wounded in consequence. The press: said nothing about it. They

published a notice that the Secretary of the Party was undergoing an abdominal

-| Zhe Italian sub:arine which. entered Santander - wes damiced
A fow niles. from. Santander, and in full view of everybody, ‘it. w acked
y English aeroplanes which all but sank-it. He.
Iitsting over on one.side. © ¢ wr anes we
[ah the German: pursuit: planes forced them to
retire. When asked where the (German) planes'came from he said Irun: || (He gives .

eve © eh Stag Te

dadenet bere tesa ote



--- Page 51 ---
14-0000

he

REPORT 371”

was gids at the factory. He lived in Nuttonalist circles, they were the

The opening @f the second front wuld be received with joy by ‘all

"Tt has no sympathy from ‘the people, everi from the very: moment. the- recruiting: was:

pao the Moscow parade. ie ‘aye the pr

the impression that he doea not mow really where their base was)e
; 50,7642.

A young Basque 24 cr 25 years old. By profession a metaleworker. Up to ~.
the beginning of the war he. was working with an-uncle in Zaragoza. Es remained.
in the battle sone throughout the whole: war and was mobilised in Franco te army,

Is a Basque nationalist, like almost all Ms family. Although a workman’ by
profession he always worked with his relating, almoat alvaye as_fcreman, or

at least as manager. He has no political point of view nor. are hig class
foelings very developed. He has never belonged to any symiteate. After the

War was over he worked in Bilbm ina wire factory where there were about

@ thousand workmen. He final'y left work in order to devote himself to the

Black Market because, acording: to hin, it was impossible to live on what ho

only ones with which he was con-ected. For this reason his report ia rather
incomplete, end in soce cases lacks objectivity. He is rather reserved,

ATTITUDE OF THB SPANIARDS TOWARDS THE ANTI-HITLER WAR, — In the graphic
words of the informant, 90% of Spaniards are partisans of England. . The
workers, peasants, potit-dourgeois, capitalists, and some of the clergy,
(later he told us the majority of the Basque cures) are cn the side England,
although in a passive way, and against Germany and the Palange.

The general opinion which ie expressed in ecnvsrsations between groups of
friends, and lately also in the street, is that the defeat of Germany is ince
evitable, due, ascording to our informant, to the fact that the Allies have
more econoric resources end more prinsry materials. It 1s thought that the
United States will be a very important factor in theredisation of victory.

Also the defeats cuffered by Germany on the Eastern front contribute to
streacing this opinion.

In Spain everyone is tired of the war, and no one wishes Spain to take part
in it. There people are in a real panic on this acore. Or informant thinks
that if Franco should decide to ficht, in viewd the terrorist nature of ths
Regine, the people would have to obey. Later in another conversation he said that
there were peonle who, in that case, would hide in the mountains,

-The defeats suffered by Qgrmany on the Rastern front were well krom
there and contributed to increase the people's confidence. He says that they
said there that, in spite of their resistance, it was obvious that the Russians
were not suffi ciently prepared to face a power like Germany.

The entry of the United States into the war was received with ‘oy by the
people who interpreted it ss an event destined to shorten the war, of which they
are all very tired over there.

The Ratification of the Anglo-Russian Pact and the dnerican-Rusaian agreemnt
4s known there, althcugh the range and content of the pact and the agresmént
were not mow. He says that the Falangist presse; only said that these nstions
hed prosised not to make a separate peace.

He does not know t.e agreement about the second frmt, although this ~ :
subject is very often. spoken of, with the idea that it would be the final blow to
Germany. Over there they think that the. opening of the Sgcond Front will result
in the rising of the French people, perhaps the Spanish people too, With tis ides
in mind the people often dizcuss possible landing places. It is thought that
this-will_take-place-in-Francé;-although ome gay it ‘might also happen in- Spain

The attitude of the people to the Division Asul® ia frankly. ‘hostil

He 8 ays. that“in the beginning a. few volunteers gave a “
Falangists who w.stied to earn merit in order to improve’ thet: position’ in: “Spaine
Others went because their position. in Spain. was..deeperate ard ‘they thought it”
they left it.” Some, who. vent. An the areys. found ‘themselves...

: oon propaganda, “gasarting that the |
aien soldier © could: fight in all climates, as # they: hed’ shown at Teruel. 7


--- Page 52 ---
’ The survivors cane back disillusioned. They rerent-of having zone.. The .- 7 “ee

' they are working at presaure, but he does not mow if it 1s xar material.

“general there 1s a great feeling. egainst the Falange ‘among the. soldiers.

-a-- 8/622

hat when the ‘panes of ‘the first casualties arrived, the people were glad |
ont eaid what will teach them to interfere in what does mt ccncern then®.. :

rity of them come back ill or criprled. He adds that tre war in Russia . ;

reyiind than the Press re>orts.it; the Spanish war was child's play cor;:ared with
it. Tae Falangists are mcre reserved and make nopurlic criticisms like the,
others but anong their friernda they also say that it wasterrible. They went

into action in fact just before the Russian co-.nter-offensive began, and ne!
received the full crunt. They had many losses throuzh bullets and the cold, mo >
Some of those who came vack crippled have Cgrman iron crosses for which they .
get e pension, our informant does not know the am un},frox the Cgrman jovernment.

SUPPORT OLVEN SY TH FRAMY' TST REOTMS AID THE PALANGZ TO PITLER. — Our
informant doea nut know in whatq wntity they send reinforcements to the Biue
Division. He thimks that there is soze exa:-eraticn on this nvint on the prt .
of the Falangist Preas wrth tries in this way to encourage enthusiasm arong the
young men. He knows that the place they report to and tra‘h is San Sebastian,
and that from there they leave for thefrcnt. He thinks that they are still
sending people, but they are only "reliefs® for those who come h:me. Ha adds
that those wio yo to the Division aul today,with very few axceptions, do it
against their will, ‘They get the majerity of those who go from the barracks.
He says that many workmen went to Germany on acoount of the lack of food and
work. He dose nst know hom many but he thinks a fair wuantity. He says that the
people take those things calmly generally, because they cannot do anythhz
against them. He only heard that in Ipim there had been some scene with the
Blue Diviebn or with the-workers who wore going to Germany but he zives noe
actual details, saying that it is dangerous t. try and know too much,

In Spain the Bost fervent supporters of tha Naxis are - Suner, Minos crane,
Moscardo and other generals, and especially the "idealist® Falanciste, or those
who custitted injustices or profiteered and are afraid of "the table being
turneds, . .

‘Be saye that the Falange is only the stadcw of what it was during the
war. That at the beginning sany people fo.ned it for safety's sake, out now
it isTdead thing that no one takes any notice of. The same happened with the
"Flechas", "Frente de la Juventud" ete. The syndicates have many members,
because membership is obligatory in order to get work. The workers would not
Join them if they could help it. He says that all the directors are Falanzist
bureaucrats who take a.vantage of their position to steal all they can. He
Cltes-as-anexasple the fact that emloyers are obliged to pay sometrinz as
a contribution to the subsidy allocated to workuen with large fenilies,.ut he
says that the Folangists do not pay it to anybody, but spend it themselves.
For these and other aitilar reasons there is a lot of discontent among tte
enployars, : 7

Our informant says tmt they are still sending large quantities of food
to Germany, also iron and othyr materials, The peonle know that if there is
‘fanifie in Spain it is becaus@/the Germans and the "Black Marketeers®

daked bbout the production of the metal factories in Bilbao, he says that

He knows that pig-iron is being sent to France, he imagines it is intended |
‘for Germany. Iron ore is also sent to France dy SOBs :

FRICTION AMONG THE RULING CLASSES. —- He knows that in the aruy there ‘4s a surge |
eeling againat the Falange, but he says that it has‘nc outéide repempussions
The-only-incident-kmown there was’ the case of Yague and Queipo de Lian y

Consequence is that they make life impossible for. Falancis
Bo says that the majority of the Basque Priests -are. e
of the Falange ‘and of Franco,’ They sre ve:

‘ ’ elp. they ‘preserve. thelr eee
Be aids ’that she richest: and.most. influential people. there di
tise they feel ‘that:there will be a change



--- Page 53 ---
TE ~ = — “se .

Hatred for the Falange ‘te general inthe aajority. of sockal classes. ose

Be says tat even those wio belonged to the Falange before, young studants, -
employees or just rich peo-le, do not wish to have. anything - ‘do with it |
now, and say that the Palanze is going to the dogs. ~ .

Be adda that in general everybody hopes that the triumph of England will
cause a change of government in Spain and so they confine themselves to waiting
alth ugh there ie talk of a posaible coup d'etat by the poldiers.

RESISTANCE CF TY -PRO- BAG) INST ENTERING 7HmaR. iD 46 NST THE. ,
REGIME -- The peoole wish to gse.the situation change as ‘soon as peasibles but
they believe that the aolution must come from outside. Accordizg to our infers:
mant, there is nc thought of fighting againsta. regine, We eays that the
workers in the factory in which he worked spoke openly against the regigs but -

he does not Inow that there was any activity. (Given the character of the
infcrmant wo may aup os@ that even 1f there was he would take pains to icnore
it). From time to time the women ricted in the queues; at first they sity

them up, «ow they say nothing, He asserts that every day the people meak mre
openly against the régine. The contribution to SAuxilio Soctal® was obligatory ~
before but row no one pays. When the young ladieg of "Auxilio Social® beg for
subscriptions in the streets and aek the reagon for refusal, sone people answer =
ecause I do not wian to*,

He says that when Franco was at Bilbs the pemle remained in their houses
end he was received only by four “chats bottes"® in the offices of the Falange,
At the end of Franco's @sech not a soul applaudal. Then eome Faleneist
young ladies said, helf in tears, *what wo must do is buy a machine gun and
shoot them all®

Assistance to the priwners, according to our informant is given by relations

and friends. here is no organised assistance, but he proceeds to tell us that
certainl: there have been collections sonctings in the factory inf avour of the
prisoners, but “by groups of friends®, He does not know of the activity of any
organisation, as such. ‘Tha nationaliete, according to him (he is a nationslist)
are tne ones mo have some organisation,
. They distributed there a speech made by Aguirre in America. (ne of she
Pristots was aleo in circ:lation. Ee has no news of the other organisations
although he adaits that if they have any organization they would not go and
tell him avout it.

Mhen he ia asked about the activity of the different organi sati ons of which
the Pronte Pooular is composed, and the attitude of the militant party members
of these organisations, he asserta categorically that there tne people are
completely united, and there is now no talk of socialists, anarchists, coaaunists,
Tepublicans.etc. All treat each other as comrades, and halp each other as far
as they can. In Spain, according to our igformant, there are only now enscxies
of Franco and the Palange, tho naintain a strict unity among themselves; thay
discuss the progress of the war together,cou:ent on the situation ets. Hg says
that the people wish for unity, regret the disumion there was before in Spain.
and the quarrals between different parties and anti-fascist organieations, ~~

Be did n-t knew of the shooting of Larra or Diegues, The execution of Larra .
ismpressed him very much and he said that 4 in order. to do what Lerra had done ons
would need plenty of gute.

FUTURE PROSPECTS — He repeats again that they believe in Bain ‘that the-triumh
_ Of England will cause a change in the situation. (We cust. point out that for some
time there have been currenta in the Basque nationalisa which have. been’ seeking.
for a ®solution® of their national preblem with the assiatence of England, - .
transforming the "Pais: Basque® into an ‘English protector: oor Dotsinioz: or. a
something like that, and even i during. the. ‘Spard sh war there were “Andi viduals tho wf
-_ thought that at the critical moaent the Basques wuld receive hel). from the English) | :
" ''  Qar. informant told us at the beginning that there people spoke only in © a
favour of England, but after considerable eircumlocution he confessed that the . . .
. ‘workers also syupathised very nuch with the Soviet: Union, -altbough™ conversations:
_ fn this direction were such more restrained. He added that the people were quite”
wel} inforied' sbout the course of events as they listen daily to :
ef Radio Lomion, end. sone also: listen: to those. of Radio Moscow,
. solution’ on. the’ da

She, wal atlnaitietlsoee os

eee a a AHR REE TE


--- Page 54 ---
14-0000

ue

tn Spain they believe that Hitler say be defeated in i942, esrectaly

af the Sscond Front is started. They also say that Russia is. bearing the

brunt of the fight. . . en ooo

aeeotetion about’ 8 monarchist restoration hss neither delighted. cr.
depressed the peo; le. The possibility does not erouge mic}. interest.

The poople,who, according to our informant, have most preatige in
Buskadi (Basque national territory) are Aguirre and Prieto, especially the
Sormr, . . . . .

4s regards conditions of material life he assures us that they are terrible
and that ie the fundamental reascn why all the people have turned against
Franc@. Thero te much talk of "Mo Limes without bread or a roof#®, but that.
doas not inprove the situation. Loe ; 7

All business is controlled by the "Black Marketeera® of tho Palange uh,
sheltered behind the Comdttees of Bupply, requiaition the crops fra: the
peasants at the standard rate, and instead of selling them to the reonle at’
the standard rate they reduce rationing to almost nothing in order to cozpal
the people to buy articles on the Black Markot, at a price which will give thea
the profits. Hs saya tha these who have7oney to buy things contzaband (and
they are the majority since salaries have hardly been increased at all in
comparison with pro-war standards) die of hunger. He gives prices which
correspond with those for other regions of Spain,

NOTE: the nilitary and naval information contained in these reports has been
extracted and supplied tc the 5.0.7, Trinidad, and the Military
adviser, Imperial Cersorship, Trinidad, under the reference rnumbere
S.B./3.0.Ie1, and $,B./MA1 respectivel;. .

" 2/0,9042, a a
- Copies to London, Mew York, Berauda & Jamaica.

af .

Abba hvicbeteeierns Ses



--- Page 55 ---
14-0000
ae

SRAM

SECRET

NO NOCUMENT EXTRACT

THE FOLLOWING [INFORMATION CONCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 201
DOSSTFR HAS BEEN EXTRACTED FROM ANOTHER UFFICIAL DO FILE.  _
PERSONS PERFORMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE DOCU
MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADOLT.LONAL
INFORMATION PERTAINING 19 THE SUBJECT ANO SHOULD BE. REQUESTED

FAM IP/ETLES 6, Mar

" 201-0289247
SEX M:

i
|
TEDESCHI, LUIS: aan |
H
{
i]
t
i

CIT ARGE | iol

“LETTER prop

ow CONNEC TED! w/OR! ‘WENT IONED IN patac 10$-nunez| CASE’
J INVOLVING SPAN COMMUNIST. NETWORK» PRINCIPALLY,
IN) LATIN AMER/' SEE PALACIOS=NUNEZ CAs | HINDEX

FOR VOLUME Ss AND PAGE 4S/

f
| |
379-00 1002!
DB0-76473
Q4 SEP 44
Fer |

PB

'
od



--- Page 56 ---
14-0000



--- Page 57 ---
1400000 a
ee q

SECRET

Cahen Fitted tay

FIELD PERSONALITY (201) FILE REQUEST.

Auw__£ ee, CTER, CSE, 14k

INSTRUCTIONS: Pore muat be typed or printed sn block Letters.

tay

SECTION 1: alt known aliaves and variants (including wascen nase, if 2 cable) wost bevlieted. Efi the iden>
tifying date verses with the aliee used, # separate fora must be weed. Brite LVEWEN for itens you are unable

to complete.
SECTION fh:
SECTION ILI: fo be completed sn all cases.

Cryptonya of paeudonye ost! be entered sa Headquertere.

SECTION 1 1

“pL SENSITIE 01 NO. tnt
7 sone Stas Ti¥e 1 DIPILT _-HABW= bs (S- Spee E0.
niece (Leet) (First) inate, Sex
- TEDESCHI huis :
SAME ZANT
Tieat)S”™”~*~”””SCON Ft viwtty (sie) (Title)

PCONTRY OF BIRTH 6-P CITY GR ‘OEM CF BIRTH 7-P omer 10EW TIFICATION 6
? a? B p a
| : 1m FSS =|

Occ/PO$. CODE 8.

OCCUPATION/POS? TION

SECTION $1
CRYP TONY } PSEUOONYE

:

SECTION Pos

couny ay OF (nde 10. wal 'é ie W mo counter wwteeest a2 r 390 COUNTRY INTEREST tre.

2] Comments:

c Ia. teas aw Oatae Plaka De Fauav Communist Eady.
Adds 1943: Febuneha 469, Busaeo Aires, Acgendine.
»+ Stapeled Stoink eglats te gt S43

Form 93 ta

‘$0°57

a EBA Tita gee eae  e


--- Page 58 ---
14-0000

27 Jan 69 (NY) ;
-RE: Carl Winter, Helen Winter
DBC 41305

FBI doc.

1 Feb. 1972 (NY)

RE: Jim Beynon
Bufile: NY 100-175210
DBD 31051

cows

FBI doc,

R&:Dec. 1968 (Seatlle)

RE: Boris Mikhaylovich Ozekhov
DBC 39101

FRB doc.
€& April 1963 (Detroit)
RE: The United States Festival Committee, Inc.

Bufile: 100-436225
DBA 39107

BRT y88o"1969  «ny)
‘RE: Boris Mikhaylovich Orekhov, Galina Sergeyevna Orekhova

“pBC-41307

: FBI doc.

‘24 Sune 1966 ‘(Wash.) . . a
RE; Communist Party, United states of America; Ineernational Relations

Bufile: 100-3-81
DBB-51452 ©

FBI doc.

28 Feb. 1974 (NY)

RE: World Peace Council
DED 69841

FBX cable
11 Oct 1974 (NY)
RE: Communist Party, USA, International Relations

DBD 81515 :

|
4
4

FBI doc. 28
18 Oct. 1974 (Chicago)
~~ RE:, World Peace Council
. Bufile: 1009-41972
DBD 82108



--- Page 59 ---
26

ae

27 Jan 69 (NY) Dy 5 .
RE: Carl Winter, Helen Winter _ 0
DBC 41305

FBY doc.

1 Feb. 1972 (NY)

RE: Jim Beynon
Bufile: NY 100-175210
DBD 31051

FEI doc,
R&:Dec. 1968 (Seatlle)

RE: Boris Mikhaylovich Orekhov

BBC 39101 ‘
f

FEB doc. *

#9 April 1963 (Detroit)

RE: ‘The United States Festival Committee, Inc.

Bufile: 100-436225

DBA 39107

BET IS8o"1969 cy) ;
RE: Boris Mikhaylovich Orekhov, Galina Sergeyevna Orekhova

DBC-41307

FBI doc.
24 June 1966 (Wash.) .
RE; Communist Party, United STates of America;

Bufile: 100-3-81
DBB 51452

International Relations

FBI doc.

28 Feb. 1974 (NY)

RE: World Peace Council
DBD 69841

FBI cable

11 Oct 1974 (NY)

RE: Communist Party, USA, International Relations
DBD 81515 ‘ .

FBI doc. &k&

18 Oct. 1974 (Chicago)

RE: World Peace Council en
Bufile: 100-41972

DBD 82108

envi bfheue oa att

hi el einnicite, bn ni etn SoBAS neva Maat tc Laden ioe met inde alte

WO vaste bandelent ie

1 ae ie OO ee



--- Page 60 ---
_ FBT doc. ;
20 Aug. 1975 (NY)

RE: International Conference of Solidarity with the
Independence of Puerto Rico, Havana, Cuba, September, 1975
DBD 90674 . :

- FBI doc.
26 April 1961 (Betroit)
RE: Michele Allison Winter

Field offi ile: 100-
Field.of ice file 21782

FBI doc.
16 Feb. 1971 (NY} j
RE: Communist Party, USA, International Relations ]
Bufile: 100-3-81 :
DBD 5593

FBI doc.

2 Feb. 1971, (NY) ; . ;
£: Communist Party, USA, INternational Relations

Badiyies 100rF-e8



--- Page 61 ---
on SESRES,,.,

EXTRACT AND cross REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IOENTIFICATION
DOC. SYMBOL & ND. DATE OF DOC. FILE CLASSIFICATION GF RECORD COPY

| FBI /Dbb-97892 06LL 76 , 201-028924

‘Tooc. suesect

HELEN MARY WINTER
. SOURCE INFORMATION
SOURCE CRYPTONYW DATE OF INFO. ° EVALUATION

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which This
‘ Form Is To Be Filed.

>Psussect oF 201 (Lest. Ficat, Middle)

WINTER, HELEN MARY - ©

eottions

ats BGT Fitvrous - a _ SECRET



--- Page 62 ---
14-0000

SECRET

(then Filled In)

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IDENTEFICATICN

DOC. SYMAOL & NO. DATEL OF DOC.

CATION GF RECORD COPY

FBI /DBD-97886 15 JUN 76 :

DOC. SUBJECT

SOURCE iN ORMATION
DATE OF INFO.

SOURCE CRYF°ONYM EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Airo este duc: distrsbutier. Ditses No.. ete ~- if applica

ge

Ve

THIS REFER 7 8 Tem ceomee BOGUS

FILED ©
SECTION Ls

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which Tnis
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 20t (Leet, First ,-Middle)

WINTER, HELEN MARY

FORM use
: . Preveous.
| t2.92 867 corrroms



--- Page 63 ---
14-0000

SECRET
(When Filled fn)

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT f0E4TIFPCATION
DATE OF DOC. 7 FILE CLASSIFICATION GF RECORD

es aes —--$. ae an

DOC. SYM>OL & KO.

copy

FBI /DBD-91238 8 September 1975 1201-289246

- | a

DOC. SUBJECT

HELEN MARY WINTER

SOURCE C2YPTO™ Te OATE OF INFO. EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also cate doc distributton, Diesem. No.. ©

ereret DOCUMENT
ET CONTRCL

roe we
TS# 208557 ag
a OM EPR LINIESA

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which This
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Last, Firat, viddie)
WINTER, HELEN MARY

fone 867 ssivievs
wee 867

= SRN nan amma recast ent tear ao



--- Page 64 ---
14-0008, .

: a EXTRACT AKD CROSS REFERENCE

: . DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
DOC. SYMBOL # NO. DATE OF DOC. FILE CLASSIFICATION OF PECORD COPY

Filfubiees ed de Apr. fe
..PS0C. SUBJECT

BELEN VARY aIATeR
SOURCE INFORMATION
SOURCE CRYPTONY! DATE OF INFO. EVALUATION . a

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also cite doc. distribution, Diasem. No., etc. - if applicable) —

martin

sR CORT eT

“Indicate The Subject, Project Cr
201 File No. In Which This
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Leet, Fi

WINTER, HELEN MARY

t. Middle)

tire 867



--- Page 65 ---
14-0000

(then Filled fo)

; ; EXTRACT AkD CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
DOC. SYMBOL 8 NO. DATE OF COC. FILE Ci

CATION GF RECORD COPY 4

— = H

FLT /uvueu/456 io aAcr. 75 bbe cutede

DOC. SUBJECT

fhebu banY alder
SOURCE INFORMATICN
SOURCE CRYPTONYE CATE OF INFO. EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Aleo cite doc. distribution,

THIS REFER TO A Tre 3

FILED if y Te? SECRET ceil.

ee

SECTION B

aa A
Moet
se,

POD. T7497 TS - 299%, Dad’ A—

Don. 49274 TS 22729) Dp sp § _

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which This
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Last, First, Middle)

201- 20924e

weINTER, HELEN MARY

(7-46)


--- Page 66 ---
14-0000

SECRET

(then Felled ny

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT ILESTIFICATION
BOC, SyMBOL & KO. OATE OF Dac. FLLE CLASSIFICATICN CF RECORD COPY

FBI/DBD-95432 03 MAR 76 oi-azeted | |

boc. suesecT

HELEN MARY WINTER

SOURCE INF GRMATION
SOURCE C&YPTONYE DATE OF INFO. EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Alao cite doc. distribution. Di TNO. ete. + af appiscable)

THIS REFER TO A TOP SECRET DOCUMENT

FILED IN T'2 12? SECRET
SECTION BY tse ans erro

i

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which This
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Lest, First. Middle)’
WINTER, HELEN MARY

FORM se
- Patveous
12.72 867 torriows



--- Page 67 ---
E
(then Filled In)

EXTRACT AND CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
DATE OF DOC. FILE CLASSIFICATION OF RECORD COPY

DOC, SYMBOL & NO,

13 February 1976 sx-zosea |

OC. suBsECT

HELEN MARY WINTER

SOURCE INFORMATION
SOURCE CRYPTONYM DATE OF INFO. EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also cite dac distribution, Dissen. No.. ete.

THIS P°
FILED i:
SECTIGH BY ____zs#, 208972

- if applicable)

TS TEP &

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File No. In Which This
Form is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Last, Firet, Middle)

201- 289246

WINTER, HELEN MARY

SECRET ao a TF

FoRN
oe, 867

se conn sl caecsanaimcnnrUatain~ annem eer tine eren



--- Page 68 ---
14-0000

. SECRET

(then Filled Iny

S-BIECT OF DOCUMENT

HENRY WINSTON 7 DISPATCH O® SOURCE DOC, SyMBOL NO.

S. ANALYST [6- OATE PROCESSED + DISSEMINATED IN

DOCUMENT GISPOSITION
42. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE . 11a. TRANSFERRED TO
| RI FILE NO.

PERTINENT INFORMATION

ib RETR TO A ToS SECRET DOCUMENT
FILED IN TOT Tee ~ BT COTE GL

SectlOd bY

~~ TSE206Z49 oven enone

sean S67 use recvious corrions.



--- Page 69 ---
a. —_—e Ue
— wee
ny eee _

B53 OOCUMENT EXTFACT

THE FILE GWING TNFCRMETICON CCKCLRENING THE SUBJECT CF THIS 201
BDUSSTER HAS ATEN EXTSACTED FROM ARCTHEE CFFICIAZL 90 FILE.
PERSONS PERFORMING NAME TRACES 266 CAUTIONED THET THE COCU-
MENT FROM WHICH THIS SXTEACT WAS PFEPAFED CONTAINS ACTITICNSL
INFORPMGTICN PERTEINING TC THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD RE RECUESTED
FROM IP/FILES.

AINTES, HOLEN

_ 201-0289246 _ 200-904-208 /04
SEX F  DPO-69841
28 FER 74
Fal
pS

MBR U.S. DELEGATION TO WGOFLD CONGRESS GF PEACE
FORCES» MISCOWs USSR, 25-31 NCT 73, SPCNSGREOD
BY wPC.

09086070

DATE 27 MAP 74

=p

Auliggeiveveranmannenie Seine Snes mati ene aati a antisense ing nti ees TY eam on ane are ay gate Anat aS Siemans a QMS 6 TI MPR arta rs memo

— nae . 7



--- Page 70 ---
SECRET

DM DOCUMENT ExTRacr — |

"THE FOLLOWING INFORMATIGN CONCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 201

" MOSSTER HAS BREEN EXTRACTED FROM ANOTHER OFFICIAL DO FILE. || _
PERSONS PERFORMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE NOCU-

“ MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREPAREC CMNTAINS ADDITIOVAL 7 |
LINFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD RE PEQUESTED |

“FROM TP/FILES. |” a a -

201-0289246 "0 100-009-022
SEX M _ OBD-90674
: "20 AUG 75”

FRI

e2

“FROM THE POLTTICAL COMMISSION OF THE CP-USA
MBR DELEGATION U.S. SUPPORT COMM, FOR THE IN-__
DEPENDENCE CONF IN SALIDARITY W/THE TNDEPEN~

DENCE OF PUERTO RICO.



--- Page 71 ---
SECRET

DO DOCUMENT FXTRACT
“THE FOLLOWING ENFORMATIGN CCNCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 2017
DOSSIER HAS BREEN EXTRACTED FROM ANOTHER OFFICIAL 09 FILE. .
PERSONS PERFORMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE DOCU-
MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADDITIONAL
“CU INFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD BE REQUESTED
“FROM IP/FILES.

WINTER, HELEN

201-0289246 ; 201-0850469
SEX F 08D-75231
31 MAY 74
. FBI a

SECY OF INTERNATL AFFAIRS CPUSA INQUIRES RE
SONORA SANDY PATRINOS IF SHE INTERESTED IN THE
TRIP TO MONGOLIA

. ~ DATE 27 JUN 74° —



--- Page 72 ---
14-0000

THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION CONCERNING THE SUAJFCT AF THIS 201
_ ONSSTER HBS RFEN EXTRACTED FPO ANOTHER OFFICIAL OO FILE,
PERSONS PFREGRMEING KAME T@ACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE NQCU-
_ MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXT@ACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADDETEONAL
LENFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE SHRJECT AND SHNULC RE REQUESTED
FROM TO/FILES.

UO WINTER, HELEN

. 201-0299246 _. 100-006-123 ;
: SEX F NBN-74602
13 JUN 74
FRI

MBR OOF POLITICAL COMMITTEE AND CHAT& MAN OF THE

ENTERNATIONAL AFFAERS COMMITTEE CPHSA,

MBR OF A DELEGATION FROM CP USA WHO VISITED
_MASCCW TO ENGAGE IN DESCUSSION W/LEADERSHIP

CPSU AURING PERINO 4-10 MAY 74

09144983

£2 IMPDET CL_BY 054979.



--- Page 73 ---
14-0000

_ DESCUSSED QUESTION GF CHIL AND USA GOV4

DO LOCUMENT EXTRACT

THE FOLLORING INFORMATION CONCERNING THE SUSJECT CF THIS 291

. DUSSTER HAS BEEN EXTPACTED FRUM ANOTHER OFFICIAL 09 FILE.

PERSONS PEGEURMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIUNED THAT THE DGTJ-

MENT FROM atiCH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADULT TIONAL
INFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE SUSJECT AND SHUULD BE 2EQUESTED
FROM IP/STLESs

_AINTER, HELEN

201-0289246 200-CI04-293/04
SEX F 0389-32103

13: NCT 74

©31

P2

INVOLVEMENT



--- Page 74 ---
14-0000

SFCRET

cote ene _ PO DOCUMENT EXTRACT Lo. . cae ce cen

THE FOLLOWING TNFORMATION CONCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 201

- . . DOSSTER HAS BEEN FEXTRACTEN FROM ANOTHER OFFICTAL Of FILE. : oe es

wee. PERSONS PE®FORMING NAME TRACES ARF CAUTIONED THAT THE DNCU- ee

. . MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTPACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADDITIONAL y

cere ace je PNFORMATIAN PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD BE REQUESTED
FROM IP/FELES.

WINTER, HELEN

- 2 1. 20%-0289246 201-0006887
. _ SEX F_ Co DRD-78208 .
; 06 SEP 74
CIT usa FRY =)
SCHEDULED TO DEPART FR NY O1 MAY 74 DFSTINED : . a”

FOR MOSCOW VIA AFROFLOT TOGETHER WITH FERN
- AND KEN®@¥Y WENSTON /201-0006887/ AND JAMES
JACKSON /201-0011793/

09199669

ee



--- Page 75 ---
14-0000

SECRET

“BO DOCUMENT ExTRACT

THE FOLLOWING UNFORMATION CONCERNING THE SUBJECT OF THIS 208
OOSSTER HAS SEEN EXTRACTED FROM ANOTHER OFFICIAL OO FILE.

. PERSONS PERFORMING NAME TRACES ARE CAUTIONED THAT THE 9OCU-
___MENT FROM WHICH THIS EXTRACT WAS PREPARED CONTAINS ADDITIONAL
., ENFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECT AND SHOULD 8E REQUESTED
FROM EP/FILES.

"WINTER, HELEN

_ vee 2910289246 201-0133419 . a
- . SEX F CBD-41515

10 OCT 74

FBI

1 ie ane



--- Page 76 ---
S-E-C-R-E-T 26/10/74

OKSSEF,  SYM3a NUMBER © DOC, DATE

a FILED IN.
 201-0289246 | 08d -80203_

26 SEP 74 201-0006887
“THE ABOVE DOCUMENT(S}) ARE CROSS REFERENCED

TO THE 201 FILE CETED UNDER LEFT MARGIN.
FOR INFURMATION CONCERNING THE LOCATION OF

THE FILE CONTAINING THE RECORD COPY CUCUMENTs
CALL FILES SECTIIN, EXTENSION 4127.



--- Page 77 ---
FBI document

10 May 1974 (NY)

Subject: Hclen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

FBI document

18 July 1974 (NY)

Subject: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

FBI document

15 May 1974 (NY)

Subject: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

FBY document

19 Nov. 1973 (NY)

Subject: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

—_—-

FaI document
22 Aug. 1973 (NY)

Subject: Tour of Union Of Soviet Socialist Republics by
Representatives of Central Committee, Comnunist Party, USA,

July 13 - Aug. 12, 1973
Soe



--- Page 78 ---
14-0000 . . an ne

mevmer Ta

bo a

FBI document

30 March 1973 (NY)

Subject: Helen Mary Winter
Bufgle: 100-423449

FBI document :
23 March 1973 (NY) . : H i
Subject: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

FBI document

10 January 1973 (NY)

Subject: Gus Hall, aka/ Helen Mary Winter, aka
Bufiles: 61-8077 and 100-423449

FBI - document

20 December 1972

Subject: Gus Hall, aka; Helen Mary Winter,. aka
Bufile: 61-8077 and 100-6423499

FBI document

15 June 1972 (NY)
Subject: Helen Winter
Bufile: 100-423449 ”



--- Page 79 ---
14-00000

SECRET

(when Filled In)

EXTRACT AKD CROSS REFERENCE

DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION |

FILE CLASSIFICATION GF RECORD COPY’

ae

SOURCE INFORMATION

SOURCE CAYPTONYM DATE OF INFO. EVALUATION

TEXT OF EXTRACT (Also cits doc. distribution, Dissem. No., etc. - if applicable)

cr
ALATER, FELEN _ ;
2u1-23524€ WC l 4-124
Six F CCL ? bed -21C51
C1 FEB 72
CIT Fal
occ .
MET wiTk JIM BEYNON, CANACA, NGV 7

R 7202281340

Indicate The Subject, Project Or
201 File-Nos—In-Which-This
Form Is To Be Filed.

SUBJECT OF 201 (Lest, Firat, Middle)

(7-46)



--- Page 80 ---
14-0000

SECRET

"gehen Pilledioy

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE ©

SvUBIECT OF DOCiwiNT : DOCUMENT IGENTIFICATION
2

RI FILE NO.

DESPATCH OR SOURCE DOC.

SYMBOL NO.

8. DATE OF INFO.

7. SOURCE CaYPTONYM

3. ANALYST 16. DATE PROCESSED TO. OFSS(MINATED IN

DOCUMENT DISPOSITION
Tia. TRANSFERRED TO
Bt FILE NO.

tz. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE

PERTINENT INFOPRYAT IGN

WINTER, HELEN

201~289246 200-004-324

SEX M DOB ? DBD -04464
O2 FEB 71

cit ? Fil

nce ?

CHALAMAN OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY UNITLO
STAT’S UF AMEKICA LETERATURE COMMISSTUN
VENEZUELA TO ATTENDED THE TV PARTY CUONGKLSS

R 7102160350,

i

eer 867 we



--- Page 81 ---
14-0000

SECRET

(then Filled tny

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
; SUBSET OF DOCUMENTS DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION
"ay FILE No.

2. DISPATCH OR SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL NO.

7. SOURCE CRYPTONYM[ 6. DATE OF INFO. |@. EVALUATION
S. ANALYST ,

@. DATE PROCESSEO 10+ DISSEMINATED IN

DOCUMENT OFSPOSITION
12 CROSS @EFEARTO TO THES FILE 13, TRANSFERRED TO
RY FILE NO.

PERTINENT INFORMATION

een eee
Meee ageee 200-004-324
SEX F DOB ? 0BD -05593
16 FEB 71
cit ? FBI
occ ?
HAD DEPARTED USA 21 JAN 71 FOR VENEZUELA TO
ATTEND THE IV PARTY CONGRESS AS OELEGATES OF
CP USA

R 7103030740



--- Page 82 ---
14-0000

FBI Doc.
17 Sept. 1970 (Wash.)

RE;Ccmmunist Party, USA Contacts with Communist Parties of
Venezvela, Colombia, and Peru
(NOFORN, NO DISSEM ABROAD)

DBC-93754

FBI Doc.
14 May 1970 (Wash.)

RE: Comtacts Between Communist Party, USA and Communist

of Venezuela
DBC 82704

FBI Doc.

24 June 193669 (NY)
RE: Helen Winter
Bufile: 100-423449)
DBC 54933

FBI doc.

20 May 1969 (NY).
RE: Heler. Winter:
Bufile : 100-423449
DBC 52075

' REESéoek



--- Page 83 ---
14-0000

inter

- @
Helen W.

‘inter,

69 £NY)

FBI doc.
10 Jan.

: Carl W.
DBC 39844


--- Page 84 ---
1400000 + +

SECRET

(hen Filled tny

: DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE
SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION

= . -
AL FILE WO. .

D- DISPATCH OR SOUMCE DOC, SYMBOL nO.

@. OATE PROCESSED CuimateD

waco vO twee Fike

ne ORM:

WINTER» HELEN , ol

, 201-289246 201-760935 :
SEX F 000 ? DBC -41305 : \
po 27 JAN 69
: Gin? Fal
we : . acc ?

t HAD RETURNED FROM A TRIP AND ARRIVED FOR
WORK AT COMMUNIST PARTY, UNITED STATES OF
t _ AMERICA /CP~_ USA/ HEADQUARTERS ON JAN 27,5 . t
69 : :

R 6902051315 .

Herd 867 one rrerrens cerviees, SECRET

en

seme


--- Page 85 ---
140900,

SECRET

(ehen Felled toy

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AKD CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT 5 CICUMENT IDENTIFICATION
z
RI FILE NO,

‘S7 DIsPATCH OR SovACce DOC, svwBDL NO. [a- OATC

> EVALUATION
je. DATE Paocessin fio. vISStMINATID tw

LOLLANT
0 TO THt® Fike

PENT INC ML INFORMATION _

WENTER, HCLTN

201-2897466 201-752914

SFX F DUH 2 ONC -41307
24 JAN 69

cir 2 Ful

occ ? p4

SEC UORGANIZATIUN CuMMISSTUN, CP, USA.

MBAR NATIONAL COMMITTFFs, CP USA ON TRIP

7 DEC 68 TO CONNECTICUT W/HUSBAND CARL

WINTER /201-760835/, 8. Me OREKHOV

7201-752914/ AND WIFE GALINA SERGEYEVNA ~

R 6902061627

FILE IN 207. 287246



--- Page 86 ---
14-0000

gotham Sane sn

rn

oem

867 ve

ocCRET

Con Crt ded Day

sus aict OF DUC WwENT COC UMN IUENTUERICATION

as OO
RI FILE NO.

3. DISPATCH Ge S9VACE DOC, BvMedL NO.

PURT ERENT INPORMATION

WINTER, HELEN

201=289246 201-752914
SEX M UB ? O6C ~39101
: 26 DEC 68

/ CIT USA Fal

occ 2 .

_ SECRETARY OF THE ORGANIZATION COMMISSION,
'CPUSAy ALSO A MAR OF THE NATIONAL COMMIT~
TEE, CPUSA

IN CONTACT WITH BORIS He OREKHOV, 201-752914

R $901141020



--- Page 87 ---
14-0000

skola

enna When ree been gmaeme

-DBB 81991

’™ FBI doc . - te tee

DBB 77690

FBI doc. ,

18 April 1967 (Wash.)
RE: Helen Mary Wihter
BUfile: (SC) 100-423449
DBB 77957

FBI doc.

8 Nov. 1960

RE: Helen Mary Winter
DBF 62099

he Menmensen ee anh ohs EE aaa AAA Cte,

FBI doc.

26 July 1967 (NY)

RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449 :
BBB 88376 i

FBI doc.

2 June 1967 (NY)

RE; Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449

FBI doc.
B 23 May 1967 (Seattle)
RE: :Helen Mary Winter

Bufile: &B#284 Pield Office 100-17363
DBB 81995

FBI doc.

27 April 1967 (NY)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 190-423449
DBB 78966

FBI doc.

18 April 1967 (NY)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449 .
DBB 78724 : on

18 Jan. 1967 (NY)

RE? Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449



--- Page 88 ---
14-0000

SECRET *

(thon Filled tn}

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT OCCUMENT IDENTIFICATION

7 - DESPATCH O8 SOURCE ODC. SyuBOL NO. = 2

CROSS MEFCOOTa TO THIS FILE 12. eamsrezarD 10
wr Fike ao.

PERTINEN

WINTER: FELER
201-265246 1CG0-CO4-121
Stx Ff Cee 2? Cub -51452
24 JUN 66
CIT USA Fel
ccc 2 .
© USA, KEW YORK, NEw VCRK .
CCPMUNEST PARTY FLACTICAARY bHG = &CRKS IN ,
AATICAAL CFFICEs KEW VCRK, Netw YCKK.

R 66CTLEOL9T

FILE IN 201-2222



--- Page 89 ---
14-0000

oo OO . ot |
~ _, SECRET ~ | 8
(ben Pitted tn ! i

OOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCLMENT LRU NT SOENTIFICAT ION

2
RI FILE NO,

PO RTaF ATE O8 aDUMCE BOC. svueoL NO. [a Date

F.Souece ae OAate OF tmeo. |9- EvAluaTioM

7 CATE Paocesseo fro. ov séruimatio in iv. Dave

ea. CROPS REPEAT TO THIS FILE

PERTINENT s4 ORMATION

; WINTER, HELEN -142338

i 201-289246 338 rei asa

: SEX F 008 ? 20 JUN 66

: CIT USA rel -

; Gcc CP OFFICIAL :
< USA

&t 59 IN
ECTEG TC NATL CCWM ceusaé 0
CHARGE OF CP SCHOOL IN MARXIST TRAINING

Ih NEW YCRI CITY, MAR O60

R 6607122280

FILE IN 201.28 BY 6

er rrene. SECRET 7000)

|. a,

ASE Loete St theeenes catteee 88


--- Page 90 ---
1400000 8,

DBB 77919

FBI coc.

.6 July 1966 (Seattle)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Field office file: SE
DBB 77913

FBI doc .
21 Jan. 1966 (NY).
RE; Helen Mary Winter

Bufile: 190-423449_
DBB 77914

FBI doc.

26 Oct. 1965 (NY)

RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-2823449
DEB 77915

)

FBI doc.

30 July 1965 (NY)

RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449
DBB 77916

FBI doc.

5 May 1965 (NY)

RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449
DBB 77917

FBI doc.

12 Feb. 1965 (NY)

RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449
DBB 77918

FBI doc.
20 Nov. 1964 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter,
Bufile: 100-423449

100-17363

nee Wagenknecht

1
4
i
i
j

4 n" nr ites sanmendaresen eee wn ance et Renter set en ee



--- Page 91 ---
14-0000

£ EBI doc, ;
: 2¢ August 1964 (Detroit) .
: RE: Helen Mary Winter ~

Bufile: 100-423449.-

DBE 77920

FBI doc. ~ .

25 Feb. 1964 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449
DBB 77921

FBI doc.
17 May 1962 (Detroit)

RE: Comgress of Canadian Womey,Information Concerning
DBA 10048



--- Page 92 ---
14-00090

SECRET

~ (Fen Palled In) aon
an

DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCLMENT

2
RI FILE NO.

3. DISPATCH O® SOURCE DOC. SyuBOL WO. [4 DATE

THE UNITED STATES FESTIVAL COMMIT?Z= EBA -29107 22 AFR 63
NCORPORAGED (EIGHTH WOFLD YOUTH FESTIVAL]? 5908ct cave tonva]e. care oF inno. 9. EVALUATION

S. ANALYST @- DATE PROCESSED 10. DISSEMINATED IW - Date

BOCUVENT DISPOSITION
12. CROSS REFERRED TO THIS FILE 13. TRANSFERRED TO

201-282h6 RI FILE NO.

PERTINENT INFORMATION

WINTER, HELEN (201-2692h5)

DL T-2 ADVISED CURING CEPYEMBER, 1962, THAT ON SPIT! 15, 1952, CARL AND HELEN
WINTER HELD A BUFFET S OPENHOUS: . 5556 BU

HONOR OF THEIR DAUGHTER, MICHELE WINIEF, UPON HER

FESTIVAL.

DE T-3 ADVISED ON MARCH 16, 1953, THAT CAF WER WAS THE STATE CHATFMAN OF

DE T-1, ON MARCH 20, 1963, ADVISED THAT HELE TEE ]T MEMBER OF THE
YOUTH CLUB OF THE MOCP,

DE T-2 STATED THAT AT THE OFENHCUSE MICHELE WINTER GAVE A TALK AND TOLD OF VISITING
SOCIALIST CIVIES, SCHOOLS, FACYOFIES, HOUSING, AND TRANCPOFTATION, CHE TOLD OF
VISITING -LENINGPAD, VOLGAGFAD, MOGCOW, AND EAST GDRMANY.

MICHELE EXHIBITED SOUVZNIFS WHICH SHE BAOUGH? BACK, AMONG THEM THE FED FLAG AND THE
EAST GERMAN FLAG. MICHELE SAID SHE HAD MOCT OF HER SOUVENIFS SENT BACK FROM THE
COUNTRIES FROM WHERE CHE ACQUIRED THE. AND CAFRIED HER LITERATURE IN THE BOTTOM OF
HER BAG, WHICH HAD A SHCULDER STFAP. SHE SAID THIS WAY SHE HAD NC ‘TROUBLE WITH
CUSTOMS AND IMPORT AUTHORITIES IN THE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.

52% BG7 vse recvious coutions.



--- Page 93 ---
14-0000

FBI doc. :

30 tov. 1961 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449 : a
DBF 96370 :

FBI doc. . ”
24 Aug. 1961 (Detroit) .
RE: Helen Mary Winter }

Bufile: 100-423449 :
BEB 77922 ;
FBI doc. i

21 June 1961 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449 t
DBF 81488

BEE SEGG EE

pao ne tsk Hb

SeTicweatee tae,



--- Page 94 ---
1400000, +

AC ies

(then Priled tny ae

eo 7 SECRET

* DOCUMENT TRANSFER AND CROSS REFERENCE

SUBJECT OF DOCUMENT

COCUMENT IDERTIFICATION

2m | co aa |

3. DISPATCH O& SOURCE DOC. SYMBOL NO. a DATE
DBA -01530 6 APR 61

7. SOURCE ariel DATE OF IFO. [®- EVALUATION

R) FILE NO.

MICHELE ALLISON WIREER

DATE PROCESSED 10. DISSEMINATEO IW Tt. CATE

boc UMENT GISPOSITION

13, TRANSFEPRED TO
RI FILE SO.

12. CROSS REFERRED TO THis FILE

201-2892h6

PERTINENT INFORMATION

WINTER, HELEN (201-289246)
SUBJ. WAS BORN 6/25/24. AT LOS ANGELES, CALIF., RESIDES AT 9556 BURNETIB, DETROIT.
SUBJ. 'S PARENTS ARE CARL AND HELEN WINTER, BOTH MEMBERS OF THE RATIONAL COMMITTEE.
CP, USA. INFORMANT ADVISED DURING 4/61, THAT SUBJ. IS NOT A MEMBER OF THE CP.
SUBJ. WAS REPORTED AS AN ASSOCIATE EDTTOR OF "NEW HORIZONS", SUBJ. ATTENDED
CLASEES: IE MARXISM INSTRUCTED BY CP MEMBERS, SUMMARY OF ACTIVITIES SET FORTH.
CONFITERTIAL INFORMANTS CONTACTED DURING 4/61, COULD FURNISH NO ADDITIONAL
SUBVERSIVE INFORMATION. SUBJ. IS A FRESHMAN AT WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY,
DETROIT.

SE PAREN 8 He E ST PG dE te MD

SS ceo Aint she TINT RY TTT PY EE Ie


--- Page 95 ---
1400000 *

FBI doc.
24 Jan. 1961 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter, nee Wagenknecht, et al.
DBF 67557

FBI doc.

6 Sept. 1960 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-423449
DBB 77923

FBI doc.
3 June 1960 (Detroit)
RE: Helen Mary Winter
Bufile: 100-8423449
PBRS&35884 DBB 77924



--- Page 96 ---
SECRET

(When Filled Ja)

NOTE: Consult
before completina this form.
pranted in block letters.

RESTRICTED

the 201 Control Systes Reference manuel

Form wust be typed or

CHECK 204 #24 201 PO EXCLUDE TRUF NAME FROM MACHINE LIST | 3+

REQUEST. DO NOT CHECK

FOR 10N, ves ae ves no
TDN NO. 6.

VARIATIONS tN B10. DATA

Telnaes wren APSE Dm

aa om

14. DATE CF BIRTH - -
Peet | 14, COUNTRY OF LOCATION!

15. CITIZENSHIP

ue

16. AFFILIATION CODE
PB PATTER% CKLY ADDITIONAL CODES - P B PATTERN ONLY

,

ter 83] 137


