
--- Page 1 ---
124-10273-10070| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

. «, |
|. GOVERNMENT

aw aS
: MR, BOARDMAN | ve a p: January 22, 1958

ee Seer wrveneme

ee a oe ee
JEN fur re rr -_ a 7 . ae enn
. LW aie poe nie (ae se

of ples
Lae OF MAIL "0 70.8 »8.R5
sumac: € VERAGE OF 6 fas oo ———

fities oy,

e

. oS) Reed
On January 10, ‘1958 18, ass Stone) - 2 scot neptoontn- Winterrowd
iAtive with the Bureau, confidentially advised that higService had a ae
He] 58, determined that{Soviet illegal agents all over the world, when they want a - je,
apa AG ee with their principal, are under instructions to send a proper comm) feat onj-~
ff, pe 8. Smirnov, Central Post Office, Viadimir, U.S.S.R." Mr. Stonepsiat ag)
pa orementioned information was being made available to the Buréau and
“a Gem only. . t 3

a ~ On the "basis of this information, we immediately instructed the

‘ j Washington Field and New York Offices to institute confidential inquiries with
appropriate Post Office officials to determine the feasibility of covering outgoing
cortespondence from the U.S. to the(U.S.S, Ry looking toward picking up a
communication dispatched to the me d address. ,

yee
eet
pres:

t
t
‘
i
y
1

On January 21, 1958, sa(Povers ¥ the New York Office called
advising that his preliminary inquirtes at First disclosed that such coverage
coukt possibly be effected at LaGuardia Airfield. Powers statéd that he subse uently
received a cali from the Chief Post Office Inspéctor who told him that he would not
be able to make such arrangements and explained that something had happened |in
Washington on a similar matter and that Bureau Headquarters should take up the
matter with Post Office Headquarters here in Washington. The Post Office E

i inspector said that it did not involve our agency and because of what. was going , |

“on in Washington at the present time, he just couldn't do if on his own. ;
Almost simultaneous with this advice, Mr, James Angleton of CIA
| approached our Liaison Agent,(Sam Papich)jon a personal ‘basis. He indicated

that if it were known within CIA That he was volunteering this information to the
Bureau, he would lose his job. Mr. Angleton stated it had come to the attention

of CIA, through the Post Office,. that we were making inquiries concerning the |
| coverage of mail to the(U.S.5.R , and as a result CIA was expecting to receive

an inquiry in Washington from the FBI, Mr. Angleton then admitted that this

|

|

|

|
i) |

; ||lesrersge was one of the biggest and most secret operations being conducted by
CIA. He stated the coverage is Ag made froin bh the Post Office in New, York
OA fe O2- F308
’ WAB: » La, ra ~~
( 8) ye, “ Bog tek fer Jo é 1 Io,
& y- Boardman) - 4}. 0 ‘Sie ris
= Belmont ’ wey Ly 7k :
_ VA IW Branigan a "3e 4G 4D .



--- Page 2 ---
. ”
ee toad

wee,

2

o1a9 1 ~ ELT


--- Page 3 ---
a + Sioned
MEMO TO: MR, BOARDMAN
RE: COVERAGE OF MAIL TO ons 8.8. R,)

is an extensive and expensive operation, He indicated that they had to set up an
elaborate array of IBM machines to tally and tabulate the results. In addition
a complicated indexing procedure was involved, as well as complex scientific
I examinations of the material, ' He said two or three | hundred CIA employees ar Sane

| and in view of the volume of material being sent from the U.S., their coverage

exclusively engaged ¢ on yarious facets_o! of. ‘the > coverage, ‘Angleton also indicate
thatthe” cost ‘of thé oy “Operation was. well oy over a million dollars a year, He furth r
indicated that the < coverage has been in |"in existence ine excess of a year and he:
stated-that the sole purpose for the cove) coverage “was toddentify persons behind the
Iron Curtain who might have some ties in the U.S. and who could be approached:
fin ‘their countries as ‘Contacts and sources for CIA. Angleton indicated that C
‘Thad’ successfully developed several sources through this means. He stressed | --
the confidentiai nature of his information and stated that while other officials of
CIA more directly concerned with the coverage were expecting a visit from the’
“FBE he was passing this along for our guidance.

+

it would appear that our inquiries of the Post Office officiais in
New York have flushed out a most secret operation of CIA. The question
immediately arises as to whether CIA in effecting this coverage in New York
has invaded our jurisdiction. In this regard, it is believed that they have a
legitimate right in the objectives. for which the coverage was set up, namely, —
-the development of contacts and sources of information behind the Iron’ Curtain,
and-according to Angleton they have had some success: in this regard. At the’
same time, there is an internal security objective here in which, because of
our responsibilities, we have a definite interest, namely, the identification of
illegal espionage agents who may be in the United States, While recognizing’
| this interest, it is not believed that the Bureau should assume this coverage
because of the inherent dangers in the sensitive nature of it, its complexity,
size and expense, It is believed that we can capitalize on this coverage by’
pointing out to CIA our internal security objectives and holding them responsible
‘to share their coverage with us... Of course, we are not interested in the
identities of the numerous persons in this country see nately corresponding
abroad. The Post Office has indicated there are approximately four thousand
le | items of correspondence to th 'D. 8:8, 3) eh | day, Angleton said they vy have. not
Coie up with a mi¢rodot or Sec ret mes
ACTION:

é communication as yet. Sie

L On the basis of our. 7 inquiries conducted in New York, we are in
a position and should, through Liaison, approach CIA, informing them, that it
‘thas been indicated that their Agency has.coverage of mail going to thef¥.S.S.

We should get from them the details of their coverage and explain our Ynterest im:
{being furnished with the results of the coverage as it might effect internal security

matters

toe i

|

0 one oe Seem? ie sme’ +


--- Page 4 ---
el GS. Seung a
oe oo _s a .
‘MEMO TO: MR, BOARDMAN . ©

RE: COVERAGE OF MAIL TO hin Gar 8. Ry

ae 3 is believed that we can and should furnish CIA with the name
and Moscow address furnished us ‘by the] British,| telling CIA that we want to (fs >)
be ativised of any communications, going €6 that™address, We will not explain
to them our interest in the particular address and, therefore, we will not be

violating the confidence of tne[British | G 5)

3. In view of the highly. sensitive nature of ‘this coverage, we will
have, to work out arrangements so that knowledge of it is strictly confined
within the Bureau, We will handle this the 1 same as- ‘ aandle communication:
intelligence data. ; ; *

+

rE



--- Page 5 ---
J rina rome FCRET @ \.
: Off é “Monsrindu EL, ATES_GOVERNMENT

Ne RETR CONTAINED 02
/S,__ HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED EXCEPT
To 4: MR. L, V. BOARDMAN</+ gehen OTHBRYdSebruary 6, 1958
— FUNE- ) ref
rom i MR, A, Hy BELMONT

. Reference my memo of 1-27 ~58 advising of the briefing given our
Liaison Agent by CIA representativés on 1-24-58 as tothe nature and extent of fii; Room —
4 CIA coverage of mail going to and coming from(Russia} Our liaison Agent
determined that CIA began this coverage approximately a year and a half ago through ©
confidential arrangements made with postal authorities, Initially, this coverage |
involved photographing of envelopes; these envelopes were not to be opened, .The
envelopes were microfilmed and the names and addresses Appearing thereon were |.
indexed with IBM equipment, Several months ago CIA began opening some-df. this mail,
microfilming the contents and indexing pertinent data therein, Approximately oto

names have been indexed by CIA, Examination of certain of this mail for microdots and
secret writing has been made to a limited extent because the volume of mail has been too
humerous for the establishment of 2 practical system without delaying -movenent of|the .
mail. CIA has adviséd that to date it has not discovered any microdots or secret writing

” or information revealing evidence of Soviet intelligence operations in the United States,
_CIA has also advised that this program has not reached its full potential,. but that its .

system of opening mail is rapidly increasing, CIA has expressed a willingness to
furnish us any information. obtained from this coverage which we feel would be'of , 7

interest, to us. . nee
; An analysis hi has been made of CIA capabilities as revealed to the Liaison Agent

and it is believed we should request'that CIA furnish us information of the followin:

‘Itypes, both that which has been received i in the past and that which they will obtain ines i

double agent purposes, + Vos G3BO0FS.

direction of.th USA. wn,
Q@PLDEMmn. mn-(0) cP, . Tp
ce = Messrs, ‘}Boardman Belmont
‘a v, Branigan Litrento .
Ss a Baumgardner ~ JDHondhue
BEARER 9 MalsRavich Turner —

the future’? ee
“oy All correspondence of a suspicious nature, such as that t containing doub'
talk, et cetera.

2) All correspondence indicating that thefSoviet) may be utilizing a hostage |
situation, i.e., correspondence indicating presstre being exerted on &o Borie) citizens who |
have close relatives in the U.S. or pressure being exerted on individséls. in U.S, ;

-

.8) Any information appearing in correspondence indicating weaknesses or i
dissatisfaction on the part of any Soviet presently in the United States so that the Bureau |
might give consideration to feasibility of approaching such individuals for a) i

4) Any information sppearing in correspondence indicating Soviet cofitrol Or



--- Page 6 ---
—_ will_nat he furnichad ta CTA we

° a ‘ 2 : rT ar: ae NS 7 a |
oe * vs Boo OY - . a Seivatle lt av . -¢
Belmont to Boardman (2-6-58) > eo,
re: COVERAGE OF MAIL TO tame. 8.8. ie

With regard to the above coverage, it is believed desirable that Liaison make

’ arrangements for us to review at CIA any material of this nature and we will-the
select that which appears to warrant investigation and then make appropriate -che
This procedure will eliminate. having CIA sending us a bunch of worthless materia:

8. :
with .

the possible expectation that we willbe running out leads for them. It is believert this

arrangem ent can be. wetted out with CIA in a proper fashion.

_ Jn addition to the above it is believed the folowing arrangements can be
effected with CIA:

. engaged in(Soviet) espionage to determine if they are in correspondence with{U.S.
This .would include a check of the back traffic on these individuals also. We 70
course, make these stops on a highly selecfiye basis.

“1) ~~ * Blace stops against names and addresses of individuals possibly ere ;

oR
» Of

2) Request CIA to place stops against. addresses inGovtet Russia believed by the

‘Bureau to be mail drops.or suspected mail drops. (It sho

be noted that we alre

ady

. have placed a stop with CIA against the name and address offK;-S. Smirnov, -Central

: Post_Office, Vladimir, U.§.S.R), which, according to information received from 3
is a drop utilized by(Soviet

, We will, of course, continue to analyze this coverage by CIA to see that we

obtain poaximum benefits,
RpConamnDartons:

°

-)) ‘\ That information received from this source be hereinafter designated as
“Bureau Info Records Section has advised that this informant symbol ns

=not been” previously - -fised.

5 . -

\ ;

x

Mu-5,

egl agents “all over the world arranging emergency Imeet
ie

-2) ‘That this matter and any mail relating thereto be labeled "June" and then ‘

filed and maintained in the{Sovmeé) Unit, Room 1734 (the regular repository of "J
mail) to afford maximum security to this source.

3) That our Liaison-Agent orally advise CIA of the type of data set forth aliove

“that would be of interest to us and make arrangements with CIA so that we can re
* this type of information in order to select that which we feel will warrant further
investigation. Liaison should also perfect the arrangement with CIA so that on a

of) CIA ADUSED LE TYPE of Dare oF sATTIS aI?

7d CL Ateadegients maps TE Kevidie a3)
CelAatranéenwnts AAoe Fok. STEPS. hats

. 4) In view of thé extreme gensif ity of this matter, a confirmatory iémo
: a:

continuing basis we can place eae stops with thean.

{
let? :
ew,

i
<<
once i
andum:



--- Page 7 ---
N“)

a

. b. If the individual named in the intercept is only possibly |

4 o

‘sme @:

CENTRAL ‘INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.

. ir Let } je y - va
a : ,

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director
* Federal Bureau of Investigation

Attention; (Me. Ss. J. Papich)

SUBJECT:

ee
1. The intercept project thas been explaineg Ship to—+ .
(ur. Stee tad Ye be referred to $Project_ HUNTER: fin correspondence
Qe. Pe the Federal Bureau of: Invest stigation and this Agenay.

2, This explanatory memorandum constitutes HUNTER-Report
. #1, Future disseminations will be numbered consecutively,

3. In submitting possible tracea on individuals of interest to.
“you, reports will be submitted in the following form:

e: a If the individual named in the intercept appears to be
identical with the individual of interest to”you, you will be furnished
a reproduction of the exterior, and of the contents if the item has been
opened,

identical with the individual of interest to you, only machine run
listing of the items will be submitted. In such cases a reproduction
of the exterior and of the contents, if the item has been opened, will
be available upon request, _ '

: 4. In order to facilitate your reading of machine run entries,
there follows an explanation of the various types of replies which you
will receive in connection with requests, A hypothetical request for

any addressee in the U.S. mail from(P, KROVAN) whose location
"is believed to be in(Mtoscow, might result in the foll wing reply:

REL

oe F *

Gk ; ; 7 ~ £X-135 fo FEB 20 1958 ‘-
eae SECRET —



--- Page 8 ---
-Date

gg

A 57CO5C3325 fzovan, Paraskoviya \) ABB EVOSWA, Wasyl( ) KM

Name In : “Ref Loc Name Out § Ref Loc Ban |Firms

\ .
This reply has the following meaning:
e . . .

TA" has no present meaning, Ail numbers are now preceeded by
"A" only'to-allow for future additional classifications. None are
presently contemplated. ©. - a ’

— "'57CO3'is the date of intercept, namely: : n5ze is the year. "Cl" |
indicates the month. The code key for months is set out as Enclosure L
, "os" is the day: ‘of the month. Thus, "B7GO5" is 5 March 1957,

The group "63325" is our own internal ‘filing number. .

The "Name In" entry identifies the correspondent inside tae(ussR.) .

The asterisk i in "Ref" column indicates that(KROVAN sort the ey

‘The ‘entry in "Loc" (ation) column indicates the area or city inside /
the Soviet Union}from which the letter was mailed. In this case it was
léd from the western séction offUkrainian SSR The code key

tised fox this column is set out in Enclosure 2, This code key is to

be used for all items prior to 1 January 1958, on which date a 4place
‘code was instituted in order to designate more precisely the localities
within th {ussR} A copy: of this new code is enclosed as Enclosure 3.

“The "Name Out'' entry identifies the correspondent outside the
(UssR) | In both the "Name, -In" and "Name Out" columns, the last or
family name is listed first.

The absence of an asterisk in the "Ref" column after EVOSWA
indicates that she is the recipient of the letter.

The entry in the second "Loc" (ation) column indicates the state of
the U.S. (in this case, New Jérsey) to which the letter ‘was addressed,
The code key uged for this column is set out in Enclosure 4, You
will note that some 3-digit entries indicate large cities within a state,
thus KO indicates New York State and KOA indicates New York City.
For your convenience an alphabetical list of the states with their code
indicator is set out in Enclosure 5.

. . . 2 7 : ; ;



--- Page 9 ---
gee

The absence of an Xx" in the "Ban"! column means, that the letter
‘was not opened and that only the exterior is recorded in'our files.

5, Since the hypothetical request was. for mail from(P, KROVAN,
who is believed to be located in oscow) only the listing as set out
above would be furnished, since it would not appear that{Paraskoviya
KROVAN,) located in the western section of ina eee SSR) is
identical’ If in connection ‘with future investigation or information
otherwise available, you may believe that OVAN)may be identical
with the individual of interest to you, you néed reférence only the
HUNTER report number and request the exterior photographs of
item No. A57C05C3325, which will be reproduced from the original
film and made available to you,

a 6. If the hypothetical request is for any mail from the Goviet
Union to Rose ESTERSON) who resides in Chicago, the reply might .
be as follows:

Date_ % Name In Ref Loc Name Out Ref Loc Ban

A57D23U 57D18 (AVRUNINA, Vera| ( *) Aaa (nsrERson, nos) KKB X

The difference in this Meting from that previously illustrated is as follows

1%

nyt ig our internal identifying designator.

The fir st date is the date

of the intercept.
inside the letter.

The second date is the date of the communication
The "X" under the "Ban'' column indicates the letter

was opened. Again this indicator would indicate only a possible identi~
: fication since KKB under "Loot. indicates California. In this instance
upon request, identifying the HUNTER report-number and referencing
both A57D23U and 57D18 mambers, the outer envelopes: and their con»
tents will be reproduced and furnished to you.

7. Normal service of either of the above requests will be 24 hours.
In an emexgency we could. service the request in a few minutes,

‘8 If your first request had been for(KROVAN , or P,. KROVAN,
zr Paraskoviya KROV.AN} located in the western section of the

Ukrainian SSR) you would have initially received the phctograph of
e envelope. Likewise, in the second instance, if your request had

3

: SECRET



--- Page 10 ---
gear nn

been for ESTERSON, or R, .ESTERSON, or Rose ESTERSON) located
in Chicago, or Dlinois, you would initially-have received photographed
~___Sopies-of the envelope and its contents. .
Ay “in order to insure most efficient servicing of your request,
it is suggested that you submit trace requests as follows: List the
last name first with any known first and given names or initials, and

address including state, city and ‘street, if known. If an exact address ;

is not known, a probable state or section will be helpful but is not
required, Thé same would apply to the(ussR The above should be
listed on duplicate 3x 5 cards. If only a phonetic name is ‘known,
‘various combinations of spellings would be appreciated, together
with any other data such as probable address or area,. Where an
address is known and there are individuals, other than the subject,
at this address to whom the ‘questioned communication might be .
addressed, their names should also be given, For record purposes |
and in order to facilitate our. answers to your request, would you in
turn number each card as HUNTER Request Ne. ..
« eet
10. -On each request will you also indicate whether the request
is for a one~time check or whether the name should be put on the
“Watch List. If the latter ; Please indicate the duration of the Watch
List, i,e. 30, 60, 90 days, or "until cancelled". Ifa Watch List is
*° xequested, you should also indicate the treatment desired when a
possible’ hit is made, i.e. photograph outside only; photograph
outside and contents; photograph outside, contents, and examine for
S/W or microdots. Specifically indicate any Watch List item which
should not be opened. In this:connection you may also desire to give:
‘ us a white list of corre spondents of interest to you Whoare not Watch

List subjects but whose mail should not be opened in the course of . 5

our normal openings for spot-checking for operational or intelligenca !
information. In some instances you may desire to indicate that you
are to be informed immediately when a hit is made and prior to the
receipt of the letter by the. addressee. ‘ ; :

ll, It is possible to make a special machine run of the names
of all correspondents either addressor, addressee, or both, from
_ any specific area in the (USSR) to the United States or to any specific
state or city in the U.S., or‘vice versa, There are various other
combinations that could be run, such as all letters mailed in Florida
either on a specific date or for any given period. If the above~listed

.

, oe

eo /, CEPRET

i r


--- Page 11 ---
or any other type of exploratory processing is desired, .2 presentation
of the. problem will enable us.to tell you immediately what we can do,

—~~how long it will take; and the amount of work that is involved. While
thig type of service is possible, it does involve a great deal of work
and 8 ould be requested i in connection with very important cases. only.

ot _FOR. THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

: ; _ : LSet] Shes

Enclosures (5)



--- Page 12 ---
i

—

ema et
; ® ,
* BYANDARD FORM NO, 64

por

* Office ‘Memorandum UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

.

to +4. Belmont | oy ~ 42 = Belmont - pata: 4-21-58
¥ 1 -, Branigan
. _L ~‘Litrento. . Tel y
FROM 7 Ae ostidin an I - Schweppe ; a ae Se :
Ration CONTAINED Oi on|—__

' gunyecr: ‘2URaAU. LIPOR oman 200 y) —f teen SIFIE! pote
Chey of. are Da ae Ss Sr uaa rf. sen :

Gureau Inforviant 200) is the symbol number: hula eae ae .

for information furnished by CLA to tne Bureau from its coverage R
of mail going to and from the(USSR) This designation . WAS APPTOVESandyl =
in your memorandun to. Hr. Boardman’ dated 2-6- That memo pointed \out
the willingness of CIA to furnish us any information obtained from this
coverage which we felt would be of interést to us. That memo recommended
that Liaison effect arrangements with CIA so that we could review
information obtained from thet coverages a

Ct, is furnishing us with certain of the results o ’ the
coverage offSoviet mail under':the caption "Project Hunter.” ] Each relport
received zt beled with a report number, for example, Huntér Report

#19q

The reports received are reviewed in the (oun Unit. When
‘the ‘information fails to indicate which Section or Unit would have a
‘logical interest in the report, the names involved will be searched
for identifiable information. when we can locate no sucn information,
@ cage will be opened if deemed warranted. The objectives of thease
investigations will be the identification. o, persons of nro-Soviet |
sympathies whose dealings with the tussians)are of a security or
intelligence interest, the identification of those individuals who
might present logical "hostage" possibilities,which could be exploited
by the Soviets,and the identification of any Soviet individual in the
7S. who has indicated weakness or dissatisfaction, a situation which
the Bureau might exploit for defection or double agent purposes.

indices and logical sources and informants in order to establish th
subject's background, activities, sympathies and tne strategic
character of his employment. This “could culminate in recommendations
for interview to clarify certain points not established by invest j#gation
and to determine whether the present activities of the subject ar
inimical to the best interests of the U.S., provided available infgr-
mation does not dictate against such interview and provided the
interview can be conducted without compromising (Bureau Informant 20:

Information from Gureau Informant 200) would be forwarded to
the field, personal attention SAGC,. utilizing tie following or similar
A phraseology: "Information has been received from¢Sureau Inyo

TRARt 200.
re a a 7
m8 a peay Aa Jr 7 Ot

Wise C aN, er sd

Investigations in the field would include.a check of nthe

owe x

S F-(Q,

Be tte I tee


--- Page 13 ---
Memorandum to Mr. Belmont

es BUREAU INFORMANT 200 .
105-67845,
i =—" toe

been

in giféet.cantact wWithyos..” ~The contents of thefHunter Report should

a most sensitive’ and reliable Source indicating t John pera)

then be sunmdrized as necessary. and paraphrased. . Following
reporting of information found in Bufiles on the subject, and

Ytnstructions regarding the investigation to be conducted a paragr ne

.mation obtained from eau Informant 200)is not to be disseminat

as follows should also, be added:. "You are being cautioned that i
outside the Bureau n Gi

reports. Information from this informant should be utilized for 1

should not be set“fortn in any investigative

purposes. only. You must avoid any statement concerning the scope of

the coverage in effect. in this instance and under no circumstances
is the subject or any unauthorized’ person to bec me aware that we
knowledge of his contact with a person in@iussia,)"

; in those inggances where .opened or closed case file a

erson mentioned in & Hunter Report i Tocated, at the Bureau, the
[Eater Report will bejforwarded to appropirate Section Chief o
pervisor for his information and any action“he deems necessarye

‘Supervisor might desire to. advise the fidd in the mgnner-descripged|
into

.ahove ‘or place a brief, paraphrased version of thef Hunter Report-
the subject's main file for information PUTpOSeSe ;

ZECOMMENDATT : SO --

In view of the extreme sensitivity of this source, the
knowledge of the same is to be confined to a need~to-know basiso
Therefore, within the Domestic Intelligence Division the Section
Chiéfs of the Nationalities -and Intelligence Section, the Internal
Security Section, and the Subversive Control, Section will be advis

ad.
of the above procedure for their personal information. Ail supervisors

in the. Espionage Section will also be informed of this procedures
ny?
wits



--- Page 14 ---
¢ . . .
i a ete cee ee

1 Bey ane © - one . . ;
. . 3 ’
OPTIONAL FORM NO. 10 hee : : . : \

UNITED STATES GOVi ..uENT te ¢
Memorandum
ro. : | MR. A. H, BELMONT "DATE: ~March 10, 1961
FROM :" amc D. E. MOORE cec}Mr, Parsons” ~~
eG el a mE , Mr. Conrad vay on
Oe Mr. Belmont is

suayEcT: aj HUNTER, P» ot
~EBSPIONEGE Sg
TAINED
LL INFORMATION CO!
~HERENIBY sere
DATE [2

Mr. D. E. Moore 2
. Mr. Branigan
Mr. W. &. Stewar

Cha
d SG Hunter is CIA's senSitive project involving. the re-
; ‘view: of mail going to cen Union} CIA makes available . .
to. us results of their a Lysis relati e to. this pro. jects

: en rep Gt

Ce
' On 3-961 duridik [

Pionage activities, between Special Agents Li teeet.

* Duckett and Mt and/ Messrs. Angleton, Horto: : “Hunt of CIA; wi

oky dn

Treapon fence for secret writing, micro-dots and possibly c codes. —

Sai & laboratory” is*fully equipped and they ‘would be gla
to make its facilities available to us if at any time we desire
an examination of this nature to be made in NYC and time was of
the essence and would not permit the material to.be brought to
our Laboratory in Washington, D.C. We expressed our appreciation
fomthe offer and said that in the event we desired to utilize
their laboratory, we would contact “GPP ;

ACTION: For information, (2 a » ae von

DEM: td. (7): mC by)

andes wee | 1D
Yeo. . |



--- Page 15 ---
° ‘ . woe = " - me
. : i ieeeemeenee a: oo : ° “ele
; ) ence 0 ae ane eee
. Pera . . aa
‘ -
” A ’ . 4 . gt 4 *
. . . C, \ i
. . ° = y. soe

r a oe Yue

ed . :
“O-14f (Rev. 10-16-70) . , r)

ee SRT
| ROUTE IN ENVSLOPE

Federal Bureau. of Investigation

arch 10, 1972 fe

Director : : BY CIA COURIER
Central Intelligence Agency ~
Washington, .D. C. 20508 - ’

ATTENFION: Députy Director for Plans , [rues fvonsroy |
REs [HUNTER PROJECT -|i - JEQQ

(C1. For your information, I am enclosing communications which may be

of interest to you. >
Te. tt will be appreciated if you will have the investigation conducted
as requested in the enclosed memorandum and furnish the results.

{7)3. No further investigation is contempla: wich regard to this paner
, re REGO L292 oz Feo
. (C) 4. You will be advised of thd pertinent eldpments cy eiestiod:

} . with this inquiry.

commie ere ues
ot

932

. * (215. Please note change in caption of this case.
3 Ni AR 10
: CU6. Stats of case: (7) Completed Tncompl ete 4

Very truly yours, . = , -
GROUP 2
Excluded from automatio en

‘doungrading and agar Hoo

deskassi tization Disector. SECRET a

‘ine. LAGUBLTEMILRLUTELANATE
me EEE SSG TPCTLOREMC STSCI OG

. . t é t abt 7)
. dares 8 de to 8 waar ape VET i on _

dis a iia i; types of traffic. we
‘gould ike to Tecetves



--- Page 16 ---
te ae ne Te
- ~~, La

" - fl 8 srppaets ;
. ‘ SECRET ; E:: Y O. Cregar
ROULE iN Lif DLOPE uorch 10, 1978

.

wy i Y -

. aT RE; PROJECT HUNTER
se . - om .

a “Ye are in the process of reviewing the Watch List
and will gdvise you. of additions and deletions. The following
types of traffic have been. of asstatance and continue to be of
‘interest to uss . . . .

I. current and, former ov te exenange stigents, viattors,
researchers and actaentvsts.

ae 20 Current and former Bovserfosictal utattora.

2. Current and former BovietJnonossicial visttors whgse 0.g
contacts are subversive, would ‘be of interest: to tne (Gouteta
because of thetr access. to classified data or are ing @ pest-
tion to be of assistance to the Soviets]

q U.S. exchan e students, researchers and persons ioho have
been tn the WUSSH with Anerican exhibitions and delegations. ..

5S. Current and forner U.S. atudents and researchers in the
USSE] who do not cone under offictol ast-Fest Exchange Progran,
his does not tnelude the short-term student tours but does
» dnelude individuals who are tn the fUsSk| yor some time. Ye
would, of course, like to receive any traffie on individuals
who are there for a short time if they have been sponsored by
subversive organizations and subversive individuals or have
[soutessh spectal invitations or special treatment from the
5 ;

outeta} . -

who vistt the ussR]on regular tours or go to see relatives. M
do have an interest in travel and contacts involving persona o
the Batch Liat; known communists, New Left activists, extremists
and other subversives; Suspected and known esptonage agents;
tndividuals known to be of tnterest to thejSovtetal because of
thetr spectclized knowledge or work on clasSijied matters:
indtviduals who appear te have been compromiseds and persons
who meet with JSovtets) connected with organizations known to
specialize tn propaganda on tn obtaining information regarding
the U.S. a ;

6, Ve have no interest tn the hundreds of legitinate smut
]

. Ve Conan tet Party and front organi zations (such as [Aner ean

ond Gintan Hews), extrenist and Hew Left gantzations.
105-93089 coe,
b af Peipiets Rese /2, ) -4". ie an cL” 4)

ix

courter 3-= 19-72.

&usstanjinstitute, Py extr Counctl of [i Test cane tae Frtendsht

a

luded from LnGeae~

‘Original to CIA, Att!n ‘James Angleton] we * downgrading and A
CEL deciassi fication Tae My \


--- Page 17 ---
toe

gmt OH

,

& Protest and peace organtzattons, such as People's Coalttion
for Peace and Justice, National Peace Action Comnittes and
Wonen's Strike for Peace. 7

9. Communists, Trotskyites and neabers of other Marzist~
Leninist, ‘subversive and extremist groups, such as the Black
Panthers, Shite Panthers, Black Nationalist and Liberation

groups, Venceremos Brigude, Vencerenos Organization, Yeathermen,
Progresstve -Laber Party, Worker's Student Alliance, Students
for a Denocratte Soctety, Resist, Revolutionary Onion and oth
New Left groups. This would inelude persons sympathetic to %
(Seytet Union, Horth Zorea, North Vietnam and aed China) C2,

oes
>

; 10. (Cubans and pro-Castro) individuals tn the U.S.

Jl. Traffte to and fron. fuerte Rieo and the Virgin Islands)
showing anti-US. or subversive syapathtes. — : ‘

12. Contacts with the (Soviet Red Crosa, particularly those
grade or -recetved by tnditviducelés

ht 13. (sovtes Conmntttes for Cultural Relations with Compatriots
Abroad )(contacta with emigres and enigre organizations tn 0.54).

14, ‘Traffic between U.S. nationals and altens in the 7.8.
wtth individuals attending such institutions as tne (Centra
Komsomo2z, School and Frtendship\Universtty. This wold incl 1de
any aliens in the U.S..wha have previously been tn the( USSR
es students. * : .

NOTE: Above sent tn answer to specia notation on Hunter Re :
27,226, Item 72A13AM ((105-67845-38542)) reading as follows: oyun

30 October 1962 statement off eres Projectfrequirements does| not
cover contacts such as the om reflected in attached item, P. ease
advise whether you wish to see traffic from U.S, nationals or aliens
temporarily residing in the U,S. (€.9e, foreign students) to rela-
tives-or friends studying at @riendship) University or similar
institutions. You may wish to take tits opportunity to review, and
possibly revise, your above-cited requirements statement,” ,

Subsequent to 10-30-62 memo,

oral requests

for other types (Items
we desired infprnation
1-15-69 and we. advised
tnquiry regarding P.O.
Comnittee for Cultural

on New Left and Blac

there have been-sever
1,2,3,12 and 14) ond) “aunter

asked us

if

attonalist fields on

them that we did,

The,

had ‘made a sin!

ilar

Bozes. utilized by the

ovutets by

2 Sout eft
Relations with Compatriots Abroad i

%

mte
iter

7

Report 27,226 was dated Januany 25, 1972, and transmi tta
_ was signed by/James Angleton, | a :

. ‘7 @-

SEE

ru


--- Page 18 ---
a ~ Roin@- nt EIETELOP -

mat 21962 ECATION

. © OT asa GEN. 8G. HO. Y7
° “UNITED STATES covennnen SCR us, Felt
leit; EB; S; Milier Me, Caliban oa

| Memorandum Jur, J, P, “Lee i te —

: & 1-Miss M. E. Triplett Ur. Gebhardt

To : Myre Ee S. Mi the ‘pate: [February 15, 1973 tr cmuns,

| — SR 1-ix, Branigan ENE Pints

/FROM ; : We As me - : po a Me alas
woo . ‘ polatled . Tele, Room

P * TBuresu Informant at 20d is the symbol punber

esignated for information furnished on a highly con?i-.

Ly, dential basis by CIA and referred to by them as "PROJECT HUNTER.
so: Lieutenant General. Vernon A. Walters, Deputy Director .7
fof CIA, has an appointment to mest with Acting Director Gray. *
on February 16, 1973; In this connection, at 5:50 pomoy on
"February 15, 1973, Mx, Jamés Angleton, Chief, Counterintelligence
‘Starz, CIA; advised that thé reason for General Walters’ visit.
iis to discuss PROJECT HUNTER. Specifically, General Walters ~
will raise the question of ‘the Bureau taking the PROJECT ov.
|} Angleton stated that Dr. Schlesinger, Director of CIA, had LalT

.jingtructed Walters to meet with Mr, Gray prior to his,
[Schlesinger's, return from overseas planned for February 19, 1973.

Commencing in January, 1958, and continuing to the
resent time, the Central Intelligence Agency has furnished this.
- Bureau. with the product of its highly confidential review of mail .
going to and coming from the USSR. Arrangements for this ‘review sy
were obviously worked out between the Agency and Post Office ;
officials and we. are not privy to the details. :

It is obvious that both incoming and outgoing mail
is opened and photographed. At one time in March of 1961,
we were advised that CIA had established a laboratory in
New. York where they could examine correspondence for secret
writing,:microdots, and possibly codes, At that time CIA
offered to make these facilities available if we needed then,
During the same approximate time, CIA advised that about
500,000 items per month passed to and from the USSR) and about
200, 000 of these items are screened " Approxima ely 1,200 item
*month received "close Scrutiny," ya “S
“RELAG9 pie fs Va
on February 15, 1973, iirs~James 5 Angleton adviacl8 2
hat: at the present tine, he has 9 of his people in Washitgton,
working on PROJECT HUNTER, and there are 2 additional ‘personnel
working in New York, for a total of 11. Presumably, ail or most
of these people pe: sian a alicia abllitye Angleton £ ithe

aoe > _ som - over | |
SE GRET <7 Lf oF 5. a6
EIN ENS

fh
sont
(5) ee a oe
acs ug ,00NN

BS

Sth ce oe



--- Page 19 ---
Memorandum from W, A. Branigan to Mr. E. ‘5S. Miller
RE: [BUREAU 1 INFORMANT 200 |

eee -

a"

advised that, the” v. Ss. Postal Service had raised a question as

to CIA's necessity to continue PROJECT HUNTER in view of possible |

' geéurity prolens within ‘the Postal Service,

The Bureau has always handled Pproyect HUNTER aterial
on a strict need-to-know basis. The material received/is handled

on one desk in the Domestic Intelligence Division where it is al
aS)

Material of no. interest is destroyed. HUNTER material can be
only transmitted to our field divisio paraphrased form
and can only. be used for investigative purposes, The material

screened for items of possible royed. | SUNTE e and retention.

for dissemination outside of the Bureau. naterial that
is retained is kept in a Special File Room et th Records Branch
at the Identification Division Building. Periodically CIA has
been furnished with general guidelines as to_the material which
wouPd be of special interest to our needs, [For example, we are
currently interested in material concerning Current and former

can never be incorporated in any communica Sion ich is intended ‘¢ an

Soviet] exchange students, visitors, researchers, . and scientists: (()

e aré likewise interested in Americans who are in the[USSK]fo
an appreciable period of time, We are interested in American
communists and extremists who may be corresponding with
persons in the [BSsn

We have always considered the product from PROJECT ws |

as valuable to our investigative interests. {in this“tonnection,
it has provided us with the identities of Americans in contact
with Sovie exchange students in the United States who offer some
potential “as informants regarding the Bovied] students' activities)
; Ye know from highly confidential sources that a proportion of
these students have already been recruited by one or the other
of the major Soviet] Intelligence Services, We know also that
many of the exchange students will subsequently be posted to the
United States in some official capacity, \(S) . :

JPouzer HUNTER fnas identified numerous individuals
from the ted States ard from other areas of the world in

attendance at the)Central Komsomol School and Friendship] University. @)

CIA has wernitted. us to furnish them the names of —
specific individuals in whom we have an investigative interest, ey
and this ha: peer x uable in covering their activities. [The
product front

who > pian to a

aa lat visit the United States./(S).

as also been valuable in identifying) TSoviets] .

- SEORET CONTENUED - OVER



--- Page 20 ---
Memorandum from We A. Branigan to Mr. E, S, Miller |
RE; [Surzau INFORMANT 200| '

_—

' The [Soviet Union]is currentiy building up the number
of trade-representatives © will be assigned in various areas
of the United States‘where we normally would not have coverage.
We anticipate that PROJECT. ‘HUNTER: would be valuable in providing
leads for any necessary coverage of these people. C

7

With the. relaxation of tensions between the U. S. and
“the lussai? the volume of correspondence has obviously increased.
We do not currently know what that volume is, To the best of
our knowledge, CIA has maintained this PROJECT smoothly and
' without: hitch, It would ‘be. necessary to now examine what —
“security- problems the U. S.- Postal . Service is experiencing.

ACTION;

: The ahove is submitted, for possible use by the
Acting Director for the visit of General Walters.

Oou Fup re L7H CE | powont |
LUALTises FOP yy AA : a
TOMO , 2-30-23

&

na Seb iE



--- Page 21 ---
- a . rs ~
, °
. cn | we , ete oe
. : Sa ee le Se
Ce a a
@. .

” . ~
OPTIONAL FORM NO! 10 $010~106 .
MANT1962 EDITION | .

GSA OEN, REC, NO. 27 . . tae : Tolson ———_|__

‘UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT tah id

Conrad ————,
Felt

Ke —M emorandum ROUTE IN ENVELOPR==

‘ Gale
Mr. Ds J. Brennan, Jr, 7 DATE: January 16, 1969 Roses ——[—
INFORMATION CONTAINED Pavel —

FROM : HEREIN} SSIFIED ine Roa
FROM : §, Js rapicn(ff ; Ses bbe, i

sumeer: BUREAU INFORMANT -209)- Pakiey 0 2 Gs nn,

UTILIZATION OF SOURCE IN. ALIST PIBLD ‘ thy! .
NEW LEFT AND BLACK NATION. Tb: 2 a,h

| ~ On January 15, (sem ober) Cen one
i° Intelligence Agency (CIA); su sted to t Liaison Agent
i ck that y'sf unter -should-mpt overlook the utilization of -the
|: Nya: Agency's} Hunter project Prox the develo +t leads in-the

| _New Left“and Black Natadnalist fields: ]/Ober Ydmitted the Fay
H traffic involving individuals in these’ ea: ight be light

but that the Bureau might wish to give consideration to placing

stops on certain key personalities.
. Thef: lunter nrojeci|tor. ws which we have ‘given the , © f
designation o ureau Inforiant 200) essentially consists o
“specialized covérage of mail between the United States an
Russia} “If we have some reason to believe that, one of eux
jject's is communicating with anybody in the (Soviet. Union)
alt might be worthwhile to place a stop. . »
ee

““We- should bear in mind that this’ coverage is
xtremely sensitive and the handling of any matters involving
Bureau Informant 200) should conform with the ground rules
which have been established. (see(Mary Triplett, extension
631, Soviet Section.) . : .
9

ACTION: WE ICSF 9 594 7) An
. The above information is™be ing directed to-the

_ attention of the Internal Security Section and the. Racial
Intelligence Section. ernie wees REN

U ba mace i308 7

rah ’

PREP Ee
oeeaen

C. D. Brennan IS8FEB S 1969 °
G. C. Moore v

M. E. Triplett
Liaison

Ss J. Papich,
" SIP: anole . een
ow

4
non KES 74acd

—

mam

Ene ORR OUIR OREN er mee oe =



--- Page 22 ---
r

meat “ROUTE IN ENViLOPE jn

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT tee
it
; L- W, A, Branigan | Coo -
Memorandum ; [3 -~ A. P. Branton Sone
. ‘elt
. ’ . Gale ——.
TO 8: W A. Brant , DATE: August 24, 1966 gaan
A el . a g 2 : ll
Se on : . . ‘totter
; aN Sue h Tele. Rood
FROM : My. Ey Sr plete 1-8, Papic Holmes

sf

C

[Prescot of personnel and change in supervision eee” ’ Hunte
-) Pr Me

‘SUBJECT: BUREAU INFORMANT 200 .
ned ge ot | Ohaix, ce

Front ‘8-14-65 through 8-13-66, 3028] aunter steers) oe

An analysis of information received from the source
‘Wa the past year ts attached. JO c- 73 3 O OFF .
é Grz0, : . Ce )

L-H. E. Triplett } sy ———

aS Lee

transmitting 6077 items were recetuved from. Bureau Inforna
200) This ts a slight increase (almost spy tn number of
ttems over the previous. years, .
Although items were received on a continuous ‘basis,
the number dropped during the period of August, 1965, through
January, 1966. This ts ‘belteved to be due to the on thd au att

oject at CIA which was. baking place during this tt

; From ‘February, 1966, to the present, there has been
' @ marked tnerease tn number of ttens received. The average

for the past four months has been 627 per month, whereas the
average for the sane period last year was 421, There has been
no significant change tn.the type of natertal except that more
ttems are being received.regarding subjects on whom the source
has not furnished information previously, necessitating more
research, The value of this matertal ts shown by the fact tha
there was an increase of 53% in number of new cases opened on
the basis of tnfornatton: furnished by the source.

furnished by (Bureau Informant 200) during’ the past year. This

Bu faureau Inf 580 letters were written on informatio
ts an increase of approximately over those written the

a

dQ).

=

previous year, More than 260 new cases were opened and 96 cases

were reopened. The majarity of new cases were epened on the
baste of travel te the USSE)and contacts of U.S. citizens

tn
Americans and (Cubans) in-the U.S. with tndividuals in the Gis)

Information was sent to the field to assist tn pending inves
tions and for information, In some cases, data was extracted

[7

from several items, summarized and sent to the field in one cen

munication under more than one caption to show relationships
between various *eubjects. . %

FX11Q REC 5

vine

78)

Wone. This is for your informatifnSe? 12 1968 Sy: a



--- Page 23 ---
‘not be unnecessarily éxpended by our Bureau proceasing unwanted

‘I Traffic Which Holds No Interest: . us

Qe Americans traveling to the USSR) as (oss travel is pernissible and

| Be 1 material emanating from: Eeorte Rice) of an Anti-U. S. nature

; : ue 10-30-62

. a
ie PROSEON ‘HUNTER

After ‘an extensive review of 2500] unt Reports since our
last memo captioned as above and dated 8/2 have made the

following observations in the interest of economy in regard to Project
Hunter as it related to our Bureau and your Agency to insure time will

material and to save your Agency the. expense involved in the preparation
of such material.

1. Govsst-biod immigrants desiring to , repatriate ‘to(ossk) - : These
people are interviewed by INS and INS refers anything of interest to ug.

several vhundred people a year visit the (USSR) while on tour abroad as
well as{Soviets) returning to visit relatives. We, of course, have an
interest in such travel involving people on the CIA Watch List, lmown
Communist Party meubers, and suspected intelligence agents.

3. U. 8. professors. in Academic Research corresponding with each others
It is not likely if U. S. professor is passing any data he would identify
himself at the sdme time.

iz Traffic of Specifie Interest:

1. All data re Cuba). This serves to identify profeests} followers ‘a
the U. s.

2. All data re U. s, (bens in’ contact with (6 Cubans) cvtonaing Friendsite:
University in Moscow

and pro{Soviet)

. Data re Ue. S. peace groups going. to fvsess) and while o in(gussta)
5. Data indicating death of eny U. S. Conmunist abroad.

Any data on. (
: At



--- Page 24 ---
- Euae!

sO (zz: PROJECT urn’)

8, Any traffic from or, to U. S. Students in toscow)or to U. 8. pexsons
who wore formers students in({loscow) .

9. Any traffic between U. S. persons: who are w th a current
exposition or a ‘Previous exposition. in te

\e



--- Page 25 ---
weet

mm

oe - . ae ® eo
- 4 »
- ' Telson 1s

tw OMLOHAL FOR NO, 10

; UNrED. STATES GOVER, \.NT

Ci as pe Be Te ity

its first Hunter Report in,2/58. As of 6/6/61, we have received |’
Tau " ré number 50058 Jnany reports transmit’: ° as many as twelve

= 7 7 =

ae

° . oa oo
0 cece net Ria Fee et ct: ne mentees

f : Belmont ___
if .) Mohr

Memorandum : =

; . @ Rosen
TO 0: Mr, W. @. Sullivan ul _ pate: 6/9/61 aks

a

Trotter
. . 1 -W. C. Sullivan Tete, Reo, ———
FROM : Mr. W. As Braniowge? 1-W. A. Branigan Gandy

l= W. De Stewart - .
suaect Buna. THOR LANE 200))- POLICY Fras? Pye 7

Phe purpose, of this memo ts to bring to yo attention, as at
atter of interest, ¢ increase in the volume arfitunter Reports
[received from CIA; the additional administrative Bontrols inst ong
lor=

0 cope, with increased volume, and lastly the desirable type of i
_ nat ton (Bureau Informant 200) nas been continually furnishing..

@ureau Informant 200) is the symbol number designated for. ingor=
“mation Furnished on a highly confitiential -basis by CIA and‘referred to
by CIA as "Project Hunter" and the reports emanating from this project. .
‘as Hunter Reports. This informant originated in 1/58 and furnishe >

ems, and some reports nsmitting up to twenty items. . My memo to:
yi. A. H. Belmont dated 12/5/60 revealed as of that date 3425 Hurtter .
eports had been recettéd. You may be ipterested to learn that in| the
last seven months we have received 1680\Hunter Reports pr almost 50%
of the number received from.2/58 until 22/60. On 3/9/81 CLA advised
representatives of this Bureau that it had recently established a| ,
laboratory in aete/ the 2eef Ran connection with this project. This .
Z

abhoratory i$ abl ocess[Hunter material for, secret writing, microdots| |

‘and possibly codes. Our ltaison representative advised the laboratory

‘would probably increase the Hunter Report volume to us by 20%} -howevér,

irom Bee above figures it appears this increase in volume ts far ¢ youre
an oe . o

A memo W. D. Stewart to W. A. Branigdn 2/21/61 re capt toned }
matter recommended and received approval the utilization of a| stamped}
notation on the front of tng Hunter Report lpermitting the interested

(Hun

supervisor to destroy conte of a ter Report fif found to be of no
value.after checking the appr iat ock on & stamp indicating his
eason for destroying same. jApproval to destroy these Hunter Rep rts)
Cuas received from CIA.which, ben, ea necessary, at a later date repro--/Y
é any Hunter Report. A ‘rom Mr. Belmont 3/3/61 to All Super /,~
visors of the Esptonage, Nationalities Intelligence, Internal Security
and Subversive Control Sections instructed all recipients re use of
above-mentioned stamp. In addition, akepe memo 21/61 received approval
for @ proceedure whereby[Hunter Reports would be screened for destruction
by substantative desk hartiling captio matter prior to sending |these
reports to Records Section for handling t@ préclude any indexing jor
handling which would later be pee ree op is destroyed.

Gos-93089) Oe REC 8 “45 wna war

Cm. 29.\ ox 10 — a yithel )

sm Te



--- Page 26 ---
Yemo Branigan to Sullivan_
Re: \BUREAU INFORMANT 2007 POLICY
2105-93089 ;
A- great_ ‘deal of material yurnished by the informant relat
directly to contacts and activities of individuals who are of cu:
‘ interest: to us such as top level communists as William Z. Poster

s

rent
and

aur ice

- Blizabeth-Guriey Flynn and such esptonage subjects as no Stated Hyman

Halperins, who were identified by Elizabeth Bentley, who stated
Halperin was’a source of ‘Nathan Gregory Stlvermaster. The Halpe.

ins

are now in Russia). Pertinent information relating to individuals of
current interest fis passed to the field for its. intelligence interest.

In addition, material is received which reveals the Govier, SYnpa
of some U.S. citizens and Glso indicates certain arrangeménts wi

hies
h the

Sovietsjwhich may be considered against the best interests of aan
rm

1S. Gdvernment. Tre Larger amount of data received tends to co
- Information already ‘mown and tt does not require in itself that
fteld be advised of. same.

the .

| ‘The informant furnished . two s ecific) Hunter Reports reflepting
that two different individuals were sending post cards to USSR with

Gnother post card deliberately and carefully sealed to the first
card. Ina case opened entitled "V. Podgoretsky, IS - RB (105-9
the informant advised that both of the post cards forwarded by

ost
95499),

‘Podgoretsky contained a clandestine message on the inner side of| the

back post card. Investigations concerning James D. Cawthon, the}

former individual ment toned, : and Podgoretsky are stilp tn progre

'

bé 7 typi data furni shes by (Bureau Pnformant -200)are set ou
el dws -

Information con gerning travel plans abroad of several ‘Si
subjects; one namél ys Lartin Field: (101~ ~1019. Contacts in this
country of Security Imiex (SI) subjects vacationing and studying
abroad; namely, “ary Lou Patterson (100- 136460)) Data relating
to @ contact by(Pernon Ferguson itchell) with

/AsS you recall, (iitchell and Filliam Hamilton Martin. were employe
NSA a short ti ago before they defected to Russia} Data that.
6. G. Mac Do epire oF Brighton, Lassachusetts) equested publ

fF the(Soviet T Pra uday to forward to him old issues of that veo so

he could distribute same to Americans in various cities here t
their language skill and to acquaint them with the (ssa. Data

cerning numerous individuals who sent Yew Years” fad s to (wikita

Xhrushe ‘ae wpana expressed their sympathies toward Govier way @ 1
namely, sper A. Sawtelie (1059-15570), a New va SI ‘Subject.
revealing a contact by Monn eter | Grothe (62+105933) with the Mi
of Culture in MoscdwpJrequesting this individual to Dromisé the
dancens would perform in U.S. and. also, indicating to him he ex,
vistt isse)again: in the near future. (Grothe advised him that la

~ 2a

ood

s mother ‘infCal ifornia)

=)

at
one
ishers

prove

ifes
Data
ister
¥seyov)
ted ¢
ist year

.
sloprerreteenrurner mnigne str erenyeccriesneranrenerevenrene en Ee ger rere TOR



--- Page 27 ---
Memo_Branigan to Sullivan ; .
Re: \ BUREAU INFORMANT 200 4 POLICY
10593089, :

he worked for Senator Gtubert -Humphr ey) as a foreign relations dtoctd

.

‘and did a lot of workin field of disarmament. He further indicat
‘ he Senator nohrey) work at Stanforg.but still served as a consu

to Senator{Humphrey
(105-58070}3 a Russtanjborn alien and her husband (onn Sando
presently employed as an'attorney in the Office ofvthe Attorney Ge
State of Minnesota, are close friends of Orville Freeman, former
Governor of Minnesota and present Secretary of Agriguiture, Washi
D. Co The informant advised:regently in regard to Cictoria Sandor,
that she advised her mother in(USSR)she expected to move to Washing

Bufiles reveal one(Victoria Ivanova Sandor
7) who
é

r
co
tant

s

eral,
tony

ton

where her husband will work for Secretary of Agriculture, Freeman; | that.

She and her husband will be friends of Freeman and President Kenne
and that she hopes through these connections she will be able to o

Ys
tain

@ necessary permitfor her mother to come to the U.S. She indicated

she will go to the President, to his wife, or to whomever tt will
necessary to achieve this goGl. .

; Information réceitved from@Bureau Informant 200) cannot be
disseminated directly as & might tend to reveal this ‘highly confide
' gsounces however, the informatton is used to great advantage by the

e

ntial

Bureau for its own intelligence at the Bureau and in the field. Investi~

gations are opened on data furnished as above and if we can ascert
. confirmation, of same data from our sources in the field we can then
‘ appropriately disseminate pertinent information. — :

ACTION: a
. -

. None, above data are furnt shed solely for your informat ton.|
4 7 .

ee

tn



--- Page 28 ---
7 _ arb {ORM NO. "10 * @ > , . . ‘@.
« : ‘
- tite STATES GOVERN»: NT ~ SECRET ‘7

[ec CIA representatives, {James Hunt, .John.Mertz and- Thomas. Chalmers:

~S

~

a

!

Lol

>
Ara)

ye Lo ete

/

Af

¢

AT SEPT. Pa

a

CRetedving approximately 250: Ryser monthly.

\G G- 82
 Givs:et ¥ . AX. we me
Enclosure gon mote EXCEP

(205-93089) A Naan ane

Memorandum
To: fre W. C, SULLIVAN pare: . 8/21/61
mom : + Wy dhe 4 , Buse

SUBJECT: S ~ Si INF¢ ORNANT. 209, - POLICY...» .

FA,

8/8/61 re same subject wherein it, was requested a conference, be
arranged between Special Agents am J. Pa pich, W. D. Stewart’ and
an ‘interested CIA: fepresentativs 0 eX ain to CIA specific type
of- "Project Hunter" material we desir JERK CAN

‘On 8/17/61 Special. Agents San ‘J. Papich,.W. D. ehaiearty
s

conferred at CIA concerning the "Project Hunter." The observatio

a
tout on pages 2, 3, and 4. of the referenced memorandum were %) :

individually discussed with the}CIA representative They appeared
very pleased with our analysis the Hunter matemial “ond ved a
were also pleased with the attention afforded it. . fant) at the
conciusion of the conference, requested we furnish a set 0 ” quides,
similar to ourafore-mentioned observations discussed, for his
people. Attached is a blind memo for CIA setting forth material jin
which we have no interest. and a specific interest.

order to better understand the. coverage of @urean
Informant 200} the writer specifically asked the following questions
and received "the following answers: ;

. : 1. Is the informant covering all traffic or selected
traffic? a, .

Answer: Approxinately 500,000 items pass to and fro
each month. Approximately 200,000: items are screened. The othe
300,000 escape screening because they pass through at hours when
no one is on duty. Of the 200,000 items screened, approximately y
1, 200 items receive: "close" scrutiny. .

etti of 2. . What portion of the informant's coverage are we
ge - ,

op
Answer: Of the t, 200 items closely sorutihized,

"SECRET

| a
Reference is nade to memorandum Stewart to Branigan 4sipe? .

amie



--- Page 29 ---
.

_ f01t material would be of interest to us.
derifed nothing to date from this material as we are soley intere

x andum Branigan to Sullivan
[Bess

Re: U INFORMANT 2004 POLICY -
4105-93089 2

. 3.° 4 are we getting specific type traffic is
Exchange stuainte < (iadimir Kazakevich) material (Kazakevich) is’

a hes letter writer now in (USSR)who was formerly a pro-
oviet) economist-tiving in the USS,), and Intourist) traff ce
(general data re arrangements for Americats- traveling to ussia)?

son who is afSoviet-bio ‘exchange student in U.S. and sends famil
love" and vice versa. Letters are synopsized and are of no inter
as such) has been sent because CIA is surveying a certain area of
traffic. Qr. Hun advised they derived no-intelligence benefit
from their™~survey and was interested to learn of our similar resu
In regard to{Kazakevich} CIA develops a great déal of foreign
intelligence data from fraterial he transmits and receives. (Mr. H
He was advised we-have

Answer: tog) oxen Student traffic ("Mother writes to

in the individuals involved and in order to protect this highly
sensitive informant we do not route the informant's material arou
general intelligence interest. (fir. Hunt}was advised all of the
informant's material is handied ‘on a stfictly need=to-know hasis

‘and the material retained is under strict control. (iir. Lunt) was
pleased: in regard to our secure cautions as ‘ very few
CIA people have any, knowledge. of Project Bunter In regard. to
ntourist) traffic, (fr. Hunt) advi we were fufffished same becaus
One of the individu associated with aa(intourisy agency was
suspected of being a(oviet intelligence contact.

with our observation that a11 Americans traveling abroad

had to obtain a passport from State Department, such travel to

ir. Hunt) agreed

the (USSR being permissible, we could obtain any necessary data

.

re ah individual from State.co)

In regard to item number three

we would not recei

ladimir Kazakevich)
ntourist) traffic. |

ve any more

(who aloné provided 30

ve, it was agreed
unter materiallre Exchange Students,
rtems in 1960) and.

@

st

hts.

rrr URE? heen epee hemes e+

aig:

In addition "holiday greeting" type traffic
ill not be furnished. Specific exceptions to the above-mentione
traffic we will not receive are'set out in our blind memorandum +
CIA and were set out in the referenced memorandum on pages 2 and 3.

+



--- Page 30 ---
I ee a!
to set wiwinik f
Memorandum Branigan to Sullivan
Re:. BUREAU INFORMANT 200 “= POLICY
| 1105-93089 ae mt
. aT : : , .
a ” ' She matter of receipt of illegible material was
also discussed and it was pointed out tolr. Hunt)no matter how
important the contents may be if the name-and address of the U.S.
addressee or addressor is ‘illegible the material is of no value.
It was specifically requested’ more legible material be furnished
| and, if it'was obvious reproduction would be poor, we would
appreciate it if U.S. person's name and address could be printed ©
or written out. fir. Hunt jadvised they were aware of reproduction

; problem and stated Xerox equipment was to be installed in the
. near future. This, he believed, would help the problem.

In regard to the CIA Watch List, approximately 535
names now appear on this list’ which’ is supplemented each Monday
morning. (Hr. Hunt )requested we specifically place on this list
the individuals on whom we want coverage even though we are
| presently receiving items re these persons. If their names

appear on the Watch List, we will possibly get closer coverage.
Attached with the blind memorandum. for CIA is a list, of individuals
presently on the Watch List which(Mr. Hunt)requested, Interested
supervisors will be advised and additional names of Communist Party
members now in(Soviet-bloc countries will be furnished “CIA via our
Liaison Agent.

| a
and furnishing same to us,/Mr. Hunt)was requested to advise our .
Liaison Agent what. it was doing an
we would furnish the results of our observations which would’ dictate
whether we would continue to receive this-new type material.

In regard to as bf certain types of traffid n

after a period of six months

I
i
ff .
dir. Hunt) desired that in regard to any correspondence .
th CIA whered reference is made to af/Hunter Reportl or the
oject Munter injany way that the letter be sent via Liaison as . JC
only a few. CIA people have any knowledge of "Project Hunter" and ) aka

CIA does not want such letters in regular mail channels.

,As pointed out in the referenced memorandum, the
need for this conference was to insure the{Bureau Informant 200)
Program will continue to operate under maximum economy and
efficiency to the mutual intereSts of CIA and the Bureau. It is
believed as a result of the above conference that the Hunter material
now received will bé reduced approximately 50%. 2

-3-

- Seite |



--- Page 31 ---
Sara Ste Y

,

Memorandum Branigan to Sullivan.
: BUREAU TRFORMANT 200 ~ POLICY.
105-93089 .

ry

. At the ‘conclusion of the conference, Gir. Runt
and his aides who were obviously pleased with our observations
requested a gimilar conference. in approximately six months,

SA Stewart)will prepare an appropriate tickler in this regard
and set same for PoyA8/62, at which time a suitable memo will. be
prepared indicating observations which might be discussed and requesting
permission to attend such a “conference.

RECOMMENDATION:
That the three copies of the attached blind ce!

be furnished to CIA by our Liaison, Agent as a guide to the HunteF)
traffic in which we have an interest.

(wn wy a

‘
.

a

a

SE Gite j



--- Page 32 ---
,  Tavel
| ‘Trotter

AL ANPORN CSO NGE = 1
. — Reesor RE: [Promer Hunter } ere -
A a BECLASSIFY OW:

I TRAFFIC WHICH:HOLDS NO INTBREST:

ferttine, laboratory processes ai:

Tolson

. Belmont ————

Mohr
‘Callahan
Conrad

Sullivan

Tele. Room
Tanram —"*

nar Saas
t we .

. ; : : SECRET - 1- Stewart .

ep NED . ° August 21, 1961
“enahnhTiOws ON cert 8 a Qo

transmitting innumerable items, we have made the followi:
pbservations the interest of economy in regard to
ffroject Hunter As it relates to our Bureau and your Agency:
nsure time“will not be unnecessarily expended by our
Bureau processing unwanted material and to save your Agency
the expense of furnishing our Bureau this unwanted material.

“)
is Intourist) traffic (general fata conoerning arrangements
Por Americans traveling tofRussia). Such travel is

permissible and arrangements have been previously made
hrough State Department for a passport. (57 ’

2 = Personal type letters, which have been translated into

Arter an extensive review of seoof unter Reports) Eee

a ~ 2° . ‘

English, between the United States relatives, sweethearts,

stamp collectors, and their(Russiar) counterparts.

43 = Letters ‘to and from Exchange Students, which again
are, synopsized in English and reveal that.."Mother
writes to son who is an Exchange Student in the —
United States and sends family's love," and vice versa.

4 = No "holiday greeting" type traffic desired.

In regard to the above four categories; your

Hunter material for secret _.

writing, microdots and possible codes and presently furnishes )

fd its observations concerning any«me of these appearing in
e traffic. a '

TI EXCEPTIONS TO THE ABOVE FOUR CATEGORIES:

I
— wa
A. Any traffic in the abpveementioned nondesired categories \

wherein the translator feels there is some intelligence
_ Significagce. Numerous letters have the translator's

> 3

ey . Pat By ae OO rete :
A: ol -” A Fe = .

£ — 2 en eee Ae



--- Page 33 ---
Project Hunter’

‘connents indicating your Agency's Watch List’ shows

‘the person is a suspected. intelligence agent or that

‘Be

_C,

- sympathies.

the text of the ‘letter indicates some type of Codey,
et cetera.

Any ‘traffic wherein’ ‘dt is revealed United ‘States
addressee‘or addressor is a United States Government
employee or is employed in a sensitive indurtry, ies,
missile field.

Any traffic wherein we have an obvious intelligence
interest such as = open offer by.an- individual -

€o assist Sovigt an indication an individual is ~

going to dtu ssia and wants to ,becone, a citizen or wherein
any individual professes profSoviet) or procommunist

+

It. WE ARE. SPECIFICALLY INTERESTED IN:

Le

"48

m2

32

4-

Iv

AL traffic relating to top cersiunists traveling

. abread which we have been getting regularly and fron

which we have been extracting a great deal of
intelligence data such as (Mary Lou Patterson, the
Pittmans, William Z. Foster, Claude lightfooty .
Elizabeth Gurley Fiynn}) et cetera.

ALL traffic on. specific individuals we place on
the Nateh. List.

“alt traffic on special individuals such as NSA

defector (William Hamilton Martin and Bernon Ferguson
Mitchell . ;

All Araffic of a clandestine type such as 3 that
in the(¥. Podgoretsic) case.

If possible, it would be appreciated if an effort *

could be made to furnish as legible a copy of Hunter material

+ Stowe



--- Page 34 ---
Project Hunter”

as possible.- In particular. if it ds evident paper from

which copy is to be made is not type to give a ‘good

reproduction, it would be appreciated if a notation
concerning name and address of United States recipient

tr sender could be made from original, Frequently
information of interest is received but United States
erson's nane en-repreduction is indistinguishable’ and
nformation becomes of. no value.

Y  LIs? OF PERSON DESIRED on THE WATCH LIST AS oF samen 1961
ee °

MAR _appaess
BERLAND, MARK V. Flat 15 tasvinsksya St. 12
a : | Perm 24, USSR
* —_
FOSTER, WILLIAM Z. ; ; ' Apartment 6B, 1040 Nelson.
7 ‘ : Avenue, Bronx, New York
HASKELL, ROY . + 12 Crown Street
. a 7 Brooklyn, Rew York
a 2
KAHN, ALBERT EUGENE eo. ~ 1362 Henno Way,
Se ot Gien Ellen, California
KOVOLENKO, Ve Pe = General P. 0., |
|" Kdew I, USSR
‘PROHTER, BERNARD DAVID . 2161 Shattuck Avenue
a Berkeley, California
ROBERTS, HOLLAND pawrntis 383 Hadonia, Palo Alto,
California. During Week
. — Days ~.787 Castro Street,
\ San Francisco, California
| SUCHOBECK, ALEX (NUIT) + © —«:1815 Lincoln Avenue,
I Pacific Grove, California
; i ae eS
2 .
ee



--- Page 35 ---
Project Hunter .
TRILUPAITIENE, ALDONA

\
|

(also card on
Leonas Algeda)

Se
SEOHER

e me,
TRILUPAITIS, LEONAS

131/14~1, Antakaenio Street
Vilnius, Lithuania

‘Apartment 1B, 104 Irvington
Street, S.W.,- - ;
Washington, D.C.

ee



--- Page 36 ---
a

¢ ; umiTeD STATES GOVERNMENT S
Memorandum
. TO : We c. Sullivan}y _ DATE: 11/2/62
ae Bre Gat : Branigan
‘ 7 Sn,

[en ete ee ete ee

ate see ee! nat ‘
. ta 2 y
soa .
eeiand e-, : e.
~ erie foam NO. 10 mae : .

1 - Stewart
_ SUBBCT: Bicexe INFORMANT 200} - POLICY

This is to advise you | that on 10/31/62, ‘vepresentatives o€
his Bureau conferred with CIA representatives James Hunt, John Mertz-
and. Thomas Chalmérs) at..CIA concerning "Project Hunter." At this
' €onference. our observations concerning Hunter material furnished -
‘our last conference on 2/13/62 were given CIA. In addition, we ‘a
CIA. specifically of certain Hunter items which were of no interest.
to us and of certain Hunter items which were of interest to us." 5

items were set forth in memorandunt form and furnished to CIA; a cox
: same is attached. .

, _ CIA advised that its (Gunter-Don) coverage was.being

(Leperates seven days a week until November 15. This concentrat
reoverage is for the purpose of determining if there is any illegaj -
] agent traffic. After November 15 all Hunter coverage can be.expected:: ) 4
| to be reduced until after the Christmas mail rush has subsided.

\

frne ‘CIA. representatives were very pleased. with. our-anal
of the Hunter material received and with the ‘attention afforded-i'
py Us e+ They are very cooperative in that they are willing to focus

sis, .

our own benefit. For CIA's interest we furnished them a copy of the
attached memorandum of our analysis of typical information furnished .
. by /Bureau Informant 200) of interest to us.

ACTION: :

None. - Above data rien for your information.

CONTAINED
WBE (W sean Sram
DATE mia By

ws se y

(4) &
- Qos-esoee) & Ge OS .
Enclosure ,
see 7 Nov 5 1962
aro: 4c , oy. a

AM
GHNOVS 1962 _ 8



--- Page 37 ---
le ae ce he ee 4

eee ee . > pe
ro _« ® . : e
oe penne Form WO. 10 - ~

. l 7 \ Belmont
UNITED STATES GOVERN .anT ) 2 eenSteddsivarnes Hobe [7
Ls tL BEGRIIQ2 ot Callchan|— :
Memorandum jon” eebionurhoe a
adver: - aoeeebeuart,, Evans |

; ae Rosen a
TO ; i : We . Ge Sulliuv . DATE: 8-25-61 ——
. _ . Trotter
" my aoe . Tele. Roym —____
FROM |: We Ae ah Ga nt on Ingram

—

7s o — Gondy
f i TC —_—— L ue Lo fees, be
- SUBJECT: | papa INFORMANT 200} POLICY _

., On 8-19-61, .a conference took place between Special . ;
; Agents Sam,Jo Papichs We De Stewart and representatives of CIA in «
regard ~tofBureaz Informant 200} As’ a result, CIA was recently :
_ furnished “G. guide as to Bureau Informant material we desire.
. _ This guide was prepared after discussion with several members
| of the Espionage, Nationalities Intelligence, Subversive Control,
and Internal Security Secttonse In addition; CIA was furnished

@ current list of names previougly placed on the CIA Waten List

_|ay use In this regard, the CIA representative advised that,

-| although we are getting coverage. on certain individuals, to insure
{we get complete coverage on each individual we desire it on,
they should be specifically added to the Watch List. ‘This Watch

Ltst is revised each Morday; therefore, any person not included

on this list to fr. De" can be ineluded by forwarding a routing

slip anytime tof. D. Stewart, Room 644 2) bearing the individual|’s
name, his address in UsSe, and indicating the pertod coverage is
@esired, <A list will be comptled by(lir. Steuart) weekly and furni
o CIA via liaison. The CIA representative further advised that
very. few people there have any knowledge of “Project Hunter" and ‘that
sany cormurtication referring to this project or a "Hunter Report"-)
|. Should be forwarded to CIA via Liaison and appropriately ‘flagged *|~
‘for our Liaison agent's attention to avoid the commlnication gett 5
‘into CIA's regular mail channel.

subject travels to the (USSRy\and his name is added to the Watch
List, : CIA will promptl Bet ra him coverage while he is “8 Oo)"

g.
RECOMMENDATION: 7 REC- Alt /, fysz. GF EQ. RG —

. That the above information. be discussed, at the next
conference held by the Espionage, Nation&klszed*Intelligence,
Subversive Control, and the Internal Security Sections and that

all agents in the above-menttoned secttoms—be.-réeminiied to furnish

air,. Stewart) a copy of any letter prepared from Bureau. Informant 200
terial to assist him in continually evaluating the program

; Wee“) (wh) wi llth Ai

(205 930

oF 7
re qi. To nar ee .

” the GIA “the (and. further advised, tf any security

FR ear mereaa sees cemarrranpecine keer irene uy Core RsSRITTIONTITONNEIFUTTI peter TS 9 An rite
7


--- Page 38 ---
: 10/30/62

. a“ , . a ; : .
_ ee RE: / BUREAU INFORMANT 200)
. — ’ —

—
Typical! data fury ished b qi reau Informant 2008

: Information indicatt travel plans to th ssn )oe numerous
Communist Party subjects; data indicating ss tno thies of
v. 8. individuals; data indicating a U. S. ps dson may be serving as a

oviet courier; data indicating the existence of particular Russian)

ociel and art clubs in the U. S.3 data indicating a, desire Of U. S.
students to study in(08sh data indicating profCastrd sympathies of
U. S. persons; data Pevealing present activity, “feelings, and former
associates of(Bernon Ferguson Mitchell and William Hamilton Martin, .
recent Nationa Security Agency (NSA) defectors; data revealing U. S.
military personnel are in contact with official establishuents and/or
individikals in(USSR3 data revealing activities of tho(iiaurtce Hyman
Halperins} now residing in(Cuba} and of their son Carlos Halperin,
a medical! student at the University of Chicago} and data indicating
eurrent| whereabouts of (Cart and Alice Jerome) ommunist Party subjects;
and data relating to t current whereabouts’ of (James M. McMillin, Jr.,
a former Ue S. soldier attached to U. S. Embassy, Moscow, Russia, who
previously defested and married a me)

_ Data of | Special Interest:

. , During the present (uber crisis, w we have identified several
pro Castro] sympathizers in U.S. ,* ough their contacts with (Cubans i"
at (Friends ip University, Moscow) and have been alerted to their aétivi Je
We e|learned that
with(Huldah S. Clark, “daughter of Negro Communist Party subject
Williem|Clark of Newark because of her behavi Fae too evidenced
discontentment there. er educational trip vot or Foerved as OP

ussian) school authorities are greatly displeased

propaganda. We were alerted tofMaurice Halper ntended return to
U. S- We have been inGipse of (illie Mae Teslic. ‘y intended visit to
(OSSR) Her Aeaughter in Sd is suspected as being the propaganda-radio
yennouncer Moscow Moll Wé are developing U. S. contacts of
(Helen Kageli=Pozner, idortee discharged in 1950's for failure to
answer questions re poSsible espionage involvement, through
correspondence of her with relatives in(Russie}

|
|
|



--- Page 39 ---
———___.
“ @
. & . =
.
arene 7 e

pa ee ee Fe ne ee

oc.

| .

cs ’
such as Valerty Pereshohenko) . One of (apreshohenko 'e) contacts ts

believed to be a target for ‘contact by ({KGB)and another is the
son=in=-law of the woman in whose apartmént(Viktor Eravohenke had
been visiting. (Kravohenko is a(Sovtet)defettor who recentl
committed suict The informant has advised of the activities
and contacts of (Viadislaw Krasnow, Soviet )defect r to Sweden in
1962, The Bureatd was not aware previously that Krasnow) was

tin the U.S. : ; :

| * Although ‘much matertal regarding communists and the
Communist Party (CP) ts also received from other sources, the
informant continues to furnish addttional details and new infor~
mation regarding changes of employment and residence, travel,
contacts and attivities., Data regarding attempts of the DuBois -
Clubs to expand nationally and internationally was furnished in
items on (Paula Garb} International Secretary, who’ went to the
USSR) to no eo Sovteif he can obtain a divorce. Items

ertaining to {Mary Lo Camache) (daughter of CP leader) told of
the birth of hér daughter, recenciliation with her (Cuban husband,
plans to go to Cuba to live and that one of her friends; a
Security Indes subject, was in Ghana when she was belteved to
be in the U.S. : :

a) Data ts received regarding travel and contacts of (Mary
Rakeczy) (widow of suspected esponage agent), who attended the
Higher Party School of the Ukraine in Kiev, USSR) Information
continues. to be recetved regarding her son, (Andrew Rakoczy,) who
was allegedly studying ballet but actually dttended the above
school for almost -two years. This has included his contacts,

* ehange of employment and residence and racial, poverty and
Progresstve Labor Party activities in Chicago. One of his cony-~
tacts now at this scheol has been tdentified as{feddie Kardash,
son of Canadian communists, The source has also advised that

(Irene Rakoczy) and three untdentifted individuals plan to study

,Gancing tn{kiev) this sumner (possibly at the above-mentioned schoél

which maintains’ a spectal section to combine lessons in dancing
and indoctrination) ond that (Bernard Francis Taylor) (son of CL
offictal), who went to the USSR) with,a musical and dancinggroup,
remained in Kiev) to attend 3chdol. Gon Zurtlko), son of the alien
wife of a U.S. citizen residing in State of Washington, is
attending school tn Kiev} He ts believed to be from the U.S, or
Canada. ;

, Additional information ts received regarding persona
tnuolved tn the peace moveménts, anti-Vietnam demonstrations,
women's organizations, "teach-ins" (one has been tn contact with

; a (GRU officer), tractal matters, Progressive Labor Party, Students
for a Democratic Society, DuBots Clubs, Students Non-Violent
Coordinating Committee and other organizations, Items reveal
names of U.S. contacts with members of such (Soviet) propaganda
organizations as the Govier Peace Comnittee,- Soviet Women's
Committee, Committee For Return te the Hone land) and others,

! . o

-3-



--- Page 40 ---
, : .
F eerion ror no, 10 . )

~ UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

Memorandum
To : WC, Suse : DATE: March 27, 1963
* - Mr. Belmont
use 1 = Mr. Sulliva:
com: tne niet fee ; 1 - Mr. Wannall
yf — _— 1 - Mr. Branigan |
yit be 1 = Mr. Stewart §
oF SUBJECT: READ INFORMANT on) POLICY 1 - Liaison
. l= Mr. Harrel

Gor pecteas

For approximately one month beginning in February, 1963,
‘Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had coverage of mail destined to’
tba). which was funneled ‘through New York City from approximately
e-half of the United States, The results of this highly confidential
| project were furnished us under the code ("Hunter=-Vince') through
special arrangements made with CIA, The project has been temporarily .\
discontinued so CIA can analyze the resuits and decision will be r
las. £2 its reinstitution based on the results achieved. : OH

- During the period the coverage was in effect, we received x
94 items and opened 15 new cases based on the material, While no N
specific data was developed indicating clandestine messages were G
beimg transmitted, we know that one of the illegal, Cubanjagent networks
has plans for mail drops in the New York City area,-and this coverage ;|
gould conceivably lead us to these drops in the future, We ha v)
(previously furnished CIA summaries con Snail” positive results y
1 achieved through its coverage of eet mail for its assistance inf wu
evaluating whether that program should be continued, It is beli ed
Wi Should do. so in this instance. g-
ACTION: &,
TY £ .
?

TZ you approve, the attached memorandum containing a'
unmmary of the action taken by us as a result of the(Hunter-Vincg
\eoverage will be furnished CIA by liaison for assistance of CIA
evaluating whether the program should be continued.

Enclosure

: 1085-93089 }

RAM:ajw
e orn

3 : je’
\S Le : | a Lyne, C/A - E 293

, qua _ Af ui :
67 APR 4- 1963 —apR aMigag 7 pe Ge



--- Page 41 ---
ee : en (RE ee ~")
. f: RNs Ser if e
: . * oy WHEL IE §
e¢ .

_ INFORMATION RECEIVED rrou{ BUREAU INFORMANT 200)

' Data received regarding the following current and
forner double agents, and sources has been utilized to evaluate
thetr reltability: (Luke Chia Liu Yuan; [Bedre Celestino Jimenez
Horenot Gordon Philtp Polley; Hugo Rodriguez-Ramirez; Julius G?
Shell; UNE. 445-8) Phyllis Oja; Samuel Jaffes[NY.2911-5; NY 3556-5;
CG 6562-8;| Ur. and irs. George R. Atkinss and Boris. fl, Oblesowsics>
The fiel es been advised of individuals tn close contact with

. (Soviets with the request to consider for development as sources).
- .. Information regarding Soviet) exchange students (eight
are (KGB) agents) includes names of associates, activities, trave
types of material requested to obtain and individuals with whom
they continue to maintain contact after they leave the U.S.
Similar information is furnished regarding other (Sovtets) in the
U.S. as a result of the exchange pregram, Material is, also
Ni furnished regarding U.S, citizens who travel to the USSR) as part

R
&

25X 1 )
Mpe-lo -

RES of the exchange. .
=ae - Data regarding current and former U.S, exchange students
=a “shows Sovtet)and U.S. contacts before and after return, romanti

an involvements, sympathies and difficulties encountered tn (Russia

Sa 4 former exchange--student has been in contact with a suspected

SQ esptonage agent regarding (Ralph Uatlaw\ (according to (vosenke the
EGB)was to, attempt recru ent of (Matlaw), The source has revealed

ormer exchange student (iichoes Co e's) travel plans and continued

Scontacts with Soviets) (one is son of.an espionage agent) and(Henry
Huttenbdch's)a tempts to obtain a dtvorce in order to marry ¢@ Sbviet)
girl, Similar information is furnished regarding U.S. citizens
who are, or have been, in{ Russia) but are not under the exchange
program, These include (sally Harris, Natasha Kent, Kathy Boudin

‘ , and Alexander Nikolauk} Two of the four U.S, citizens who have

5 applied for entrance vo Soviet) universities have stated that they

Bu; destre to becone (Soviet) oi #tagne. (uilagros Rutg Aponte, Puerto
BOG Rican nationalist in the USSR) is using an alias in her corres-
ERS pondence, Another(Puerte Rican)}went to (cube befere he left for
Suh the (UssR,

GS -

Bao : Material has been received regarding three employees
ES of USIA, two U.S. citizens employed by the UN, @ Federal employee
Zp who intends to marry a(Sovtet)girl, three tnpdtviduals involved
er) with (Soviet) women and o U.S. contacts ef(Gelina Snirnova (an
Ze o Intourist guide) who has compromised Americans in the past).

ACs ;
ar3B

Contacts of foreign exchange students and aliens in the
U.S. from (Canada, Peru, Cuba, Ecuador, Dominican Republic, Brazel,
Uruguay, Colombia, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Mextoo, Chile, Haiti,
Italy, France, Iraq and Af tod) with their friends in the(USSR who

.are studying at (Friendship Untversity or other schools show th

ee bien 2 (ee 1288) 0)



--- Page 42 ---
_-yyltapgantzation to receive -hér husband's archivés ‘and her illness

choice the (ussat contact oflajer Abdel Okeil of United Arab Repub]
.) ttending the(FBI-Natt onal doadeny] with individual in
i ors and(Sovied} repatriates,

they may be communists, Two foreign students and an exile from
Haiti}have: been acting-as intermediaries, Several have applied
or admittance to Friendship) University and other schools in th
USSR) because of finances or ‘tdeelogy. A(Nicaraguan)Marzist in -
the U.S. its acting as an intermediary for an, olivia) 2 at

Data is

(Friendship University by forwarding nail to(Bolivia
Choel in the

urnished regarding foreign students who atténded.

(USSR) and- are now in the U.S, — aes these appears to have nied)

compromised before he left (Russia and another brought his Sovie
wife to the U.S. . :

Itens.are received regarding, Soviets) who have entered
the U.S. as wives of Americans: (Victoria Sandor (now a Federal
employee); Alo Anderson; Ludmila olsen)
was approached by(Soviet) Intelligence when in the(USSH) in. 19653
fringe Horwitz; Nataliya Konigsford; and Rostta Bre ton) wife of
an (4103 on) politictan and newgpapermdn, who has become’ involved
wv
contacts, travel and study tn the( USSR of Mrs. Kemp. Tolley, Sou
wife of former U.S, Naval Attache, who has admitted furnishing
information regarding Americans to the Goviers tin the, 1940's.

*

who has advised that she

a(Russtan}born U.S. Army Captain, The source advised ef )
tes,

i)

Huch material has been furnished regarding U.S. cttizens!
travel plans, tncluding those of known subversives, their (Soviet

relatives and contacts and difficulties encountered by two tourists
with (Sovietjauthorities, Data has been received regarding ovilets)

and former U.S. citizens who have traveled, or intend to travel,

ato the U.S., their contacts, activities and relatives, Several
had renounced their U.S. cttizenship-and had been engaged tn

questionable activities in the past. (Mary Uackler), who recently

returned to the U.S., has had numerous-contacts wtth known subuer-

stves, at least two of whom were connected with espionage, tn the

past, Material is recetved on U.S. defectors now tn the (USSR

seven individuals to repatriate to the USSR U.S. contacts wit
urrent and former known and suspectedf{Sovt dDagents now tn the
ISSR (Vladimir Sossinskiy, Vladimir PoZner, bifon Olkhina

Additional information received BD Ue plans of

Leontds Rimjans, Vladimir Paramonov, Igor Melekh) and others);
activities and contacts of current and former known and suspec
esptonage agents new in the U.S. (Aaron Pressman, Josef Zargvi
Victor Perlo, Helen Pozner Wilga) dnd others); the death of(Geor
Lieb) (suspected of working, as black narket currency operator f
GBY' and continuation of his contacts by his wifes activities 4
Kirtlil Alexeev) (suspect in inde) case) family; (Soviedy contacts
erard Piel} who has been tn contact with a (KGBjofficer; Govie
jontacts and travel of(D, a Brennan) who, according to ederg
was te be approached b KGB; contacts of (Olga Yoursevitch) (wid
of ship destgner) with KGB)agent, travel “to (uss. as a guest of

who was @
the( USSES U.S. contacts of several defec

of

>

ed
h,

gt
r

4

w

to}

