
--- Page 1 ---
157-10002-10056 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
: :

Date:09/30/93
; Page:1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM :
& : IDENTIFICATION FORM
* AGENCY INFORMATION

AGENCY : SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10002-10056

RECORDS SERIES :
MEMORANDUM

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

DOCUMENT INFORMATION

ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM : SCHLESINGER, ARTHUR JR
TO : THE PRESIDENT

TITLE :
CIA REORGANIZATION

DATE : 06/10/61
PAGES : 15

SUBJECTS :
CIA
COVERT ACTION
PARAMILITARY WARFARE
CUBA
POLICY CONTROL

ae

DOCUMENT TYPE : PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : S
RESTRICTIONS : REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/30/93

OPENING CRITERIA

COMMENTS :
Box 244
. Folder 7
Exhibit 5 to R. Goodwin testimony on 7/18/75

[R] - ITEM IS RESTRICTED ~

HW 50955 DocId:32281896 Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
‘ 1
5.
ME, Spevations sua Rey

Clandestina activites ahold ba acacaged net gedy in the context
nf theiy veletionahip to aa cpen geciuty but shee in td coment of thelr

ralstiangbip to United Suates foroign policy.

CiA sperstio;s have oe noon bald effectively eubordinate to U.S.

foreign pole ys
: 1, Clandcsiing ietelligence collectian in, wy charter, free from
Thin fact exposes American fereigu policy
wen moltiteda of eunbarrauasoante when CYA $a Mecavered gearuiting
E_uerte ov developing geurced in 6 fyiamdly count ye The recent ;
Etageacsre sees, whon CEA, witheut notice to the Congul General,
tried ta subvayt a esgmber of tha Spacial Sranck ef the Singapore
Police provides as insieuctiva exancplo. After emmpllentions of
§udigrane commbazitys including an attempt to gaubject the recruit 4
e e-datecter tert, 12 ts mpad eck thas the rocwest krd leng since
inlermed bie supariere of eho CIA apprench and wes leading GLA
into a trep which, whic SPSwig. groduced cengiterablie emhar>rass~
et to relations betwaen tha US and tae Hrngapere geveznomcnt. .
pemeryas IR

Enya
There hava Geen teoatice of m compar
+ ne Back 5

State [eepartracnr egaeret.

& is JA CIA bas soda that, tn such cxsas, neither the Embosey mar the Dagert:
x ment in Washington 32 nermelly formed of this type ef aperetion.
th phost, no eaa knows how many potential problema for US forviga
policy -- end how esach potential friction with tivlendiy etagee -- are
being created sf this moment by CIA clandogtina ieteRigente eperedion
Surely thoza is on argument fox peemibating iste te ducide whasher the
gdventage to be goioed by tha apsration (3. Bx e gho irforrmation devivat
fyorn on agam within the fpecial Branch of tha Singapore Polies} eut~
weighs the tick (8. Soe axseperating tho local govwramert aed thoakiog
ite confidance both in ear puUrpoese aod in cor sense}. Clandestine
intolligancs eparations ghouls plainly be clanred tooth with the Depers:
mort of State and (ezve for encentiocal inmans 3% and cu agrasment of
the Beeretary of State} with the local UD, GS. fambsonedore

U

7

‘n  Change/classify to,

Fissn 0
With concurrence of

«DEPARTMENT OF STATE

FPC (HDR by

C] Declassify €] In part and excise as shown

CAG ORO 12886; Seerts-ta} (

HW 50955 | DocTd:32281896- Pages 2! Th.



--- Page 3 ---
SEeRe ye

& ; it bas meant too that the Gate Department, eten apariowl ef an
opevalian only tn ite letar atagon, is under grent preecure te
endorse the spcration a3 already mounted becaues of the alleged
evil cansaquences cf onarcielug 2 vote. Iweall romember Tom
Mann's remark the day the decision ene mata to go shaad on Cuba:
"lL would nevir have favered lolrinting this operation: bet, aince it
kas gone ae far ao it bac, Ido not think wa gan rlek calling it off,"
Moreover, ni @ ties when thera {9 lncreaging promium en activism,
Biate, whan it quactions CLA cparations of lnitistlves, caste taal tn
apriesy, sisey, asgative séle, The edvoceta of clandestine activities .
stema ‘tough’ and scoligtie! the appensat hee te invoke much istonsihlos |
2 She veputotion of the United Ststee, world public epinfon, "What
éo we say inthe Unite? Motions ?", ote., arnt gore hopelessly

idsallatic, legalistia and ‘ace, ' ;

The reault of ClA's initiative in covert political cnerations has boon
te ¢rante situations which have forced pelicy on the State Departreont,
This woa net the ortginal ides behind CIA, As Allen Dullss wress
in hie 1947 memorandum to the Sonate Armed Servlees Commiliec,
“The Central intelilgenca Agency should have aothing to do with polley.”
Yont, in tha ycare since, CIA haa, tn effect, ‘made’ gelicy in many
parte of the world, <A number of gowarnmerte still in power kvow

@ ; that thoy have evan been. targets ef CLA attempia at everthraw ~~ not
& State of mind calculated t etimulate friendly feelings tewnard the
United States, Indusgela, of courea, ia a prime oxarmple

Thia experisnce suggests thet the present sysiecin by which CLA notifies .
State of a projected covart cperaticn is inadegeate te protect US
trtereate, There nine? be seane meann by whieh Stote can be iefozmod
ef such aperntiona s¢ an carly enough etaga te aNicet the cenceptio

and prellrainary planning ef the eperetinn, Cthorwise CIA will con-
tinne to confrem Miste with prapesitions having pstential daagnet on
foreign paiicy but of toe late a point to subject thet impact te reasen-
alle contrcl. : :

2. 4 ~

o With concurrence of _.

: Erreremreee* Enea °
° 3 Me eclassif n par! ork a ; si
& See acs t vy oO] part Srl
: J FPC/HDR by < K- 2-I-bl-Ga,



--- Page 4 ---
»

SEGRE A

8.

igiginally the uge of! pte Departenert cover fér
snaal was opposed to be etvietly Iaited aad tempg rary.
len-CorreneJeckeon report etnted in 1943, "The GIA shoulda
Binte Pepasirient covar a9 6 olmpla answer te al’ ite problend
eceed to Gavelee ie own outelde cuver and eventually in ff
8B persone

None a

find o way tr
glasa CLA ha

ia easier to arrange cis

iPquicker; it facilitates ths.
rity: ofc eperatinna saegl) aa of comfinuntcations; lt insures &
Bleasanter iifa fos the CLA Rucple. % the affect is te further the

LA encroathmant on the tees Atics alfunctiong af State.

ce 80 § rrermice Ee
Teetetanl Secon

a0 GS va y of Proaldent Ker
Biletticg fo gasving in United Oey

F y cmbanstos ware CAY
tha country longer, nag]
en (amd ts abler) thay

wy since bagun to mova into arenas a 7 political ‘reper ey
mpfled by State, The CLA mén doing are art interwal ae on
timber these in the Emhasoy's polittcal soctionl ime SIN
a cought to monagellna contact with eoxtaded
9, among therg the President of tha Matigueal Kenostly. CIA
tep Hoerz > nae eens a fect wolk knowa locally; aw

DEPARTMENT OF &TATE

Dl he See Pretatn glace'n C1 Change |ctasally Bjasctcm

With concurrence of =

Iriligee LL Decslassity-En part al aa own

rn ef a ans



--- Page 5 ---
a) Ali 24 Ent RT MENT oF STATE

in clases
With h eencurrone. 7 Cane [classify tg

Gélassity Cl tn part an,

rene

Ee
amusement that tha ¢ ae = rec wi Mehte. he am :
‘es et dimbassesiog| eS +20 ohle t3 acura eatrance tha ff
eal i

Th Directiv.
Bae a wrk

4. Pavamilitaz warfes re, gether, ia regarded tn soma quartara
aga purely samilany ests eauily detachatle from pelicy and there-
fore & proper function of the Depestmang ef Dafanae, Yat there is
almest ao CIA Conctlon mowe pecullerly dependant on the political
context than paramilltncy warfare.

@ Theye ave agveral roizora fer this. For ena thing, a naramiiitacy
operztion ie la ia osturs a lagge end attribetella eperetion and thoreby,

ag suggested above, clavhes with the presupresitions of eur epen
sachety. (Thess conaiderctiens nead net sepiy, hewoves, to the
trolsing cf, cay, the outs Vietonmece in guarrilla tectles er ts the
exyport of alragdy ozlgting querriiie activiies,} Fer ancther, io
morel and political price of direct reremtiittery failure is acute for
va. Communists, when they stimulate paramilitary activity, os
doing what the world aupects fyvez thom: wien we da lh, we aggaar
to betray our ewn profeased principles and therefere canocs atinrd te
darpoand delinsmency by defeat, aresver, a9 tse regent Algerine
aplecda chewad, once we convinces the werld that wo ere ceommitiod to a
psramilltery endesyer, we will be blamed ioe el ecrie ef things, And,
ng the recent tractera-feae-prizonera ezisede ghivse), chen wo do cond
man to possible death, wa etnact Mghtly welte them off aud clause tho
booke, Tha Cernruimiste, on ths otnor Randy have po es weplae abecuat
Uenidsting @ losing ahers,


