
--- Page 1 ---
176-10033-10145}

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

AGENCY :
: 176-10033-10145

RECORD SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

RECORD NUMBER

ORIGINATOR :
; : Schlessinger, Jr.
TO:

_ TITLE : a
: 6/30/1961
PAGES :

SUBJECTS :
DOCUMENT TYPE :
: Declassified
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW :
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS :

FROM

DATE

CLASSIFICATION

JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM

NARA

Church Committee

WH

Kennedy, John F
CIA Reorganization

15

Paper, Textual

2/14/2001 .


--- Page 2 ---
SANITIED Mut dole Sir

SECRET : asa -

June 30, 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

SUBJECT: CIA Reorganization

! gubmit the following viewa ag one whe worked in OSS during the
war and served as 0 poriadic CLA consultant in the years eince.

Qn balance, CIA's record hao probebly been very goad. In the
nature of clandeatine operations, the triumphe of an intelligence
agency are unknown®; all the public heare dhout (or should hear
about) are its errorve. But, again tn the nature of the case, an
agency dedicated to clandestine activity can alfard damned few
vigible errorg. The important thing te recognize today, in my
judgment, {6 that the C1A, as at preecnt named end constituted, has
about used up ite quotes. Ite margin for future error is practically

mon-exietent. Gace more CIA debacle will shake faith considerably

in US policy, s¢ home ae well as abroad. And, until CIA is vieibly
reorganized, it will (ae in the Algerian inatance} be widely blamed for
@evalopmente of which it ie wholly innocent.

Fhe argument of thi¢ memorandum te thet CIA's trauble can be traced

to the autonomy with which the agency has heen parmitted to operates
and that thid cutonomy fe due to three main causes: {1) dn inadequate
Gactrine of clandestine oporations; (2} an inadequate conception of
the relationship between operations and policy; (3} an Anadaquate

_ Or ehould be «+ a gross aad repeated GIA failtag haa been ita
eccedional réadinegs to succumb to the temptations of favogable

publicity. The Guatemalan and raniqn operations were almost
nullifted by the flood of self-congratulatory publicity whitch followed
them fe. g., the articles by Richard and Gladye Harkoese, “The
Mysterious Doings of GIA," Seturds r Eve Post, Get. 30, NN. 6,
43, 1954). ,

SECRET


--- Page 3 ---
SECRET
2. oe
conception of the relationship between operations and intelligence.
The memorandwn digo suggests waye in which gome of thage prad~
leme can perhapa be allevinted.
1 GIA Autonomy

CUA conducts three mate forma of secret wort elasdsatine {atelite
gence colfections covert

politica! eperationg; and sargmilitesy
- activitieg. i car¥ies on thege functions with relative autonomy.
‘The reasons for the sufenomy are histericat.

Whea CIA began, the State Department, titt thinfting teo mach to
tevrae of ite traditional mtesions in foreign affaicd, Looked an this
now ventare with uppicies dad ransunced the opportunity to estes

come ambhaseadors érantl: 7 preferred not to now what GIA was w to
fa theie countrice,. Biter 1983 the feat that the Secretary of State and
tbe Director of Central inpetligence were peathare durthes cuntirmed
GiA's indepandenes from ‘eupervicion by State Depattment desks.

is the meantime, IA grew in eigo and pesos. Busing the fifties &
begga in some areas te cutatetp the pore fi phen aind yamine

avelaged, cad te grastor tole i played in tho lltiston of play,
By tho time that State had began to be fully auane ct the probiens
crested by an active and autenomese CLA, t6 had tong since miaced
the change to eutablich te own ultimate authority; While State re-
Ca comsdegraeolses by Cia‘ tendency co prone & propa operat

tg geome degree ‘a tendency to pkegent & propased operation
aimoat ag & never & contre avert
Glangeatine intellig reosidetion and tt had leet growd tn each
arene ge ert police repeting end event the mtotenenco of
overt diplomatic contacta;.

a

SECRET :


--- Page 4 ---
SECRET,
3

For its part, CIA had developed ¢ whole series of functions paral~
leHng elresdy existing functions of the Stata Department, and of ©

the Defense Depavtment ag well. Today it hag ite own political
deake and military staffa; it hae in effect its own foreign services

it has tor bas had) ite own combat forces; i¢ even hac ita ows air
force. Its annual budget t@ about _ times that of the State Depart.
meént. The contemporary CLA possdases many ef the characteriatics
ef a ctate within a state.

I Doctrine

Though GIA's autonomy developed fer histerical reseons, it has been
able to endure because there ie no doctrine governing our conduct of
clandestine operations, The preblem of doctrine for CIA ta the extent
to which ite various clandestine missions axe compatibie with a free
and open society.

Bt is idle to argue that, beesuse the Communtsts can do such-saé-auch,
we are free to de it tes. Communiom ig a creed nurtured in cone
gplracy and the whale point of Gamnvuntst ecciel and politcal ergani=
gation is to make conepizacy effective. I ‘fighting fire with fire’ means
contracting the freedome traditionally enjoyed by Americans in order
te give more freedom to CIA, no one séricualy wiehes to do that. Yet
£ do not feel thet wo have tried rigorously to think through the mits
which the maintenance of an open cactety places on aecret activity.
Untit thie te done, CIA's rote will uct be clogrly defined and undor-
gteed: The problem which must bs faced in: what sort of cecret
gétivity te constetent with the preservation of & free aocial order? .

We must begin. I beliave, i Aer Su dover vender teoribaaoeyhaeptir
will continue to bs & nation in which politicians will.ack questions and
make speeches, reporters will dig out storied, newepapera will pub»
Heb editetiale, individysia, driven by promptinge of causcience, will
bluse out things harmful tc the state, and seam, We do not sich to
change these thinge aad could not do ao without viciating the eseence
af our eocisty,. Theae things make up the framework to whlch CIA
must operate, In ahort: they constitute the problem: aad, ae
General Mavshalt used to say, “There's no point te fighting the

. prodiona,:

SECRET



--- Page 5 ---
SECRET

Thare follows from this, # would think, the conclusion thas socees
miseiie go bg. a8 they do ct Cone the

Each form of cecxet activity predents ite own problem. Clandeatine
inteliigance collection hae heen a treditional function of the agtional
ptate. He retes and usages are fairly well cotabliehed, In the
msioa, eapionage, if conducted with discretion. ehoulé present no
great problem, Howevet, when ‘Conducted with Gn open checkbook

_Gtthe goverament,

Covert polities! cperations present a teicher probtem. Cecasions
ariae when tt fo neceseser to subsidice newspapers, politicians and
organiaations in other cuantries,, Bus corruption ofthe political Iie
of unuther nation te not @ eeeponetbility to be lightly assumed,
onc, a eee tmd tasch of Cure toe the Joy of ts
Paramilitary activities ezeate an even more dificult problem, if
caly becesee the problems ef concealment are eg mach mere difficult.

ty general, Twoulé suggest that any secret operation whone encosss ta ;
dependant on the augpreatica of news, a. eo tyteg to Congeeesmen and
fournsiicta and on the deception of the electorate chould be undertaken
analy whens the ceisie ta co arngtdarable that the gains really seem to —
outweigh the disadvantages, This cuggecta thet the of the gras
operation may be of crucial texportance:. ——

cage be made for tse eeesealty,

tn chort, chen confgonted with & proposed eporaston, we must not only
ask wheather the operation te technically fensitio te tte own terme) we
must oak whether ite queceds requieas our epen aocicty to be in say
cortous way fakes to fee Gum principlog

SECRED


--- Page 6 ---
SECRED) — &

8

Clandestine activities chould bo asaessed not only | in the context
of thelr relationship t an open society but algo in the context of their
selationship to United States foreign policy.

CIA operations have not beds held effectively eubordinate to U.S.
forcign policy.

ligence collection is, by charter, free from
State Department conte nivel. This fact expoess American foreign polfey
to & zmultitude of cmbareagemente when CIA ts diecovered recruiting

-egente or developing sourced in. a fvlendly ceuntry. Tho recent

‘eo case, when CIA, without notice to the Congul General,
teted to. subvert a member of the Special Branch of the Singapore -
Police provides an ingteuetive example: After complications of
ludicroue complexity, including an attempt te subject the recruit to

@ e-detector test, f¢ turned ont that the recruit hed long cince
informed bie eupertare af tho CIA epproach oud wos loading CIA
into a trap which, when apeung, produced conatdarsbie emberraco-
mans to relations between the US Gad the Singapore government.
Theve have besa troabies ef a comparable surt ta Pakistan end ta
saraeck tne CLAUNGA operetiond en ene Smneiied Into Sacche
to work in a CIA-MBA operation). —

CIA has eatd that, in such cases, neither the Embasey aor the Departe
ment la Washington is adrmally informed ef this type of eperation.

fn chort, ne one knows how many potential pechiome for US foreign .
policy -- and how much pateatial friction with friendly states -~ are
boing created at thig moment by CIA clandestine intelligence operations,
Surely there is an argument for permitting State te decide wacther the
advantage to be gained by the operation fergy, the information derivable
from an agent within the Special Branch of the Stagapore Police} out+
weighs the rick {eogy. exaaperating the local government and shaking
ite cenfideace both in cur purposed and in our senec}.. Clandestine
intelligence operations ghould plainty be cleared both with the Depart-
ment of State and (aave fer exceptional mmetances and on agecement of

- the Secretary of State} with the leeal U.S,;. Ambassador.

Alea

SECRET | | ae


--- Page 7 ---
SECRET
6.

2. Cavert poltti jsattong technically require State
arance. In practice, however, CIA has often beon

. Department « a : 4 Ie 7
Sble to acize the initiative in ways which geduce State's sate almodt

to that of a rubber étamp.
This has heen pertly che ceasequance of the guperiar drive and

.gctiviem of CIA perecanel, especially ee compared with the difidence

of State Department personnel. Yer example, when men come to CIA
with the assignment ef developing covart political campaigne or
organising coupe or preparing for paramilitavy wasfave, these mea
naturally fall to work with ingenuity and seal; thay probably feel that
they aro not earning theiy pay untese, eay, they ovginize as many
coups es poseibte. The concept of ‘contingency pisoning’ hse
lagitimatised the concrete prepacation of eporations sill prosumatly

in @ hypothetical stage! people did nat at Eivet nctice that ‘contingency

contingeaty a
project shrough (tt t@ axquod) will invite the dissgpotntmaut and
alienation of the grdug} do the preaaure increases to fellow through
Gn what had started ae @ pure speculation. This wac o central faster,

ef course, inthe Coban decision <- the fact that disbandment of the

Guban force in Guatemale just ecemed te create too many probleme and
embarrasgmente. Having entered inte releticue with pereaaatitioes in
foreign lands, ClA has sometimes ecemed to feel thet wo must therce
etter de protty much what dhsy Want ~~ oy clco hay wi ow socustty
of oven go over to the Gommuniatas. This approach has made us on

_ ecesaicn the pricuners of cur own agents. 9

SWe become prisuncre ef our agente tn ancther cause toe. Tho Cuban
opteede leaves the atreng impresuten that CEA ic nat able to control ites
own fow-level cperatives,, While the CIA peopic in Washington are men
of exceptionally high quality, the men sttracted te ficld jobs are same~
times tough anil avon victous peapic motivated hy Grives af thelr owas
and not necoseartly ia polities! ar even moral sympathy with the purposes
af the operatias. Such actions as locking up the Revolutionary Countil,
ouch enterprises 86 Gpevation <0 in Miamt whore CIA agents reportedly
trained Cubans in methods of torture, euch episodes as the detention and
thivé degree reportedly Gdrainiatered te Dx, Radolfs Nedel Tarafa and
86 other democratic Cuban thie February «- ali thease suggest that things
ge on under CIA spoagorehip with which CIA in Washington ic only dimly
Sequainted..

PRESEN,

SECRET


--- Page 8 ---
- SECRET

f has meant too that the State Department, often apprised of an
operation only in ite tater etages, ia under great pregsure fo

endorse the operation as Gleasdy mounteg because of the elfeged

evil consequences of exercising a veto. I welt remember Tom
Mann's romerk the dey the decision wes made to ec ahead on Cubat

. " would never have foveved initiating thie epexations Sut, since it

- hag gone a6 far ae is has, I do nat think we con risk calling i off, “
Moreover, ot 6 time whan théve ie intresging premium on activien,
State, when lf queations CIA operations or initiatives, caate itself in
& prigey, elasy, negative yole. The advocate of clandestine activities
gdome ‘tough and realietic; the opponent has ta favake auch tatangtblee
as the reputation of the United States, world public apinion, “What

“do we cay in the United Natiang?", etc., ani acdine hopelessly
tacaliatic, legaltetic end 'sefe.'

The resuls of CIA's tattintive in covert polities operations hae been
to create situations which have feveed policy on the State Depaetment.
Phig wag not the original idea behind CIA. Ae Alicn Dulles wrote

_ in hia 1947 memorendwn to the Genate Armed Gesvicss Committas,
“Fhe Centra’ fotelligaace Agency should have nothing te.do with palicy.
Yet. in the yeare siace, CLA hae, tn effect, ‘made’ policy im many
parts of the world. A sumbes of govarnenants Gtilt in gomes hase
thae they have oven bean targote of CIA G6 overthege «++ ngs
& state of axind colenigted t9 stimulate. 9 feelings toward the
Unieed States, Indonagis, of courac, (6 0 peime example.

Tide experience saggaste thet the 2 preoenteyetem by which CiA nititiae
State af & projected covert te inadequate to pretect US
There set be eomo masue by which Beto cao Be ffarmed
_ of gach operations ot an eably enough stage to affect the :
and preliminary planning of the operatiqn, Qrherwise CIA will cen~
tinue to confront State with propositions having potential impact oa
farign play Wt at apa abject tat tnpdt fo eaeucae .

hae acaely 6¢ many 9 under effiatal qebs a0 6
$900 to $760, About 1500 of these aro wider State De artnitt

49061 Docld:32629331 Pana Aa


--- Page 9 ---
ee

SECRET
&

(the other 2200 ave preaumably wider military ov other non«State
official.cover). Oviginally the use of State Department cover for

GIA personnel wae guppoged to be atrictly limited and temporary.

The Dullee-Correa-Jackgon report étated tn 1948, “The CIA chauid
not use State Department cover aa a simple dnawer to all ite probleme,
but should proceed to develop its own outside caver and eventually in

Chie way and through increased effictanty of ite overseas personnel,

find & way to temper its demands upon the State Department." None-

-thelesa CIA has steadily tnereaged ite requisitions for official cover,

There are several reasons why CIA has abandoned ite oFiginal intentics.
af dsveloping systems of psivate cover. it ie easier to arrange cover
through State; {¢ is lege axpensive; it ie quickers {% facilitates tho
security of operations a9 well as of communicationa; {¢ insures o
pleaganter fe for the CIA people. But the effect ts to further the

CIA encrcachment on the traditions? functians of State.

fs eome missions, f understand, GAS personack qutsumbers regular
State Pepartment pevesantl. 6 the American Embagey in Vicana,

‘gut of 20 persone Hated in the October $960 Foreign Service List a8
‘being in the Political Suction, 16 are CAS peraamels of the 31 <fficere

lieted as engaging in reporting o¢tivitica, over half axe CAS, Of the
83 officers listed {a the Political Section in our Embassy tn Chile,

34 are CAE. On the day of President Kennady's Inauguration 47 percent
of the political offieave dérving ta United States Embassies were CAS,
Gometimes the CIA mflasion chief has been ta the country longer, hae
more money at hie diapesst,. wields more influence (and te abler} than
the Ambassador. Often he bas direct access to the local Prime
Mintater. Sometimes (se Curing a critica! period in Lacs} ke pargues
& different policy from that of the Ambaseades;, Algo he te genseally
well known locally ae the CEA representative.

is the Paste Embsavy today, there ave 128 CIA pacple. GIA tn Paste
hae tong eince begun to move inte areas of political reporting normally
eccupied by State, The CLA men doting g tosernal

. Cutnumber those ta the Embassy's polities! section by 102, CIA bee

even gaught to menapolice cantgct cautect with cegtain French pelitieal pereonall
tied, among them the Preaident of the Netional Agsemkly, CIA occupies
te top Rear of the Peete Eoihasey, tact well kauwn lotaltys aad on

SECRET :  &


--- Page 10 ---
~ SECRET

the night of the Genoxale' revolt ta Algeria, pasdere<by noted
with emugement that the top floor was abinge with lights. (Jam .
informed that Ambaceadar Gavin waa able te decuxe entrance that
night te the CIA offices only with difficulty. }

CIA ia apparently sow firmly committed to the GAS approach ae a
permanent solution for its probleme. It is pregging to have GIA

. people given the eauk of Counselor. Hefore State loses control of

more and more of ite presumed overaces paveguncl, and before GAS
becgmes permanently integrated into the Fuveign Service, {¢ would
geem important (a} to agGute every embadeadoy the fizm control
aver the local GAS stétiva nominglly proneed in the NSC Directive

of January 19, 1961, and {>} to review the currant CAS altuation with

an eyo toa steady reduction of CAS pergaanct.

There are savers! reacgas fer this. Pur cae thing, & pavomilitaey

apesatian to tn (te nature @ large ené attetbutable aperstion and thereby.

men to posstble death, we canoe lightly weite thom off anf alose the
The Communists, on the other hand, bave no cerugicn about

auidsting 9 losing shows,

SECRED


--- Page 11 ---
SECRET
10.

Moveover, guerrilia warfare te fought, much more than military
men ordinarily realize, in an ideological context. The gucrrilla

_ succeede when his prégram enlists grageradte support; and it is

very diffteult indeed to heat him whes the countrydide t¢ with him.
Van Mook told General Marghall in 1946 net to worry about the
guerrillas in Indenosis; “we are sending 56,000 men out there
and will clean the eftuation up in the threes months." Marehall,
who had had experience fighting guerrillag in the Philippines,

‘replied, "Te won't be eG easy, You wild find that they will bleed

you ta death." Cyprus and Algeria illustrate the difficulty of over«
corsing guerrille resistance through sheer weight of military force.

Serious guerrilla mevémenta have been defeated only three times eince
.the end of the Second Wexld War: in Greees, because Tito’e defection

closed the northern border; in the Philippinsa; and in Malaya. In

the last two cages the guarriila Resistance enled becasse Ore
combination of political itary Sounteeoe ence: The struggle.

in Malaya, ae Field Mas ;
the minds gad heats of the peoples i: thesefore involved aot cnly
paramilitavy ¢perations tut 6 veet educational program, organisation
of trade anton, political reform and an offer of national independence.
the guersiilals power lice in hlo sovolutienary program, the anowsr .
liee in part tn meeting the aceds which enable the guerrilla to rouse
the counteygide.. “Withaut a political geal, wrote Meo Tac-tung,
guerrilla warfare muct fall, oo te must {f ite policiéal objectives do
cot colnciéa with the agplretions of the people sad Uf their sympathy,
esoperation and aseiatsnce cannot be:gained.” He added, “De we
want the Gupport of the mgeses? B we do, we mutt go among the
paar pc arouse ‘thém te activity; concern eurecives with their weal
4 woe," .

eaunforsed te Defense,

~ SECRET


--- Page 12 ---
British expertence ao

5. Hew to Establish Policy Controi? Heee f wonder whether the
net be ef value. The notéble feature of the

ighe
British tatelligense aystens is tha determination te Reep

elendestine
onder atrict Foreign Office control. ‘Thie edatrot is achieved

io 8 number of ways?

@} Seecet Intelligence Service {hi6} iteelf operates under
the direction of tha faint Intelligence Committee, which hee o
Foreign Cfftcs chairman (until wecently Sty Patrick Bean, who
ta now the Britieh gepresentative at the UN) and which inckudes

the Survice intelligence dircetere aud vepracentatives of the

Eelonial Office and the Commonwealth Relations Office aa well

‘a9 the Chief of Sis.

 hoste pobitieg? wartare disecttver are origiatet. net

ihe Pormencss UnterSecretay' 2 Department tn the Sarciga

e)} GIS covert politics) scticn campotgns most not only eon
form to Parcign Office divectives but ssuut be cleared with the
agpropriate Foreign Office geographical deena,

6} working groups under IRD chatemenghip gavern opere-
tans in apectal G7aaey veh St sO? csamate, Stng-Seviet salae

Mena ov the World Youth 7

e} « Foreign Office Btall Lisioen Offioee site ness to the SIS
Chie, and Forgign Office officiate cerve toute of duty in SIS
sections,

All these devices might bo edaptes for une by dae State

Department,
thie would megs that the intelligence agency would
Que that ite epevations would be at att

- vated sions? gut
- points eubjiict to State Bepaetnsat clearance «+ # clearance te be

SECRET


--- Page 13 ---
SECRET

i.

enforced by dapectives, By State Department choirmanship bel
warking groupe, and by the infiltration of State Department
pessonnel inte the intelligence agency.

Obviously this aet-up would act succeed, however, unfees the
State Dupertraent f were prepared to evercome Re inbred
habite of diffusion, négativiem and delay and to take 6 firm end
parposeful grip on the eituition.

The relationship betceen operations end intelligence ratsee pasticw-
fasly perplexing quectiond. i ‘fatelligence’ tncledet two separable
aetivigiog: clgadnétine collections end research, asatyets and
evaluation. The fleet deste with that omali portion of raw intelli»
gence procured by secret sneane (My. Rollvs detimated in 1947 that |
"a proper analysta of the iiteiligonce citatnshio by. . . avert,
normal, aad aboveboard moaqn. would supply ua with ever 66 percent,
1 chontd eatiraste, of the tnfeymstion required fer the guidance of eur
national paltey"): cin eroqnd taveive involves the collation and interpretation
Gf GU feeme of inteliigence, however. obtained and tho production of
‘detimetes,

” ‘Uner the Beitich aystem, clandestine collertion i¢ entrusted to the
Secret Intelligence Service. The research, qnabytic end ectimating
function te located in the Foreign Office Resarch DPopartmont.

Gadar the American gystem, CIA has resgunathility for both
Glandestine collection end vesearch ong analyeia:,, The Mate Pepart+
meont's Bureau af inteliigenes and Reeearch alge hae racegech asd
‘euglyéte seopaneteiliticss hut, in practice, CIA hae established
control ever the mashinasy for producing antionst eatimgtes fn ouch

for Beceptance or rejectlds in other words whore in Great Beitatn
the Foreign Office playe the ceordinating vale in the intelligence field,
in the United States that role hag been agaumes by CLA,

 ¢

SECRET:


--- Page 14 ---
we enanre

The argument against incorporating the reseaech and estimate
function in State was made by Dulles in 1947: “Soe the propor
fadging of the eituation in any foreign country {6 12 important that
tofarmation should be processed by an agency whage duty it te to
weigh facta, and to draw conclusions (com those facte, without
baving either the facte or the conctustons warped by the incvitable
aod even proper prejudices of the mon whoge duty it 6 to determing
policy and who, heving once determined a policy, are too itkely to
be biiad to any facts which might tend to prove the policy to be
faulty."

Erectaaly che came Grgumcat cén be used with equal effect testnst
incorporation of the research and estimate function in CEA «+
Le. if tatelligence fe ten closely connected with operations, then
these committed to 6 particuler operation will tend to actect out the
intelligence which validates the operaticn.

Sbvioutly bets ergumsuty conclude in @ case for the extabliehment of
@ falely tadependent sudeivch and csfimete grap, But, if the RE
group {9 tco independent, one rina inte the oppedite danger? thes fe,
iat Baithow policy net operations wilt be subjected te adequate
intelligence checks,

Tho trouto with the Gahan aportion fos exasmphes “wae not Ghat

cutimate of the atata of optaton tn. Cube trem that an which the opera
ton was baced,; Ther existed, in ghort, the eigiculous cituction

SECRET



--- Page 15 ---
>

SECRET
14,

that knowledge of the Cuban operation, faunted in Miami bare

by any number of towelevel dgente in the operations branch of CIA,
was denied fo even the top officials of the intelligence branch. Tho
Buresu of Intelligence and Research of the Department af State
knew even leas about the Cuban operation.

The problem, then, {9 t¢ have an R&E group suffictently independent
‘af both policy and opsrations te resist the pressure fo make the case
for vested ideas and intereéta «- yet aufficiently clase to be able to
aubject projected operations or polictes | to the moat intenge and
searching scrutiny.

Where could thie group be tecated? Lf the GIA were ta become
qubordingte to State, &¢ RifeG is to the Foreign Office, then the R&E
function might be veeted in & coordinate eubagensy, somewhat inde-
pendent of both State and CLA, yet closely connected with beth in day»
tosday opevations. The RG&E subagency would receive intelligence

from CIA and from State, 66 well ae from the services and, of courte,
évern public sources. It would represtat, in effect, a fusion of CIA/DDE
and State/Intélligence and Research, it might alco take over cortain

of the service functiong now confided te CIA <« photographic tntexpre-

tation, biographical data, foretgn breadcadt monttoring, evert cellec~
tion, mépe, etc, Phere might be in addition a Joint Intelitgence Board
with representatives from all the intelligence agencies and with

' State Department or White House chatrman,

¥. Conetusten..

The argument of thie memerdadum implies 4 fetely éreetic rearrangce
mont of our present tatetiigesce aeteup. It alae implica the cagacity
of the State Department t&% asqume command of the éftustion nd to do
do in an effective and purgedetul way. i the State Department ae at

preacnt staffed ig neo capable ef esauming eifactive command, thie te
tots in wy judgment, an argument against « eationgk reorgenization of

_i{ntelligonce.: ‘B to dn Gxgumeot for @ Gragtic evarhaul of the State:
Department,

"6

SECRET



--- Page 16 ---
z aanes

:
;

SECRET
15.

‘The structure which would meet the criteria suggested in this
memorandum would be ee follows:

ec:

Ranta.oneannane

1) The State Department waulé be granted general
clearance authority over all clandestine activity. This
might be effectuated on the British mode! by the appointment
of a Deputy Underscerétary of State for Intelligence, who
would act for the Secrotery in these matters and who might
serve as chairman of a Joint Intelligence Board.

2) The Joint Intelligence Board would include repre-
gentatives from all clements in the intelligence Soramonity |
and also from the White House.

- 3) Fhe operating branches of tho present CIA would be
reconstituted under gome blameless title {the National Informa-
tion Service}. . This new agency would be charged with regponsi-~
bility for clandestine callection, for covert political operations
and for paramilitery activities, I would submit projects to the
Doputy Undersceretary of State for Intelligence far clearance.

In general, the agency would bear somewhat the game relations
éhip to State as the Digarmament Administration and ICA
presently do. —

4} A second eemlindependent | agency would be ect up, again
bearing a blameleaa title (the Foreign Regsarch Agency), coordic
nate with the operations agency. This agency would be charged
with responsibility foe collation and interpretation. fe would

iaciude CIA/DDI, the Bureau of Intelligence and Research is

State, and the various eervice functions now carried on by CLA

(photographic interpretation, biographicat files, fer¢ign broadcast
monitoring, scientific intelltgence, mapa, avert collection, ete. },

lt might well be Iocatad in the GIA building in McLean.

Arthur Gebleginger, jy.
The Attorney General
Mr, Bundy
Mr. Dungan

SECRET


