
--- Page 1 ---
176-10011-10152)

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

JFK Assassination System
Identification Form

~ Agency Information

AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER: 176-10011-10152
RECORD SERIES: NSF
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: WH
FROM:
TO: THE RECORD
TITLE: MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
DATE: 06/08/1961
PAGES: 4
SUBJECTS :
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: — Secret
RESTRICTIONS: IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: 05/08/1998
OPENING CRITERIA: UPON AGENCY REVIEW
NSF:M&M:SPECIAL GROUP(CI) MEETINGS:6/61-10/62:BOX 319:PENDING NLK-92-104

COMMENTS:


--- Page 2 ---
-

Sty

8 Jeue 3963

MEMORANDUM FOR, THE RECORD —

suBIBCT: Minutes af Spacial Group inciting - Teno 3981 Py
Seta uateenrnnonehent

+ Mesers. Bewtos, ‘Gilpatric, Bundy, Ralph Bungan, Suites

(Me. Buagan, Specicl Avcigtant ta the President, participated
ia the Special Group meeting fev the Stvet time.

1. congo |

Mesare. Beoten ond Gipateleagrond with so plan forthe
Gemgo, Bae.’ Bowles conditioned Bis agproval on the accoptaice of
the thres provisicns est forth in the State Department interual .
merrandwas dated 6 Jeng 1961 (copy attached). Br. Dulles indicated
that these conditions wore -secepted by the Agency but he gaintad out
thee the condities which proserfbed the inelusicn of Gizenga se bia
representative to the Leopoldville Grsverament involved the danger
of Qeinging fa-0 representative of Moscow whe would ettampe to
eubvert.and central the giverument. Bir. Bundy fele that he could
mat sppedes this program without refercnee te higher sathority.

Bate wee mado of the pacotbility that if Gieeags decided te
particigate in 8 new Leepotiville Goveramant ox Parligmoent, be hnd
ample reswaraes. and @ chance, eventually to win centecl of tho government.

a. Rentow of Polttical action Po

Mr, Randy steted that because of the special acaattivity of Oo

. programs involving covert suppers ta polifieal parties and leaders: a

io friendly ceustrias, Ngher authority wished to review them.
Mz. Bundy proposed Thursday oz y Pelday, Suse bith or 16th, for
thie guepade.

Mer. Bowles cuggeated hae we o wight Bok to have a general
policy enunciated regarding this wublect. Sther mermbare af the Greup



--- Page 3 ---
Po guggested that & genoval policy statement asight not be eutiicienthy -
Mexible te take eax uf apecial situations whieh might arise.

Réx. Belles neted that the pertinent NSC paper authorized :
programs ouch es that under digeusdicn, but emphselned dat he
would ouly undertake this type of activity {f it was fully supported
by-the Department uf Biate and higher authority’ Ha sfated that he

| fully apprecizted the sensitivity of thie type of activity. Mz. Dulles

' gaté, however, that be felt the Special Group choold have some
iatiteds to make decisions on thove mations within the generat policy
which might be Jald dowa-by Mighes ‘sutharity withent gafervat of ;
each specific case far approval. .

"Bite. Sundy seated that he would like igs. Dungan te work with
our people ta tho preparation of the briefing to be gives highsr
authority next wosk.

Ce , - 3. Release Procedure - Fran
mc Beeauge of the contingency aatare of thts propesad and because

ee af the cowerdsd apeudn, discussion of thie matter wae deferred to the

is |

- ‘ghie fitght was epproved with Chinnt persoanst. There. wes eome
discussian ’s to the desizability of having Scath Viamamess conduct
these missions but it wie pointed out that they did net have the

competence.

seaport ene

mS “This eones wae approved. 32. wee noted that a peogrows report |
had just been recetved.aud it ons suggentod das thie ropart be .
" co distetbaend to misishore af tho Group. ;

har, Bondy veiterated the decision that covert Aanexes should —
ast be procoasnd through tho NSC machinery. Beaute of tha interest
of iighor autherity in politcal actien oporatiens in friendly arcas {ace
. ftem 3) and since this anzes was written ia rather broad terms, bo :
would Hhke to check tt farther. — ;

wo annet) naava.cnanennr ne. 4


--- Page 4 ---
. TAGES missin. bz, Dulles duated his opintes Gat the we of

te. Helles stated thes -wille he wanted ts. open disenasion ef _
tis matter at this meting, he did nyt expect & finel dacition to be
maids watt {she Bae} meeting fe. Roady noted ibe previsus réserva~
Sparx trees ford the fact Chat hie sancten i bean

three times previously. ir

. gansidere s bat at ap eaveent infermation witch TACHLE weak

produce and suggested the possibte use af U.S. porteinel fer the

anacehdent.. "the ave of well qua ified Chinst crews, io his spinten,
seouls mitigate the etek tuvtived. tewas agreed that the prapeaal
would ba sapubenttied later,

& Hicowmgus,

' Bae. Dallee cutlined tho saturo aad wale of tho equipment
roméiniag at Pusarte Cabecin and of the need for negotiating with

| Samosa te effent its eucovery. ‘He indicated that some quid pre que ,
wend yeabsbly be involved in nchteviug an agreement with Sumeia.

Rr, Bandy stated thet. this was a matter that should be negetinted

‘betwsen the Agency aud the Department <f Siete and xed act be again -

natanred to the Special Gronp.

involved a eunsiderable amount of mocey and thet the matter ghouls
be rencives atan earty date. It wee agreed that the Agaacy should -
digcuse thie. matter with Daputy Aasigtent Sccretany Movales-Corstoa
end cuhentt # Hermast snnpestd ta co aesiy muatting ok fhe Hpeciet Geen

tae. Duaily soqnasted that eaptee uf the sntantes of Spncbal Gerenp
meetings: be formneded to mombers of the Grvap fer approval aad



--- Page 5 ---
ee

#itestien. Br. Gilpottic nated the very stese eelationehip beteesn
his siiiee and the Ageney and felt chat bo gould obtain all the
infesmoetion he neaded without geceiving 4 copy of thé miguies.

My, Bullet suggested that because of the eansitivity of ihete records
and beckave same of thé egiereuces contained therein involved tha
use of peoudenyme, the need of ihe Group might ba satisfied by
having eiptes of the minutes of each mesting made avalinhis at the
asubgequent meeting for epprevl. Meuare. Bundy. and Dangan agreed
03 the submigeian of the mingtes fer approval ata subsequent mecting
‘bat stated det they might Rave @ used fer a complete record immediately
at hand t naawer ‘Say Quacttans put to then by Bigher authastty.

gHOMaS P. SCHREYER

4-


