
--- Page 1 ---
176-10030-10422| [2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY : NARA .
RECORD NUMBER : 176-10030-10422
RECORD SERIES : Sorensen Papers
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR : .
FROM : Schlesinger, Jr.
TO : President Kennedy
TITLE : Memo to President CIA Reorganization
DATE : 6/30/1961
PAGES : 15
SUBJECTS : CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE : Memoranda
CLASSIFICATION : Unclassified
RESTRICTIONS : 1C
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 8/21/1998
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : Sorensen Papers: Classified Subject Files 1961-64 Box 47, CIA,
Document 1a.

WW 49061 Docld:32622644 Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
SECRET SEE SANErr2eO
; . YERSELON .
UM ING

Tv : .

June 30, 1961

“| MEMORANDUM FC. THE PRESIDENT

| SUBJECT: CIA Raorgmaization

l@.

1 submit the following views ‘as one who worked in CSS during the
/ war and served aca periodic CLA consultant in the years since..

TO THE. DETERIORATION

“Gn balance, CIA's record has probably been very good. dn the
nature of clandestine eperations, the triumphs of an ee
_ agency are unknown; all the public hears about (or should hear:
“-, bout} are its errore, But, again in the nature of the case, an
“agency dedicated to clandestine activity can afford damned {sw
visible errors. . The important thing to recognise today, - ‘a my —
‘judgment, is that the CLA, as at present named and constituted; has
- about used up its quota. Bs margin for future error is practically
oe 7 non-existent. ~ Cne more CIA debacle will shake faith ‘considera! ;::
2" in US'palicy, at home se well as abroad. And, until CIA is visibly
reorganised, it will (as in the Algerian instance) be widely & blamed for |
. _Bavelopre ate of which is. is wholly fonocent. ST,

The argument. of thie memorandum ‘oe that CIA's ‘trouble can i be traced
© the autonomy with which the agency has been permitted. te opera:
and that thie autonomy is dua to three main causes: © (1) an inadequate
doctrine of clandestine operations; . (2) an inedecuste conception of

NW 49061 DocIda:32622644 Paae


--- Page 3 ---
HE’: KENNEDY

* (proTocoPTED @y 7

_ tection against xicCarthyite attacks, CIA was able to attract and hold
- a larga number of edie and independext-minied men, The mere it.

dey

"py ins thane that Stave had begun to be fully aware of the probleme

SECRET . \oL-

2.

-  eenception of the. reintionshtp between eperations and intelligence.
'. The memorandum 81:0 suggests ways in which seme of these probe
lems can perhaps ‘be sllevinted:

|b GIA Autonomy
; CA. ‘conducts three ::.ain forme of eacret work; clandestine intelll- _

gence collection: co~ort pelitical operations; and paremilitary

. activities. it carr::s as these functions with relative autenemy.

The reasoag for the autonomy are bistorical.

‘“Whea ciA began, th<« State Department, still thinking too much in
: ‘terms, of its traditienal missiscas in foreign affairs, losked onthic .”
"7, new venture with suspicion and renounced the oppertunity to seize
- firm contrel of CiA.aperations. did nat, tor example, tryto -

establish any effective system of clearance for CIA activities; and
some ambassadors frankly preferred act to know what CiA wea up to

*-- fa their countries. After 1953 the fact that the Secretary of State and
"the Director of Central Intelligence were brothers further confizmed .

“CIA's # Independence {rom supervision ys State Department desks.

ite personnel. .- ress to ctstrip the Sate Department ix the us aa
‘mnere perhaps because Alien Dulles gave his people courageges pro- .

added brilliant activists to its staff, the mare menmeatura ite perstions

created by as active: snd sutoncmoss CIA, tt had long since missed
the chancs to establish its. own ultimate authority, | _, While Btate:: ‘s

NW 49061 Docia:32622644 Pade 3-0-2"...


--- Page 4 ---
z. SECREZ tit aCe
7 deo,

Yor its part. CLA bed developed a whole esries of functions peral-
leling alyeady existing functions of the State Department, and of

the Defense Cepart::.ant aa well. Today it has ite own political
desks and milltary -affe; it haz in effect its own foretgn service;

it hag (or bes bad) !:6 own combat forces). it even hee its own aly
force. Rs ancual * wadget io about times that of the State Depart-—
ment. The contemporary CiA posesaces many of the characteristice

ef a state within a state.

- IL Dectrine

Theugh CLA's eutenv:ay developed for historical reasons, it has been
able to endure because there is no doctrine governing our conduct of
_ > Clasdestine operations. Tae prodlem of doctrine fer CIA te the extent .
"to which its various clandestine missions are compotibie with a free ,
* and open society,

O THE-DETERTORATION) ==

Iz iz idle to argue that, because the Communists can do such-and-seeh,

_ We are freo to de it tco. Communism is a ereed nurtured in con-
epiracy: end the whole point of Communist social and political orga:.i-
sation ie to make conspiracy effective. If ‘fighting five vith fre’ moacs
contracting the frecaoms traditiazally enjoyed by Americans in order

| to give more freedo- to CIA, no ane seriously wishes to do that. Yet.
I do. not feel that wo have tried rigorously to think through the limits .
which the maintenance of an epen society places on cecret activity.
Until this fe done, CIA's rele will not be clearly defined and under- —
stood. The problexs which must be faced is: what sort of secret :
activity is caneistent with the preservation of a free secial order?

- We roust begin, I believe, by accepting the fact that the United States a
will continue to be a astion in which politicians will ask questions and

_. Make speeches, reportere will dig out stories, newspapers will pub-. _
lish editorials, individuals, driven by promptings of coascience, ‘will

blurt’ Out things ‘harmful to the state, and $0 on. ' We do not wish ¢

“Cust operate. -.In short, they constitute the preblem; and,.as
General Maraball vaed to say, “There! s no point in fighting the

aww snare Wana. P9E9N9GAA Dana 4


--- Page 5 ---
SECREN .
. \aw
a7

_ There follows from tals, I would think, the conclusion that secret
_ gctivities are permissible so long a9 mey do nat corrugt the
' principles and practices af our society, that they cease to be
7 : permissible whea their effect ia to corrupt these peinciplse aed
er practices: :
Rach form of secre: activity presents its own problem. Clandestine
innelligence collecti-::\ hae been a traditional function of the national
- etate. Hs rules and usages sre fairly well establighed. — Ia the
- min, espionage, if conducted with discretion, ehould present nv.
- great problem. Hoesver, when conducted with an open checkbook
and a broad mandats even espionage can begin to push agninst the
limits of secret activity in an open society. I consider later, for
example, the questica of the Controlled American Source (CAS) sid .
whether the overdoing of CAS is act beginning tobarm other se: wing
i of the government, - . on

Covert political operations present a trickier problem. Occasions

_ arise when it is necessary to subsidise newspapers, politicians anc
organisations in other countries. But corruption of the political life
of another nation is not u responsibility to be lightly assumed. 1.
wonder whether CIA tue net dons too much of Siis for the Joy of it.
Paramilitary activitics create an even more difficult problem, if .
enly because the problems of concealment ere oe mach more difficult.

In general, I would suggest that any secret operation whose success ie
' depenéent on the suppression of news, on lytng te Cengreesmen and

journaliete and on the decegtion of the electorate should be undertaken

only when the crisis ie so considarable that the gains really seem to
_ Outweigh the dissdvantages. Thies suggests that the sise of the pro-
"+ posed operation may be of crucial importance. “Small operations can |
| be done with a minimum ef accompanying corruption. The greater.
’ the visibility of the eperation, the more ite success depends on |
_\* thwarting the impelees and denying the values ef an epen secisty,
"the riskicr if becemee, aod the more uxgent it 19 thet a2 overs
"ease be made for ite necessity. 7 a ”

‘In short, wiles confronted with a proposed operation, we must not |

wa 40NE1  Nodta-29699K4d Pane A


--- Page 6 ---
12. Cperations and olicy

Clandestine activitie should be assessed not only in the context
of their relationship won Open society but also in the eentext of theiz
relationship to United. States foreign policy. .

"CIA operations have .ot bean held effectively subordinate to U.S
fareign policy.

1, Clandestine ictelligence collection is, by charter, free from
State Depertrnent control. This tact exposes American foreign policy
to a multitudes of embarragsments when CIA is discovered recruiting
agents or developing sources in a friendly country. The recent
Singasore cago, when CLA, without netice te the Consul General,
tried to subvert & member of the Special Branch of the Singapore
Police providee an instructive example. After complications of
. ludicrous complexity, incloding an attempt to subject the recruit to
a Me-deiactor test, it turned out thet the recruit kad long since
informed hie superiors of tha CLA approsch and was leeding CLA
inte a trap which, when sprung, produced considerable emberrass-
ment to relations batween the US and the Slagapore government.
There have been troublice of a comparabic sort in Pakistan and in
Japan (wheve a group of Chinese Nationals were smaggied inte Sescho
to work in a CIA-NSA operation), = =—

CLA hae caid that, in such cases, neither the Embassy nor the Dapar:-
ment in Washington is normally informed of this type of eperation.
in short, no one knows how many potential probleme fer US foreign
poliey -- and hew much potential friction with friendly states -- are
being crested at this moment by CIA clandestine intelligence operations.
Surely there is an argument for permitting State to decide whether the
advantage to be gained by the operation (e.g, the information derivatis
from en agent withis the Special Branch of the Singspore Police) out-
weighe tho risk (e.g., cxmepersting the iccal government and shakin,
ite confidence both in our purposes and in cur eense), Clandestine
” ingalligence opervations should plainly de cleared beth with the Depart -
ment of State and (save for exceptional inetences ead on agreement of
the Secretary of State) with the local U.S. Ambassador,

|

)

OF THE ORIGINAL

,

i

2
ao
=
-
4
a
a]
Lit on!
a
ul
e
ld
a
w
zr
—
10
ae
pu
a3
a.
y>
ia
<
ae
oo
Ll
aa
>
(=)
ud
2
2
i
x
Ww
a =
pe
>
wo
2
Ww
al
a
=
Oo
a
=
a
=
a

‘
wer 40NL4) Noola-%W9KI9KAA Pane 6


--- Page 7 ---
_ SECRET; ;
6. Ve

2. Covert politisel operations technically require State

Department clearance. In practice, however, ClA has often been
‘able to seize the initiscive in ways which reduce State's role almost

to that of 3 rubber ota: am

. Thia haa been partly : ue consequence of the superior drive and .
_ activism of CIA perz-unel, especially as compared with the diffidecce z
of State Lepartrcent persornel. Yor example, when men come to Ci!
with the assignment ut developing cevert political campeigne or
organizing coups or preparing for paramilitary warfare, these men
patorally fall to work with ingéavity and seal; they probably foal that
they are net earning their pay uniese, say, they organise a6 many
coupe #9 possible. The coucopt of ‘contingency planning’ bas
legitimatized the concrete preparation of operations et Sy
in a hypethetical stage; people did not at first notice that ‘estineescy
‘planning, " when carried to the stage of recruitment and training oi
personnel, crustes a vested interest which often transforms contin-
gencies into apparent recessities. Thus, if a group is assembled
and revved up on a contingency basis, then the failure to carry the
” project through (it ls orgued) will invite the disappointment and
alienation of the greups eo the pressure increases to fellow through |
en what bad stasted 94 # pure speculation. Tais wae a central factor,
of course, in the Cuban decision -- the fact that dlebandment of the
Cuban force in Guatemala just seemed to crests toe mazy problems and
embarrasumente. ving entered inte reisiions with persenalitico in
foreign lanée, CIA has sometimes seemed te feel thet we must thors-
after do pretty rcuch what they wact -- or else they will Now security
oF even go over to the Communists. Tels, TPProach hag made us ex ;
occasion the prisoners of our ows agente. *

ToraTion} ~ oe . a

THE DETER

ET.

THE KENNEDY TBRAR

Ee]

“" #We become prloaere of our agente in enether ‘eense too. The Cuta::

| episode leaves the otrong impression that CIA is not able t@ control its -
.”  qwe lowelevel operstives.. While the CIA people in Washingten are iron
veyed exceptionally high quality, the men sttracted to fleld jobe ars | sore -

“_{PHOTOCOPTED By ‘

ruled Ca reportedly administered te De. Redeifa Nodal Tazeis
. ‘ether democratic Cebene tie 2 Fepreary o> all these hes eshtan

M 49061 Docla:32622644 Page. 7


--- Page 8 ---
ws AQnK4t

GINAL,

OF THE ORY

mo. le

It hag meant too the ihe State Department, often spprised of an |
operation only in it» ater stagee, is under great pressure to

endorse the operatic. ac already mounted because af the alleged

evil consequences a exerciaing avete. I wel] remember Tom
Mann's remark the vay the decision was made to go abead on Cuba:

"I would never have iavored initiating this cperation; but, since it

has gone as far as it has, 1 do not think we can risk calling it off.
Moreover, at atime vhen there te incressing premium on activior,
State, whan it queet.icns CLA operations or initiatives, caste itself in

a prissy, sissy, negative role. The advoente of clandestine activities
sceme ‘tough' aod realistic: the epponent has te invoke such intangibles

‘ae the reputation of the United States, world public epinion, "What

do we say in the United Nations?", ete., and seems bepelessly
idealietic, legalistic and ‘soft, '

The result of CIA's initiative in covert political ‘operations has beea

to create situations chich have ferced policy an the State Department.
This was not the or:;, al idea behind CIA. As Allen Dulles wrote

in hie 1947 memorandum to the Senate Armed Services Committe,

“Tne Central Intelligence Agency should have nothing to de with polic;. '
Yet, inthe years since, CIA has, in effect, ‘made’ policy in many
parts af the world. A number of governments still in power know
that they bave even txen targets of CIA attempts at overthrow ~- not

8 State of mind caicuated to stimulate friendly feelings toward tha

- United States.. Indengeia, of course, is a prime example.

This experience suggests that the present system by which CIA notifies
State ef a projected covert operation is inadequate te protect US
faterests. There must be seme means by which State can be informad
_ of euch cperations at.an early enough stage te affect the conception
" and preliminary planning of the operation. Otherwise CIA will con-
tinue to confroct State with propositions having potential impact on
foreign policy bus st too late a point to subject that tmpect te reason-

’ able control.
: 3. The Controlied American Source (CAS) representa a particula:
aepect of CLA's encroschmect on policy-meking functions. CIA today

hae nearly ac many people under official cover overseas an State --
3900 to 3700. About 1560 of thees are under State Department cover

Ranta: 29699844 Pane 6


--- Page 9 ---
7

8,

(the other 2200 are >:ssurcably under military or other nen-State
official cover). Or: ginally the uee ef State Department cover for

(CIA personne] vac s-pposed to be strictly limited and temporary.

The Lolisa-Correa-. ickson report stated in 1948, “The CIA should
not use State Departrcnt cover as a simple answer to ali ite problen:z,
but should proeced ti develep its own outside cover end eventually in
this way and throug: increased efficiency of ite overseas personnel,
find a way to tumpe: ws demands upon the State Departmest.” Noz--
theless CIA has oteaiily iocreased ite requisitions for official cover.

There are several :~asona why CLA has abandoned its original inten?:..
_ ef deveiozing eyate:.:6 of private cover. 2 ie easier to arrange ces:
thrungh State; it is iess axpensives it is quicker; -it facilitates ins
szcurity <4 operations a8 well as cf communications; i insures a
_ pleasanter life for the CIA people. But the effect is to further the
CIA anercachmert on the treditional functions of State.

in come missions, | understand, CAS pevsonnel outnumbers regular
Stato Department persennai. in the American Embasey in Vienns,
out of 20 pergons Listed in the October 1960 Foreign Service List as
being in the Political Section, 16.are CAS personnel; of the 31 officers.
lsted as engaging in reporting activities, over half are CAS. Cfthe —
13 officers listed in the Political Section in cur Embassy in Chile, —
11 are CAS. | Cn the day of President Kennedy's Inauguration 47 perce:
of the political afficers serving in United States Embaceies were CA5.
Sometimes the CIA mission chief has been in the country lenger, ba»
more money at his dispesal, wields more influence (and is abler) thax
the Ambassader. cites be bas direct access to the local Prime
Minister. Sometimes (ee during a critical period in Lacs) he pursed
a different policy from that of the Ambassador. Also he ia genorally

‘well known locally as the CIA representative, |

DUE: TO THE DETERIORATION j

OF--THE ORIGINAL:

LIBRARY.

a

In the Paris Embassy tocxy, there are 125 CIA peepie. CIA in Fars
hee long since bogur te move inte areas of political reporting normally | .

occupied by State. The CLA mea doing overt internal political repurti:.:

outnumber thoes in the Embassy's political ee section by 10-2.. Cis ines

PHOTOCOPIED BY THE KENNEDY

oe . ~
7 . . ees cos ee tye eet a ci ese ee Lae oes oe.

HW 49061 DocId:32622644 Page 9


--- Page 10 ---
\q-
Pee .

the night of the Gen- cals‘ revolt in Algeria, passers-by nated
with amusement the: the top floor was ablzse with lights. (Iam
faformed that Amb seador Cavin was able to secure entrance that
night to the CIA off: es coly with difficulty. }

CLA is apparently vue firraly committed to the CAS approsch as a
permanent solution :or its problems, RB is pressing to have ClA
pecple given the ranx of Counselor. Before State loses control uf

_more and more of its presumed overseas personnel, and befere CA“:
becomes permsnentiy intagrated into the Foreign Service, it would

. em important (2) to aasure every ambassador the firm contre}
over the local CAS station nominally promised in the NSC Directive
‘of January 19, 1961, and {b) to review the current CAS situation witi:
an “re toa steady redaction af CAS personnel.

THE DETERIORATION |

¥

: 4. Pazamilitary warfare, I gather, ie regarded in some quarters

gaa @ purely technical matter, easily detachable from policy and thore-
fore a proper function ef the Department of Defense. Yet there is
almost no CIA function more peculiarly Copendens en the political
context than paramilitary warfare.

There are several reasons for this. Fer ene thing, a paramilitary .
operation is in its nature a large and attributable operation and ther=i.;,
as suggested above, clashes with the presuppositions of our open
society, (These considerations need not apply, however, to the
training of, say, the South Vietnamese in guerrilla tactics er to the

. wapport of alraady existing guerrilla activities.) For anether, the
moral and political srice of direct paramilitary failure is acute for
us. Communists, when they stimulate paramilitary activity, are
doing what the world expects from them; when we de ft, we appear

- to betray cur own professed principles and therefore cannet afford to

| eompound delinquency by defeat, Moreover, as the reeent Algerian

’ episode showed, oncs we convince the world that we are committed to 2
paramilitary endeavor, we will be blamed fov all certs ef things. Acc,

' . gs the recent tractora-far-prisoners episode shewed, when we dc se::1 |
men to possible death, we cannet lightly write them eff and close the
beaks. The Commmuste. an the other hand, Mave ne seruplee about.
Hewideting © looing show. .

HE KENNEDY LIBRARY. DUE TO

OF. THE’ ORIGINAL. *::

?

iy

PHOTOCOPIED @Y T.

a . . fn mt eee a a a in Ma eine a aor nen ne a ee

NW 49NA1) = Darld:37622644 Pace 10


--- Page 11 ---
SECRET, 10. Vo

- Mereover, guerrilla warfare is fought, mech mere than military
men ordinarily realise, in en ideclogieal context. The guerrilla
. ‘gucceeds when his program enlists grassrocts suppest; and it ia
| very difficult indsec: to beat him when the countryside ts with Bin. -
- Van Mook told Cenoral Marshall in 1946 nat to worry about the ©
guerrillas in Indonsata; “we are sending 50, COO men out there
: and will clean the situation up in the three months." Marchal,
: who bad had experic--ce fighting guerrillas in the Philippines,
_ veplied, “It won't L<« eo easy. You will find that they will bleed
_ you to Meath." Cyprus and Algeria illustrate the difficulty of over-
“- ? eexring guerrilla te sistance through sheer weight of military force.

. Serious gverrilla rovements have been defeated only three times oince .
" the end of the Second World Var: in Greece, because Tite's defection -
closed the sorthera vosder; in the Philippinse; and in Malaya. © ic ;
:" the last two cases the guorrilla resistance ended because of tae oo
a combination off olitical ang mil , countermeasures. The at strugaic

HE“ DETERIORATION

_, the miade and hearts oi the people; it therefore inveived not e217.
_ paranillitary operations but a vast educational program, organization an
‘' of trade unions, political reform and an offer of national independencs. mo,
- |. If the guerrillats power lies in bis revolutionary program, the answer oo
"lies in part tn meeting the angeds which enable the guerrilla to rouse -
the countryside, "Without 6 political goal," wrete bso Tee-tung, ;
. “guerrilla warfare rust fail, ae it mast if ite politseal objectives do. a
“.” pet eoiacide with the aspiraticas of the peeple and if theiz eympathy.
. eeeperation and aseistance cannct be gained," He added, “Do wo | .
‘| | want the support of the maceeo? Hf wa do, we must go amaeng the a a
"= masses; arouse them to  acttivitys concera curecives with wets weal’.

For these cana ‘rccumecy sli ae be sisi Py
primarily a military weapon. Rt is primarily @ political weapon and -
at.


--- Page 12 ---
. Vee
Se .

5. How to Esta:dish Policy Control? Here I wonder whether the
British experience «ight sot be of value. The notable feature of tha
British intelligence -vetem is the determination to keep clandestine

activity under atric: “oreign Cflice contral. This control ie achieved
. int a j number of fwayr

a) Secret intelligence Jorvice (1-6) itealf operates under
_ the direction of tho Joint Intelligence Committee, which has a
' Foreign Cifice :aairmen (until recently Sir Patrick Dean, who
is now the Eritich representative at the UN) and which includes .
the Service Inte:ligence directors and representatives of the
‘Colonial Cifice and the Commonwealth Reiztions Office as well
as the Chief of ‘.3,

— ..d) baste poitical warfare directives are erigiaated, pot |
‘by 85, but by tac Information Research Department inthe.
' Foreign Céfice, uften in consultation with an interdepartmental
Working Group wc International Communist Fronts, and under
- the ultimate co.<rol of the Superintending Under-Secretary of

the Permaneat ° “ater Secretary's Department im the Teselgn
:  Chfice, .

O. THE DETERIORATION

e) SIS covert political action campaigns mast net eaty con-
“form to Foreign. Office directives bet must be cleared with the _
_ Appropriate Foreign Office geographical desks. o

a working groupe under IRD chairmanship govarn epera- a
" tlons in special areas, euch as, for example, Sine-Seviet rela- ~
tons or the ¥ World Youth Featival,. ;

points ‘subject.to State Departs as clearence clearance to be

NW 49061~.DooTa:32622644: Padé -22-


--- Page 13 ---
SECRET ee

12.

" enforeed by directiv»s, by State Depertment chairmanship of
. working groupe, a: by the infiltvation of State Department .
' personnel into the a ebligonce agency.

:  Chvicusly this set-~2 would not gueceed, however, unless the
-.: State Departraeat itself were prepared to overcoms He inbred |
nabite of diffusion, -agativiam and delay ‘and te take a firm and
_parpesaful stip « on ine ettustion.

“s IV) Cperations anc iotelligence

. The relationship ber~een oparations and intalligescs raises partice-
“"lavly pespleaing questions. ‘Intelligence’ includes twe separshic
“; @etivities: elandéssiae cellection; and research, saslysis and
. | evaluation, The firet desle with that small portion of raw inteili-
:. gemea procured by secret means (Mr. Dulles estimated ia 1947 that -
... "a proper analysis of the tatelligence obtainable by. . . overt, .
_ normal, and aboveboard means wold supply ve with over 60 percent,
I should estimate, of tho information required fer the guidance of oux
” nations! policy"); the second lovelves the collation and interpretstic::
of sat forme of fotelligenss,. hrwaver ohtetaed ass the preduetine of . ‘
. catimates.

HEDETERIORAT ION

2:

0

: “Under the British system, ‘clantostine collection to entrusted te the oh
Secret Intelligence Service. The research, snalyeis and eetimating
fanction 9 located in the Foreign Office Resoarch Department. — Ls

“: | Under the American eyster, CLA has responsibility fer beth

get's Bereau of Intelligence and Research eles hes reeserch snd
: ‘analysis reaponsibilities; but, 4n practice, CIA hee establiched |

HW 49061 Docla:32622644 *” Page -43


--- Page 14 ---
SECRET —_
13,7".

The argument again»: incorporating the research and estimate
function in State wa. nade by Dulles in 1947: "For the proper
judging of the situat:on in any foreign country it is important that
_ information szould ts processed by an agency whose duty it is to
-./ J, ° weigh facts, and to ‘raw conclusions from these facte, without:
'". "paving either the facts or the conclusions warped by the inevitable
: and even proper prs dices of the men whose duty tt is to determine
policy and who, havi-g once determined a policy, are too likely to
be blind to any facta which night Cent to Prove the pelisy $0 be
pores faulty."

Precisely the game aegument | can be used with equal effect against:
the incorporation ai -bs research and estimate function in CIA ~- |
4ee., if intelligence is too closely connected with operations, then - ce
"these committed to + sarticular operation will tand to select out the: ve

: intelligence which validates the operation. ; Los

HE: DETERTORATION|:-.

Coviously both arg: cenks conclude tn & case for the establishment ef
a fairly. independent -esesrch and estimate group. But, if the Rai
\greap {e too independent, oue rune inte the opposite danger: that is
. ‘that neither policy sor. operetions will be ©, subjected te adequate — “F
: intelligence checks. -—.

Tha trouble with the Suban operation, tor example, wes not that
intelligence and opsratians were combined, but precisely that the © wot
- Coben-cperation evaded systematic intelligence judgment. The in-:
. ‘telligence branch (LUN) of CLA was never informed ef the existence ae
: @f the Cuban operation, Tha Office cf National Eatimates wes never.
| eked te comment. on the sesumption, for example, that discontent
had resched the poist in Cuba where « successful landing operatico.
would provoke uprisings behind the lines and defectiens from tha:
- . Militia, "In December aad February, the Céfiee of National Estimat
Produced gonezal sppratvals of the Caben situstion, But these *

WW 49061 - Docha: 32622644. Page 14 °°


--- Page 15 ---
Ocuncl . : -

\e

14, ”

‘that knowledge of the Cubeo operation, flaunted in Miami bere
by any aumber of Iic:--level agente in the operations branch of CIA,

. wag dented to even 20 top officials of the intelligence branch, Tho _
.. Bureau of intelligence and Research of the Dopertment of State ‘
: Eaew oven lses abou the Cuban operaticn.

= The problom, then, ig to have an R&E greep catfictently independent
‘ef both policy and operations to resist the pressure te maka the case
fox veoted ideaa anc iotcrests -- yet sufficiently clese to be able to
subject projected orerations or pelicies te the most intense and
ao searching scrutiny.

Where could this group be loested? If the » CIA were to become Poe
gubordinate ta State. aa 24l-6 ie to the Foreign Cffice, then the Ri... -
_. fanction might de vested in a coordinate subagency, somewhat inde- .
; pendent of both Stats and CLA, yet closely connected with both in ‘d:..
: to-day operations. The R&F eubagency would receive Intelligence .
> from CIA and from. “tate, 28 well as from the services and, of courec, ©”
" . fromm public sources. 2 would represest, in effect, a fueion of CIA/ ii
and State/ Intelligence and Xesearch. 8 might aleo take over certal:
of the service functicas new confided to CIA -- photographic interpre-. -..
tation, blographice. data, foreign broadcast monitoring, overt collec -
tien, maps, etc. . There might be in addition 6 Joint Intelligence Board.
- with representatives from all the Intalligence saenrioe ead withe
: ‘State Department or White Houge chairman :

Vv Conclusion,

. ‘The ay gument of thie roemorendum implies a fairly drastic rearrar
“pent of our presect intelligence set-up. 2 aleo implies the capacis.
.° ef the State Department to assume command ef the situation and toc
so in an effective and purposesul way.



--- Page 16 ---
SECRET

a

15,

- The structure: whic? would meet the criteria oggeeted | ‘tn thie
saetmorandarn woule 2 as follows:

. Y The Sta: Depart: ment would be granted general
.Ciearance auch :ty over al] clandestine activity. This .
roight be effectuaced on the Britiah model by the appeintmest
of a Deputy Uni secretary of State fox intelligence, who

_ would act fort! Secretary in thees matters and who might
BOrve BS chairn. +a of a Joint Intalligence Beard,

2) The Jour. “Intelligence Board would include repre-
oxtatives fror «il elements in the intelligence community
; and ales from tee Whi te e House. ,

3) ‘The operuting branches of the present CIA would be.
reconstituted under some blamolese title (the National Informa-
.- "then Service), This new ageacy would be charged with reeponai-. #

‘:. bility for clandestine collection, for covert political operations -§ sis
‘L) ..., endfor paramilitary sctivities, It would submit projects to the , :

. 7 Deputy Undersecretary of State for Intelligence for clearance. . ae

:.. In general, the agency would bear somewhat the same relation-
', ghip to State as’ the Disarmament Administration and ICA et
: presently do, Se '

Se ek ‘second ‘sensi cindependent ‘agency y would be set up, again
po bearing a Dlarmeless. title (the Foreign Research Agency}, coordi -
. ‘inate with the operetions agency. ‘This agency would be charged -

' with responsibility for collation and interpretatien, 1k would
“ include CLA/DDi, the Lureau of Intelligence and Research in .
> State, and the’ various service functions now carried on by CIA
(photographic interpretation, biographical files, foreign broadcaé
inonitoring, scientific intelligence, maps, overt collection, «
It might well be located in the CIA building in McLean, :


