
--- Page 1 ---
198-10004-10207| | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
: JFK Assassination System Date: 6/24/201

identification Form

Agency Information

AGENCY: “ARMY
RECORD NUMBER: —198-10004-10207

RECORD SERIES: CALIFANO PAPERS

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: ARMY
FROM: JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
TO: MR. JOHN H. CRIMMINS

TITLE: — INTERDEPARTMENTAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE OF CUBAN AFFAIRS: REPORT ON
THE STATUS OF ACTIONS DESIGNED TO COUNTER SUBVERSION

DATE: — 01/10/1964
PAGES: 62

SUBJECTS :
COUNTERINSURGENCY
CUBAN SUBVERSION
LATIN AMERICA SECURITY

DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: — Secret
RESTRICTIONS: EC
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: — 10/07/1997

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS : Califano Papers, Box 6, Folder 10. Army memo from Joseph Califano to Mr. Crimmins on status of
actions to counter Cuban subversion in Latin America with other related documents.

TF. K Ae sorsinAion Va Cco Sth Leu e”

Beoeseony Army EQ 18826
Declessity © Exclude — Exempt
Authority,

frstaeatemepuaneensenneeeneeee

E Reter %
Rion otc MAE py REEL, ADA

wa

v9.)

HW 50955 Bocld:32276192 Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
SECRET

Lt Col Haig/78029/8 Jan 64/md

RAN 1g

MEMORANDUM FOR MR, JOHN H. CRIMMINS
Coordinator of Cuban Affairs
Bepartaient of State

SUBIECT: interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban
Affairs: Report on the Status of Laplementation of
Actions Designed to Counter Subversion

Enclosed herewith ia the Report on the Status of Implementation
of Actiona Designed te Counter Subversion for the period 1 December
1963-1 January 1964. The format of this report adheres to the topic
outline disseminated at the meeting of the Subcommittee on Subversion,
September 13, 1963,

itis requested that this office be provided with 12 copies af the
final report. It is assumed that each of the representatives will have

an opportunity to consider the final report before it is forwarded.

Signed —
Joseph A. Califano, Jre

“Joseph A, Califano, Ir.
General Counsel

Enclosure “oF
As Stated -

Mr. Califano
Li Col Haig
ASG

DOWNGRADED AT 3 YE.R
DECLASSIFIED AFTE2 12 YEARS
. BOD DIR 5200.10

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 2

Ng /OT/T WSO

E9/0E/T Mal

‘Wanor ese



--- Page 3 ---
~ SECRER

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS TAKEN
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO
COUNTER SUBVERSION FOR THE

PERIOD 1 DEC 63 ~.1 JAN 64

3. Control of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas and Arms.

a. Guneral A. P. O'Meara, USA, Commander+in-Chicf, US
Southern Command, met with Vice Admiral Ray GC. Needham, USN,
Ghief of Staff to Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic and members of their
respective staff during the peried Ll to 15 December 1963. Discus-
sions encompassed methods of improving the existing surveillance /

intercept system throughout the Caribbean. Existing US plans were

veviewed, continuance of the ghip visit program institeted in Novem-
ber 1963 was agreed upon, and cambined exercises to test country
capabilities to intercept simulated intruding shige y were planned for
early execution. Discussions by General O'Meara. Were continued
with the Secretary of the Army and with representatives of the State
Department, CLA and the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff,

b. Commander Mine Division 44 with minceweepers US5_
STURDY and USS SWERVE completed visits to Central Arserican
porte in Gosta Rica, Nicaragua and Guatemala. Deficiencies in the
capabilities of all three countries to counter gubversive infiltration
were reported. Additional visite, designed to agatet in correcting
deficiencies, are planned. USCINCSO alae plane, through Cormmandera
of U8 Military Groups, to ageist in developing existing capabilities.

&. Based upon information from CAS Panama representative
on 8 November, USCINCSO directed US operations to find a emali
beat which wepartedly left the Colon Free Zone with a cargo of armeé
destined for the vicinity\of the Colombian-Venesuclan border. Day-
light vigual aerial surveillance flights were inetituted immediately,
with radar-equipped aizerait taking over eurveillance during hours
of darkness. Colombian and Veneauelan authorities were notificd
through US diplomatic channels, but ne direct communications
between US surveillance alreraft and Colombian forces in the
vicinity of the probable landing area were eutablished befers termi-
nation on 14 November. This offert, though not successful, has
evoked considerable affert by US Gtate Department, Defense Depart-
ment and CIA activities te improve capabilities and precedures,

© DOWHGKALAD RD a VERS

CECREL, DECLASSIFIED AreER 12

POD DIR 5200.19

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 3



--- Page 4 ---
SS ot Se — x ae

SECRET

d. Action wag commenced in the Colon area to provide means
to Keep track of shipa and boats eatering er leaving the Colon Pree
Zous in otder to monitor the movements of those suapeated of cderying
contraband. Adsiatamce te USCINGEO wan provided from the continents}
United States in carrying out surveys as to equipment required on ag
secretive a basi 29 possible, and special optical equipment to include
probable night television wae appreved by the Seeretary of the Army
for expedited delivery to USCINCSO,

e. A joint survey ang mobile training team from USCINCSO
eomtinued agsistance to Venesuclan authorities in improving indigenous
capabilities for surveillance and interception of intruders.

i. 4 US Southern Comumiind Operations Plan §0-63 was develeped
to provide for three levele of operational assistance to Venenuela in
surveillance and intercept operations. Representatives of the US Strike
Command and the Aly Defense Command visited USCINCSDO to assist in
developing detailed aupporting plans.

g- Infotmation wae obtained by USCINCSO concerning in-country
communications capabilities of Colombia and Veneauela to reecive and
digseminate surveillance information provided by U5. forces,

5.

Strengthoning of Counterinsurgency Capabilities. —

a. US Agmy trailing included the following: 13 etudenta from 6
sountsies comploted Cl operations course in the Canal Zone; 5 students
irom 5 countries completed Cl orientation course in the Ganal Zene;

24 shidente from § countrice completed Military Intelligence course
in the Canal Zone; 11 Chilean studante completed epecial Military
Intelligence orientation course: three Canal Zone-based Cl Mobile
Training Teame (MTT) carried out training programe in Ecuador,
Peru and Venezuela; and one Canal Zone.based CL MTT commenced
a twaining program of Panamanian National Guardamen.

b. US Navy training included the following:
{i} The Small Craft Inspection and Training Tear
(SCIATT) completed tralniag the third claes of Central American
nationals, bringing to 63 the total aumber of students trained since
May 1963. .

a

SECRET

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 4



--- Page 5 ---
SEGRET

(2) The semiannual maintensnce chock of two
Pasameanion 40 loot Coast Guard Udlity Bests (OGUBSs) was com~
mmonced on 16 December by am on-the-job training (OST) program.
Werk should be completed by 10 January 1944,

(3) Work waa temporarily suepended an two 49 foot
CGUGs in Costs Rica due te the lock of critical epare parte. Tt ia
anticipated work will be completed by 15 January 1964.

& increases in the stock levels of the Canal. Zone etockplle
of tiet contrel equipment were divected on 20 December 1963, [n+
creases will ensbie USCINCGSO to respond to urgent requests from
Latin American governments. Buildup concerned primarily tear
ge grenades, gas maske, carbines and shotgun smmunition.

gd. Final arrangements were made with the Bertram Beat
Company of Miami for dvlivery of 10 outbeard-inboard fiber glage
beate te Cabamis, Venezuela for use in the Lake Maracaibo area.
Beats, spares and an MTT will be delivered te destination by
i4 January 1964. .

¢. Action has bean taken te expedite the shipment of tadie-
alectronic gear to dameica for use in the joint surveillance program
designed to combat Caatre-inspired insurgency in the Caribbean
area. Lquipraent should arrive in Jamaica within the neat few weeks.

£, A US Air Force Air Commande MTT demonstrated in
Asuncion, Paraguay.

a. Other Special Actions.

a Latin American Military Communications System (LAMCS)
in Ecuador and Nicaragua and the Ground-to-Air facilitics in Ecuador
have been completed.

b. Authority to proceed with the LAMCS in Honduras was
received from the US State Gepartment on 17 December 1963. This
facility should be completed within 120 days.

. €, Emergency power units to improve reliability of U5 Army
and Air Farce Migsion radio stations in Colombis and Vanozuela,
hipped fgome the United States, arrived in Bogota and Caracas tea-
pectively.

3

SECRET

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 5



--- Page 6 ---
A 353 ; 091.411 020 031.2 201

é CUBA” . pine Staff _ JCS Reynolds, John
& > swcret . ao

5s

A

1-24-63

From: John Reynolds, KCS

To: C/Staff
Subj: Interdepartmental Coordinating Comte of Cuban Affairs: Rpt on Status of

Implementation of Agtions Designed to Counter Subversion (U) .

rw Incl: None
Dis: Col. Haig 1=3-64
FW 1-30-63

OSA 3004

ese v¥Sso

CO"e-T eqng

€9-O0€"T Ma

OSA FORM 3 . THIS PAPER BELONGS TO:
31MAY 490 ~ Administrative Support Group Division, Office of the
Secretary of the Army

* U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1963-6a3865 |
|

HW 50955 BDacld: 32276192 Page 6



--- Page 7 ---
CONFIDENTIAL

rk SAOGC/LitColHaig/1c/59856/18Dec63 -

o .
Ww
| a
w |
oS
\ December 18, 1963 a |
4 fond |
zo
MEMORANDUM FOR COLONEL WADE ROBERT
Office of the Secretary of Defense
(Unternational Security Affairs) ~
NR
G
SUBJECT: State Paper Entitled "Terrorism in the Latin @
American Countries on the Critical Insurgency List" Ss
a
. Enclosed herewith is a paper prepared by a member of the
Cuban Coordinating Committee at the Depariment of State (Mr.
William Bowdler, 182-3736} for use by the Department of State
representative at the Special Group (Counterinsurgency} meeting on 2
December 19, 1963, The paper was provided to this office by State ne
on December 18 with the request that Department of Defense &
comments, particularly on the basic memorandum, be obtained, .
we

Although this effice is very much concerned with the aspects of the
paper which deal with the problem of Gastro-inspired subversion,
the broader implications of the paper pertain to the Latin American
area and the military assistance programs related thereto, These
are, of course, matters of primary concern to your office. There-
fore, the attached paper is forwarded to you for appropriate action
with the request that your comments, if any, be coordinated with
this office so that they can be correlated to actions currently under

FF

a the purview of this office,
Signed? .
A. M. Haig
Lt Colonel, USA
L Joseph A, Califano, Ir.
General Counsel
Enclosure
As Stated 5
PY “OSA, OSG
Mr Califano
LtCol Haig

CONFIDENTIAL

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 7



--- Page 8 ---
; Co CONFIDENTIAL

SAOGC/ LtColHaig/1c/59856/18Dec63

December 18, 1963

MEMORANDUM FOR DIRECTOR, DDR&E
Office of the Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT: Anti-Sabotage Operations in Latin America

The Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban
Affairs (ICCOCA} has recently considered a CIA proposal to provide
guidance to US firme in Latin America confrented with Castro-
communist inspired sabotage of their facilities and assets. CLA has
contracted for the preparation of a report which will consolidate the
experiences of several US firms in Latin America in combatting
gabotage. After consideration by the ICCOCA this report will be
furnished through our country teams in Latin America to local US
firms to assist them in instituting appropriate anti-sabotage programs.

I would be most grateful if you would prepare a brief report
designed to supplement the CIA project which would include enumera-
‘tion of general guidelines which might be adopted by US firme in the
Latin American area in eombaiting sabotage. In particular, an
enumeration of known appropriate anti-sabotage devices available. on
the commercial market tegether with the manufacturer's names would
be most helpiul..

A member of my staff has discussed this project with Mr.
Pheips of your staff, who has indicated that DDR&E might be of assist-
ance in this matter based on.a recent field trip to Venezuela where
problems peculiar to that area were studied at the request of the US
Ambassador. It is also possible that commercial devices developed
for South Vietnam would have applicability in Latin America, Because
this project ie designed for distribution to several Latin American

“countries, it is requested that where possible guidelines be developed
which might have genergl application throughout Latin America, but
with emphasis on key subversive target areas, Present plans autici-
pate finalization of thie project by December 23, 1963.

Signed:

fc Me Haig

Ut Colonel, USA
foseph A, Califano, or.

Dmmads ASG \ General Counsel

Mr Califano

LtCol Haig CONF IDENTIAL

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page @

£9°8T=2T van €S€ vsO

€9°0€"T MI



--- Page 9 ---
OF OEC S65

MEMORANDUM FOR MR. JOHN HM, CRIMIMINS
Geordiuater of Cuban Atisies
Departnent of Pteate

SUBJECT: interdepartacntal Coordinating Comaiittes of Cuban
&tiiva: Report on the Stetas of implementation of
Actiona Designed to Counter Subversion

Raclosed herewith is the Rapevt on the Statue of Ixnplementation
of Actions Designed te Comer Subversion for the period 1 Nevamber-
i Becermber 1963. The format of this report adheres to the teple out~
ne dieweminated at tae meeting © od tbe Subcomunitiee on Subversion,
September 13, 1963. -

it is xequesied that thie office be provided with 12 copies of the
fined report, leds agqumed that omch of the representatives will have
an opportunity to consider the final rugort belers: it ig forwarded.

PPT 6E~)

Soe eeph & Galifane,JPrs
feseph A. Califanc, Ix.
General Counsel

Enelogure
Ag Stated

Mr. Califano 7
Lt Col Haig
ASG...
iene @ECUELYUA OF dHE VuWA
OLLIGE

DEC 18g ai yy ey

Seaupi witb

sia SECREyY"" om
OSA, ASE Contra! WOO gE.

DED DIR 0200029

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 9

vand ¢s€ Vso

Hoc eT

Ma

oats



--- Page 10 ---
SECREL

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS TAKEN
BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO
COUNTER SUBVERSION FOR THE
PERIOD 1 NOV ~ 1 DEC 1963. ,

3. Control of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas and Armes.

a Ona § Nevember 1963 the Commander-in-Ghied, US
Southern Command (USCINCSO) advieed the Joint Chiefs of Staff
(JCS) of reports concerning suspected subversive arma omugegling
into Venesuela or Colombia from the Colen Free Zone, Panama.
USCINGSO initiated surveillance at firgt ght on ¢ November 1963
to detect and track aurface veesele which might be engaged in the
subversive traffic. The ICS directed the Commander-in-Chief,
Atiantic (CINCLANT) to commence surveillance with radar eyuipped
aizegaft and to keep USCINCSO advised of all information. Sus-
pected craft were not positively identified or intercepted; however,
there were indications that an unidentified surface veasal off the
Rie Hacha area of Colombia and in Colombian waters wae probably
io contact with small boats operating from the Colorabian coastline
at night. —

b. An dizected by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, USCINESO
developed 4 plan uader which the United Sietes could provide apsiate
ance te Venenuelan forces, on three levels of participation, designed
to prevent the surreptitious movement of Castro~Communist arma
and perdonnel inte Veneauels. To be fully effective, the plan calls
for US elementa operating from Veneauclan territery which ia aot
considered a likely aubject for epproval by the Government of
Venesguala at the present time,

c. A joint gurvey and mobile training team of eleven men was
provided by USCINCZO te Venezuela on 22 Novernber 1963, upon
appieval of the concept by the Government of Venesuela, The pe purpose
of the team ia te train Veneguelan military personnel in organiaing
and operating 4 Joint operations <enter; in improving capabilities
im the plotting and ceordiaation of intelligence data, and aerial phote-
graphy; and in coordinating all Venesuclan military and paramilitary
organizations involved in surveillance and intercept operations.

. aaiaeieeen Ap gy INTERVALS.
; DECLASSIFIED AFT oR 12 YEARS
SECRET, DOD DIR 5200.10

—

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 10

re



--- Page 11 ---
PE MA SET SaERGinnEerare

x -

a. Two minesweepers from the US Adantic Command, USS
STURDY and USS SWERVE with Commander Mine Division 44 em-
barked, commenced a schedule of visite te Caribbean perts in Costa
Rica, Nitazagua and Guatemala. Visite are intended ta aasist each
country in improving ite coastal and off-shore gurveillance effert,
to improve intercept capabilities with reepact te the prevention of
infiltration of arma and subversive personnel through the countries!
territorial waters, and to eatablish procedures which would provide
for US aesistance in foal taterception when requeated. Visits in
November, undet the supervision of USCINGEO, covered Puerto
Limon, Costa Rica; Bluefields and Puerto Cabeza, Nicaragua; and
Puerto Barries, Guatemala,

bh, Seventy-cight Latin American officers, previdusly en-
rolled, were in attendance during Movember at courses stressing
counterineurgency conducted hy the US Asmy Canal Zone school.
Two officers graduated from the US Army Counteringurgency Course
at Port Bragg, North Carolina on 12 November 1963 and two addi-
tlowal officers are néw in attendance,

«. Seven US Army Countetinsurgency Mobile Training Teams
based in the Canal Rene, consisting of twenty officers and thirty-tive
enlisted men, provided tralaing in seven Latin American countries
during November.

a, Nine enlisted men from Chile were in attendance at
Marine Corps schools at Camp Pendleton, California in November.

e. 08 Cozst Guard training in small boat oparations wag
provided in the Canal Zone for Hifteen atudents fram five Caribbean
sountries in the operation and maintenance of forty-foot Caast Guard
utility boats. A Coast Guard mobile training team of one officer and
two enlisted men, based in the Canal Zone, provided training in
Costa Rica for the reconditioning of Coast Guard utility boats. Five
members of the Costa Rican Guardia Civil are receiving on-the-job
t2aining in connection with reconditioning of the hoate.

2

SECRET

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 1i



--- Page 12 ---
SECRET,

£ AUS Air Force counterineurgency team ef five officera
and eight enlisted men, based in the Canal Zone, provided training
for Ecuadorian Aig Force personnel in Ecuader.

g- At the request of USCINEO, and with the enthusiastic
guppert of the Venezuelan Government, a emall beat peogram has
been initiated to provide security for the Lake Maracaibo region.
Arrangements have been made through the US Navy under Military
Credit Sales agreement for the manufacture of six (6) 25-foct and
four (4) 31-foot inbeard-outbeard, fiberglass hull boats by Bertram
Boat Company, Miami, for delivery in December 1963 or early
January 1964. A SEAL-trained Mobile Training Team (MTT) of
one officer and five enlisted men will be provided by the Navy and
will report to the equipmont supplier in Hane to become fully ac-
quainted with the boats by 1§ December. The MTT will accompany
the boats to Venezuela and will remain up to two months in country
to provide necesaary familiarigation training.

6 Exchange of intelligence on Cuban Surye lanes.

a. Upon receipt of intelligence pertaining to augpected arma
amuggling from the Canal Free Zons, Panama into Colombia or
Veneauela, the USCINCS® relayed thig information to Colombia and
Venenuela by the Miltary Alerting Syatem. The US Ambassador ta
Colombia conveyed the information to the Government of GolGmbia.
Colombias Navy and Air Force elements were assigned incroasad
surveillance misstone in the Caribbean coastal area of Colombia by
Colombian military authorities aud reaulte of theiy surveillance
activities were provided te USCINCSO by the US Military Group
Commander in Colombia. The results of US air surveillance of
thé expected route and landing area, undextaken by US Air Ferce
end Naval air elements were transmitted to the US Military Group
Commander in Colombia for passage to the Colombian military
authorities.

b. The motor vessel BLUE STAR, of Pasamanian registry,
was apprehended by Ecuadorian authorities in Neveraber 1963 ae
it wae attempting the clandestine introduction of toutraband articles

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 12



--- Page 13 ---
SECRET

%

inte Reuader. Ship mevement infermation had been provided te the
US Naval Attache Bogota by the District Intelligence Officer of the
#ifteqnth Naval District. There was no apparent invelverment of
Cubaa arme or Cuban trained personnel in thie instance.

%. Other Spe ial Agtions.

&. Gonstrvetion ie now in progreas on the Latina American
Milltary Communications System (.AMCS) in Quite, Keuador; the
terminel station 16 empected to be completed in Deeamber 1963.
The station in Nicaragua is expected te be campleted in early
December 1963.

b. In responac to a request by USCINCSO, action wae taken
@n 15 Nevesnber 1965 to expedite delivery of communications equip-
meht required to implement a Jamaican integrated coastal surveillance
eystem, The syotem wae originally approved ae part of the $500
thousand one-time grant of Military Agsigtance material directed
by the President in April 1963, tut world-wide shortages af specific
iteras threatened to delay chipment in some cages until FY 1965. In
view of the urgency of thie requigement, priorities were adjusted
to provide delivery by 1 January 1964. The items include;

2 AN/GRE vadiod and iastaliation kits
AN/ARG 5 gadies
AN/PSM 6
Wattmeter

é. The Joint Chiefa of Staff and the Offtee of Public Safety,
State-ALD, are atudying the possibility of increasing the etock level
of curtain items of Riot Contsel Uguipmeit in the Ganel Zone, in order
to mect rapidly and effectively nimitiple contingencies that may cceur
ia Letin America, In the past, the sige of some requests have neces#i-
tated shiprnent of certain iteme directly from the United States, with
resultant increase in cost and time. USCINCSO has been aaked for
his reternmendations on eteck levels.

SECRET

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 13



--- Page 14 ---
OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
, WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301

INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

2 DEC 1963

veply refer tot
28590/63

SIGNED

Frank K. Sloan
Deputy Assistant Secretary

TED AFTER
OD DIR 5200.1

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 14

221 aNd ESE VSO

of

fon
wb
Ph
~
a.
_
a
Ge
°
i
fon
w



--- Page 15 ---
“Soper

26 NOV 1963.

’

ah, PRAGKE Eh, LOAM, Dep 4Agst See/Sel iSa
@egional Affairs}

HAIGH GEMERAL J. D. ALGER, UGA

BEAR 4AUMMAL W. FP. A. PERDT, USN

MATIOR CANTRAL FU. CARPENTER, Hi, WOAP

SRICARMDA GENERAL €. 7. QUILTER, Gea

Bepert on Stetud of lmplamentation of Acticns Designed to
Counter Uahwerstom (5)

; Reference: De Meme €b4, ssbject a6 shove, dated Septentbor i, A963
Atieched hereolth io a Geel dvatt of the Repart to the Prostdent of

the Subcommittee on Cuban Subvercion es Pragress Made Daring Soptes
1963 in Gurbing Coban Subversion in Latin America, -

itis gequacted thet comments, ang, bo provided this office by
1260 eure, 2 Deeamber 1965. The Gepastont of Defense. pevtior of
sulijwet report io haeed on. sobmisaions provided In resgoae te referenced

OTOP ARG.
Signed
_ deéseph A. Califano, Jr.
fesoph A. Califano, Jr.
General Counsel
Eechoanss
Ae Stated
ee: Mr. Yarmolinsky (OSD)
Lt Col Haig I. ;
Mr. Califano A ~
ASG-~ ; SECR RET EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC RECRADING
OT Sn ; DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY

SATE

OSA, RSG Central Mier, id

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 15

E9-OZ-1L_ PGND ESE VEO

€9-0€-1_ 8/3



--- Page 16 ---
gp CUBAN suBvERsioN re
oo MSTION TARED DURING BEPTENBRR 1953 EN CURBING |

338 56 Gatco Mae P- 9.49. °F


--- Page 17 ---
—

- a. . instructed Eohassy Tunis to gall to the attention

of senator attempts to establish North Afeica routes to.
or ponetraté ton of Africa. , :

a - that aD Agteflot flights te Cuba would be pernitted to.,

: : he Control of: Travel to and From Cuba.

Department of Sta ae

. of the 3 Foreign Miniatey our concern at increased evidence

‘tonteis has a valid case da + thearb ing any ‘Blee civil ele

Be Instructed Enbassy Conakry to contact Guinean Govern= .
: ment efficiais, veminding thea of, ehete past assurances,

SECRET

cuba, especially rhroagh Algeria, and our coavietion chat

use Conakry faelhitics, and to express guy concern at =

an recent indLeations that Leroflot was preparing to establish tes

. service tee Cuba via Gonalary.

and report en alleged landing and vefuelling of ¢ bana
: eireratt at Guadeloupe. Also double«cheekod Sirect ty.

~ ‘with the Shell Company, the supplier of the fuel. ee

“ 7 to use French Caribbean epenteneton for. flights to and:

“HW 50955_ Docld: 42376192" Page: 17 nee .

Gs Instructed Consulate Fort. ag France to > investigate

” Tngeructed Eabasey Paria to query the French Goverment ~«  —

© ahest alleged Cubena use of the Guadeloupe facility, and os

te express our eonters at this evidence of Cuba's atteapt

Brow

a SECRET:



--- Page 18 ---
noe

“HW 50955"

SEGRET
a ae

fram latin faoriea. a we, : : : L wee

— da “Instructed Esbaney Rie te make 8 new | approach to

wee the Brazilian Foreign Ministry to express our concern —
at Guba? g continuing use of “charter” flights to Brazil
"and the laxity of Braziiten officials ‘is the control of |

= passengers. During the course of the month the Braztlion
Government began th ghtening controls against Cabina 7

a Elights. Specifically, all requests for landing permission nN

_ vere hensef oxth te be processed by the Foreign Office, aS
a with appropriate delays. ’ Ale tighter passenger, erew: -
. ond cargo controls were to be institeted when a Gobana. -
_ flig ght is peraleted to use ‘Braci lien facilities. Ll lhe ‘
7 = Determined that the 0,K, had specifically werned 7 -

oe Cybena that no aviation feel waa avaliable in Barbados and ;

thet HM .G. would, in the future, respect, Shell Goupsny*s. ;

-_ decision to deny fueling to gubana planes,

, gy Contineed Inter-Departzental efforte te prevent”

: of vecumpeion of. ferzy service betueen Cuba end the v. S..
wich a british ef tleen, Herold berber, bas beon atiempte _ we

ine te establish éacing the past several month.

t

Docld: 32276192 Page 18.


--- Page 19 ---
7 Bs "Tnotructed Consul Georgetown te investigate’ and -

_ ' Internetional daion (UIA) ‘neld de Habana Septeaber 29 = - :

oa practicing architects who hoa planned ¢ te attand canm cs

me “off iolally authorized dxgentine delegation at the abana

ce 50955. “DuvIa: 32276192 8 “Page. 19-

. xeport on av idened ‘the Departusnt received wi nich indicates
; that Caba is planning to se2l mexehant vessele te ‘British

. Guiana in order to facilitate the establisheent of oe

Central Ingeltteonce

oars of, dxchitests to cppese Argentine attendance at the

' Pabane meeting, with the result that 25 of the 39°

eelicd ‘theiz participation; °

. meeting, but encouraged the attendance of an ‘official.

reyslar service for paseongers and cargo. L :

i

Agence

(ae Ia connection with the Seventh congress of the

- Cctober 35 1983 the Buenos Alxes ‘Station:

-) encouraged the Angentine Rational Federation a

(2). arrenged to srevent the attendance of any:

Axgentine delegstion or ent?-Comumist coloration at an Se

internetional architects nesting to be held ja Mexico

.

i& Gctover; - ~



--- Page 20 ---
‘AW 50955

| dete arior concerning cuban charter flights to. Brazil which

a supported the Ambassador’ 8 request that the Axgentine:

the e Babassy wit dats Oat Cubans glighte to Brasil used

-  Alse induced Rie. aieport officials ‘te impose stringent.
: | pasoport control and “paggene efforta. | These efforts | 2S
contributed to the B coailian Covernacit* s failing to

a issue Landing permits ‘for Cubana flights on S Septenber :

- 21, 24 and 25, 1963 coveing ¢ theic cancellation, then

" gGebans, beeause of haraganent at Bio, began using the o ;

: lending fae ilicies ia a0 Paulie where controls ware.

= ROR existent, “GIA initiated a anid obtained a local Latcon
|. @gvecment for ainilar barassaent in the event of future

+ Ga Sars _ flights te S ao Paulo.

Docld:32276192 ‘Page 20°. °

-@) delivered a memorandum ‘to the Minister of

goveronent @zpress concern over euch flights. :

- Ro de Janoizo Station continued to furnish -

i

in xepres entatious to the ‘Bragilian Foreign Office. 7 :

| Mexleo eity atation inepired & press cempaiga -
of hoof and mouth and, ensllpos epidemics in Cubs, prior |

to the Architects Congress to discourage participation

dat the | Hlsbana necting. The naaulting guarantines and



--- Page 21 ---
i Pe
SEOREE Tae :
; -5-
inoculations eere a factor ia discouraging 52 of the 9
69 Hexisen professional architects who were expected to.

RW 50955- Docld!32276192 Page 2ae:°


--- Page 22 ---
DEEL. Cenerok of | SASSO EES. Movement of Guerrillas -  .-
. 8nd sess os oo, ee

‘ Department: of State a

Made the necessary arraagenents tt hrough Embassy

“Teg! eigalps wt 1th’ the Goverbment of Honduras for the
7 dispateh ef three oe 8. helisonters to give logistical

“agsistane nee. to the Honduran Arny in its effort to- tocate 4

and eliminate the bande of guerillas allegedly operating

a Ss the Fatuca River ares slong the © Honduran Ricsragusn, pt

8

e border. i

. Honduran arwed forces conducting eo ntor~taeuegency

a eperations in- the Patuca River ered. A tetal of 27 sorties | al,
were flows gesulting ta delivery of 3928 pounds of supplies, a

~ evacustion of 12 sick Honduran soldiers, aivlife of 19.

_ passengers to points in the ogorational areas and.

: recovery of “46S pounds ef supplies fron, the e operational Le

area. .

We

ei
by

~ SECRE

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 22 Pe,


--- Page 23 ---
apartment aft Beste

a, Tnetrueted Embassy Monies City to infers the

Mexioan airline SAESA vhat thee proposal to purchase ©. oe
surplas Cuban aircraft would in faet result in the.

- acérual to Gaba of a significant anouat of hard currency, °

and the U.S. would have to oppose the transaction.
Fureher, 4£ dollars were involved is the paschase,
“dt would be a v solation of the Suban Assets Control
R Regulations.
- be tat corned Department of nreacury, Foreign Assets a

Gentzol orfiee, of the activities of Somondelp Enterpeiees,

“2 Miami firm engased in sending renitvances ts persons. ae

. in Gaba in vidletion of the Caben Assets ‘Cont trol

.. Regulations.
-.@. Instructed Gonoulate, Belize te inform

a Per. RMeherd Joyce, ag Americen ational, thet bis -

 eowseveial transactions with Cuba vere in violation

- of the Cuben Assete Contsol Regulations and that he |

is gvohibiced from enganies, is euch trade.

HW -50955° Doc]d:32276192° Page 23.


--- Page 24 ---
 Strenethoniae of Counter-Tr, ipurtency Cacsbilicied —

SEGREE , mo, Loe = mo os 2 MG

=3. as

epartment of Dafense

a Thirteen Latin Aner clean officers graduated from , -
the counter=insurganty Gperations Course of the U.S.
Aray School for Lectin America in tle Ponama Canal Zone
on 30 Septenber. ‘Bazing. the mon thy & cotal of OL Latin: 7
Anewhean officers encolted dn courses “stressing counter=”
tnourgency at the Arny Canal Zone gehool, ,
oy Be Eight US. ey countet~ineurgeacy mobile

training teans were providing teaining to the Armed

' Ferees of five Latin admerican countries Goring the period.

So in tuo countries.

8.86 Ade Foree counter~isesurg geney Cra lode teams were ©

ee tn the Canal Zone, 15 students from five countries ~

were under instrestica in the operation of coast: guard

gk 324A acy patrol exatt used for coastal sur eveillance.

eM]

-.. Sim studes nes from tee qountzies were undergoing similar Dost ck

_ eraining in the UsitedSévates

HW 50955

Docld:32276193. “Page 24

a, AUG. Savy oo penkereineue gency a training foam

eaela to aseist ia isproving che security

of oil installations in Lake

_ SpeRee



--- Page 25 ---
Gessna 153 aiverafe ‘each for aedical civic action and.

7 continse with the Goverment of Guatemala for the

. to iuereses their petrol capability on rivers crossing a

|: the Rolivien frontier. Our internation is that. the

“of personnel end weapons into Peru.

HW 50955 Docld:39276192. Page B50 FS Cee

©
;

=P
G
14
me
pH
aed

g
+A
g

e. Goesta Rica and Honduras were provided one

internal eoourity PULPOSeS. :

ge On Hay 25, 1963, three walSR SANAN | heldeoptere me

” were provided to the govermeent of Colombia on a 60-day _
oe oan. ‘The, Colombian Government requested an extension

 g€ the loan and 2 90-day extension has been approved. .. ae

eo

_ genenal Trtel dineace a deeoey

q fous "7 2
a, Gash ak Caty Station has earuited, on a)

ek

trial basis, & fommes member of the 3 Hovember guereilia

group and debriefings ara ia process. |“ Hegotiations — _

' fermarion of a new internal se curity service.
“%, Line Station hag agreed te furnich the Penevian ae

- investigations Foldes (FIP) with am outboard motor:

sivers exossing this frontier have provided the priaary

evesges for recent attewpte to osin clandestine entry —



--- Page 26 ---
~Vi.

_ “tagtneoring inet. tallation work continued on radio
etations for Managua, ‘Bis arinia and ‘Teguelgaipa,

nod Honduras .. “Ho further progress hes Been made in reaching © ;

agssements with Colombia and Eonador for tights to
: estat blish nadie stations in those countries. tastallation ae

of the new tran. seistimian coonerctal able in Panans

is nearing coup) tion.

7 Senural Intelile:

GLA Stations eontinued theiy exchange of intel iigence :

information with local intelligesce & asonucles. The.

follwing actions are of special clenificences.
Be SEA Station in Buenos Aires furnished the 7 :
sumenes State ce tntells seee @ Se aud ea (SIRE) with |

 &nkermation om | the travel of Ax gentines: to Cuba, and ze=

guested thet S102 provide nome , traces and debri ef these

coreLlers am theig ren wa phenever feasible. S12

provided the traces, but did net conduct any debriefinss.

The Station hag not felt it feasible te try to remedy

sion in view of the  pexsgoned ” cbsages” expected .

‘wichin SIDE aster the aew govarement de sastalt led on

he

wa 50955 ‘Docld: 3927e4a2 Page 26 : ae | Srerer — . ; 7 ee



--- Page 27 ---
bh dasa result gt infomnat 2On © sed by the Bogota * “ye

‘Station tot he Administrative Department of Security lee

(24S) eondernine Colombian travellers te cubs, 3 member
‘o£ paseport vielations have been ai iscoverad in which
evavelleve fo Cubs (are using paseporta isgued te ouher
persons. Thexe is & veluctanve, however, on the (part

.9& the Coeloublen Governuent te prosecute this type

of violat: on. © .
“90° At the urging of the CL Station tn ‘Line, the
7 Hatdonal intel Ligence Service (SIN) insteucted ene of

its penetrations of leftiet group o campaign for a exif

te aba ds oxdor to eoeive guerrilla warfare training.

: Tate asset bas been offered, aud has accepted, an cpportuniey:

ma) oake ‘the trip by the Lefties St tavolution nary Moveneht |

(8), geimeacy vebiele of Gabon 6 subversive activities: a
; o-

ia Pers. Deleting ont debiteting oF the asvet wilt be

The veravian Navel intelligence Service C2NES) bas,

dn verponse co the efforce of the © Station ia t Lima, sent
‘ene of its agents to Chile where he wlll sign aboard 8

‘Chilean fveighter coliing ac Habana, The acget hae been.

given opesifie intelligence requtzenants to fulfi2d.

te

a : ‘The
HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 27. °.. | SESEES re



--- Page 28 ---
RW 50955

Docld: 32276192 Page 28

SEGAEE

SFY.
3
re B

2 o

The Princ Minister ; and Hinteter of Covernnent and
Police has requested fro the CLA gepresontative in
tima any informition thet he might supply on subve sive
elements posing : ® threat to the Government ef Por. oo
Tals zequ west has opened an additional channel ta the . *
: highest level of the Cove srament wth & concomitant
peospection effective action when needed. .

-&e | Throwgia feguiar ‘HHaleoa channels, the Veneauelan .
General Dizectorate of Police (DISEPOL) has beoa provided
by CIA with the nenes of Sih Yoneauelans known to have
gvevelied te Guba from February through August 1983.
fale actt ity | wiLL be eageled out os a continuing basies

the names are mow bedog tntegrat tad into the regular .

watek Ris

bie

aterme tional aixports in Vonecuela. ;
Tans on, a at least three veturerices have been arrested .
om the basis of the informs stow fee pplied to ko DEGEFOL, |.

- BEGEPOL hes indlested ite epprociation of the daca.

being eappt ted aed desired thet the err rengenent be

ban DMelomtio, Comercial and Cultural

Ho special actions to report. _
~ _ OVERS



--- Page 29 ---
Vill. Other Soselal Actions _

United Stares Informacton on Agsney

a. The Agency's press service tranenittred seven

artieles rélating to Cuban: subversion on its wireless ~

. €ite service to aSTs offices. throwsheut Latin America
os et

fox : placem nt in the tooal newepapers.. Developments

reported ta these axticles included demands by the Bolivian

Senate for the ouster of the Gaban Chsegé atattatres, ”

 terrorien aad goverment countiextetion in Venenuela,

the seleure in Reuador of an arms and explosives cache

reportedly received fson Caba, several articles om the.

“4

Latemational Outen of Architects Conerena dn Habons ©

a

(exphasizing the invest of the Castre regime to use the :

Congress ae @ forum for lite propaganda claims), and
Assistant vn, Martin's Los Angeles epesch in which
he pointed out ‘the regime's af atlinity fox Chinese conmunist
doeteias and its cencinued eoaphen: eis om violent revolution :
and ssboceston., In all, the press service trang maltted _ a
27 articles and comentarios éuring Septenbes ca che -

- subject of Cuba, the other articles dealing for the moot
part with economic aad polltieal cond éitlons inside the
eountay as evidenced by the regimes own aduisgions and oo

Tae

the x reports oF
HW 50955 DocId: 32276192 Page 29



--- Page 30 ---
SECEET
ion Eee

Be “he Yotcs of America Spanish broadsasta ko y Latin -
dmovica & suring September carried a ‘total of 20 news .
analyses, coumentaries, press round-ups, and int terviews
related to the subject of Gehan subversion. Seme of

_ the develooue sats _ treated ineloded the following:

A comnestaa y on coxmmmist eubaseies as channels for

. subversion; @ neve aetlyaie on the 8. students who

. visited Cuba; Sesisvant & pOrObary itareia’ 8 Les Angelea

speech | & mows analysis on Cuban subversion as an obstacle
im the neruslizetion of US .oSov! ae relations; a threes
park s sorkes ony s undversity actonony 2a fa tatin dmerlea;

i ‘ eatuve on the letter of & Colombian student whe.

went te Gaba on a séholarship and wae digillestoned by

oy

the conmanLet indoctrination; a commentary on Che Guevara's
eecent article on revolutionary stustegy; and 2 commentary 7
on puctetite | training in Guba, Many of these items were
“cepeated several tiase in the broadeaste. The "Rendesvous a
with Cuba” how se eaeried Zone 2 e five Gommentaries kek "

4

és ond interviews nightly on econemte and political
¥ F

éevelotmente ineide Guba. Of epmeial note, the Cxban

t
id
fay
5S
ia
e.
Cs
ie
ve
A
a
age
ws
id
ec)
ro
ped
iy

+ roy
g

nucted anerdiy no Volce of

x

A amoriea brondeaers about Che Cass ayaee axvtiele ged toa cone

gengerios ¢hat Cuba hed accepeed an n agricultural sole in

&

‘HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 30 _ _ SECRET oe : . the -


--- Page 31 ---
HW 50955

Docld:32276192

. SECRET
eens
45
~ ES

the coumeaise blee and had postzomad ite plans to

ioche tvdolise.

c. On September 27, the Agoney issued ¢ eleculay

inete ction to alilits Latia dmerican posts urgine
greater attention te spportuadties for publicizing Saban

atinulated cub sbversion tg Miggestiag the ¥ are ORG types of

| information ecelvicies to support this offor ty and requesting
- monthly reports of Held act tions taken to implement the
“This was done as a follow-up to the original |

imetruction an Cubga subversiow which was issued April 3,

the Lon and

hom ok

GEA ix

Be tad ie dafeot:

exploitation of ¢ ‘athelete Rabesue Pores Ondéree

Vever wis & member

Ess Ports Alepre on 4 Septenber 1993.

of the Cubon bagketbe ald “team which porticipared in the”
‘Wor rid University Gewese (fISy) hele in Serto Alegre -
Beacil in early Seprexber 1963. ;
%. Agelete nee @ vag given to the Government of

were Grrested in cannack Lon with

Page 31 -



--- Page 32 ---
HW 50955

&

Docld:32276192 Page 32

ef Cgatenala wants to daterze

offices pregared

SECRET
ee fw
Only one of chose interzoge ated admitted te way dnvolvenont a

with the ex sptured doe. OES y the Communist Party, a
gaevrllias, or angthing else that could be’ construed

as incriminating. the ome who did adait knowledge

denied that he wag involved in a any way. The Government -

gate thie person again ato)

_& Leter date.

GEA Station in Meatevideo arranged fox an
“interview between an Usuguayan mm mblitery dateLligence

, a
officer and % @ vecent defector fven the Montevideo »

' Saba iabaesy deving which oxtencive information regarding

Quban subversive activities wea veavowled, The Ueuguayan

2

a Sepore containing this data and _

geedanted 1t to the Netionsl Council ef Severmmont which

bos been slow ee indicate coneara over commmdst sub-

yeraive aetiyity in Swuguay. Ag a result of this FePOres

ae Get on &

‘the ROG has directed the Hindeter of Interioz to appoint —

@ goaclal comigeioen to seudy the prablea of ‘Comumiet

sabverstion and to > sake Be scemmngndat tons es to what course
AAO Soverncent.
x te pres for péessage of +.

stronger

- BETeeT 2


--- Page 33 ---
wti~subversive Les islation on che Sts sion hae

steps to prepare Urugiyan pail Ade opinion by planning
simpltancous local press releases of tha sallent

 geatures af the defestor reper with gieiler press

feporting in the United Seaces where the defector wiltbe

brought to Light.

; e250.

NW 50955 Docld:32276192 -Page 33 o °


--- Page 34 ---
ies SECRET

29 October 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘THE GENERAL COUNSEL

SUBJECT: Interdepartmental Coordinating Coumittee of Cuban Affairs:
. Report on Status of Implementation of Actions: Designed to
Counter Subversion (0)

1. () The following information is submitted in response to Memo~
randum No. 64, General Counsel, dated 19 September 1963.

2. (S) Reference Topic 5 (Strengthening of Counterinsurgency
Capabilities):

a. Canal Zone -

(1) Fifteen students from six Latin American countries. are
attendees, in the ten weeks Counterinsurgency Operations Course of the U. S.
Army Scheol of the Americas which began 30 September 1963..
/ (2) There are 24 students from eight Latin American countries

attending the 16 weeks Military Tntedhigence Course which began 23 August
1963.

b. CONUS -

qt) Three students from three Latin American countries are
attending the Special Warfare Course at Fort. Bragg, N. C.

(2) One Peruvian student is attending the Civil Affairs
Course at Fort Gordon, Georgia.

ce. In the month of October 1963, “eight Counterinsurgency Mobile
Training Teams (MIT) (14 Of£f-48 EM) weré deployed in six comtries to
conduct counterinsurgency training.

d. AU. S. Army officer is attending the Command and General
Staff School of the Uruguayan Army and upon completion of this course in
December 1963, will be assigned to the OUSARMA, Uruguay. He will perform
intelligence advisory functions as an additional duty.

e. An additional officer has been assigned as assistant USARMA
in Guatemala, a: the capability for intelligence assistance in
that country.

USA. ASG. CONTROL NO Aaa As ME 22 fn ) oY

ROWISRARED AT 12 yEqa ISTEREALS "
_ KOT AUTOMATICALLY pEet ASSIFED

FED
00 BIR S209 _ SECRET 2314854

RBY

HW 50955 DoclId:32276192 Page 44

van ¢s€ vso

£9°6Z-01

£9~0€rT Ma



--- Page 35 ---
- SECRET.

OPS SW OF ‘
SUBJECT: Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affaire:

Report on Status of Implementation of Actions Designed to
Counter Subversion (U)

5. (8) Reference Topic 6 (Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Sub-
version): :

a. The number of intelligence exchange agreements between the

u. 8. Army and local military services in Latin America has been increased
to 13.

b. The additional officer assigned as Assistant USARMA, Guatemala,
raises the collection potential in that nation and may develop information
which can be exchanged with Latin American countries.

J. D. ALGER

Major General, GS

Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff
for Military Operations

for Special Operations

G.S. BLANCHARD
Colonel, GS .
Director of Special Warfare
oDcsoPSs

2

SECRET

BW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 35



--- Page 36 ---
SECRET

Lt Col Haig/78029/290ct63/md

co
wm
October 29, 1963 ia
xi
, b
S
MEMORANDUM FOR MR. JOHN CRIMMINS S|
Coordiaator of Cuban Affairs SO
Department of State S
ww
SUBJECT: lntetdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban |
Affeive: Revision of the Paper Entitled “Training of
Latin Americans in the United States"

Ata meeting of the Subcommittes om Subversion on October 10, 4
1963, the Department of Defense (DOD) Reprocentative was requested =
te review and up-date the DOD portions of pages 4, 5 and 6 of aubject =
report. Enclosed herewith ip a line in line out revision of the raport, 3
A revicion has alco been made to page 7, whieh is designed to make >
the DOD portions of the veport current. wo

. ered
Signeds F
Ay M. —_

: 2% Colonel, US#
oseph A. Galifane, Iz.
General Counsel

Attachment
As Stated
yh wwe
we Mr. Califano geese ours
Lt Col Haig
ASG, qth .
ee t
as ra
gag 0 WE
pec veh ee gol
a, cag (yee the
Na WA, a ’ ce Bi) ;

ASG Contre 19 2 gL CS FUP

; EXCLUDED FROM AUTOE inte RERRER NS
SECRET. DOD DIR 5200.20 DUBS NOt SEG |
“ .

MANY cee

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 36


--- Page 37 ---
DGD Revision to Paper Entitled

3. Military Assistance Programs

in flelde as followa:
Plying Instruction (8-83 weeks)
Command, Staff and Operational
(Girection aud control of
armed forces, 4-23 weeks)

Conemmnications/Zlectroalcs
(6-29 weeka)}

Equipment Maintenance and
Repaie (5-28 weeks)

Logistics (2-14 weeks)

Administration (4-40 weeks)

Professional Specialized
(Engineering, Medical, Legal
ete.» 4-20 weeks)

Orientation (2-3 weaka)

OSA. ASS, CONTROL po, 22S

SECREL

HW 50955 DocId: 32276192 Page 37

“Training of Latin Americans in the United States"

age
248

336

306

BOG

At the prepeattime end of PY 63, 372272 1791 Latin
American military students ase were receiving, oF ate-pragparomed-te-
vacelve have received training in the United States under the Military
Assistance Program. Courses vary in length from two-week orlentation
tours te §3-week Bying training courses. However, the majority of
ineiruction in for pericds of less than ein months, and is distribated

454
638

a

234

i)



--- Page 38 ---
Difficulties Encountered in Filling Available Miléte
fuuetas in the United States

The failure of Latin American countries te take fall advantage

of military quotes offered hae been a persistent problem. In 1962, for
example, 15 per cent of the quotas offered wore unfilled. This unfaver~
able gituation derives irom g“any causes. DGurlag-the current discal
yeas -lé- pet-cont of «infilied. Army -quotac-have -hoon dite-to inability 40-
maoct- course pre-—roguiclten;-22 per cont -hacause af dack-of cufficiont-
fundsj-and-33 pez-cent because-of politieal wpheavalas The armed forcen
of the average Latin American country are gmail, and the availability of
qualified candidates who can be spared for extended periods of obligated
service and the lack of a professional non-commissioned officer corpe
alee tends to diacourage the traiuing of enlleted men in Unlted States
scheole, eince large sume from limited budgets te train enlisted men
who will romain in service only a brief time. Another significant
detezrent is the por diem rates required by law to be paid by some
countries to service personnel gent cuteide their homeland, in
Argeatina, Bracil, Colombia and Uruguay the legal rates fer porson-
nel serving abroad. are too high te. be supportable by defense budgets;
while tz other countries, such ag Bolivia and Paraguay, the standard
fates are too late to provide a reasonable livlug for atadents.

BW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 36



--- Page 39 ---
(DENTIAL

en

‘
i

GON:

y

:ANDUM NG. 74 FOR GENERAL EARLE GC. WHEELER Gos}

MAICOR GENERAL 3. 9. ALGEE, UES
BEAR ADMIRAL W. FLA. WERDT, BW

Report of Mesting of Subeomunidies on Gubversion

Civeulated herewith fow information io a sepoxt of the Octebor 10,
1963 meeting of aubject subcommaities.

Signed
.. §voseph A, Califano, Jr.

* Soeegh 4, Galifeae, Je.

Geewrdl Counsel
éttachmgat .
she tated ’
ce: Mr. Yarmolinsky (OSD)- 2»
Mr. Califano
Lt Col Haig _| sod, Ww
ASC Sm

PEUSLEYE RG fo ita,
: OEMS

ACL ot a 34 ni otbs

fees
Cog .

CONFIDENTIAL

HW 50955 DocId: 32276192 Page 39

GAPTAIN E, 2. EUMWALT, JB., USN (8p)

OR GENERAL 3.W. CARPENTER, 0, Baar
DRICADIER CLERAL WILLLAM N. IGHES, UIMG

SUBIZGT:  luteedepartoental Coordinating Commitios of Cuban AMeien:

YSO

EP-b-W ¥BND CSE

CDGE-/ ~If



--- Page 40 ---
CONFIDENTIAN =<
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY

‘<. QFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C. 7

- "October 14,

" MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD ©

| SUBJECT: Meeting of Subcommittee. on Subversion, ;
October 10, 1963 *

Outlined below is a summary of deliberations of subject sub-.
committee during the meeting of October 10 at 1430 hours in Room Q :
6273, New State. Agenda is at Tab A, ;

Aan Itern 1 es . : ; _ soe

: "The Final Subcommittee Report for the months of July and
August was circulated. The report has been circulated to points ‘of ; Q

“contact by separate correspondence. . et :

‘Agenda Item 2

: The Subcommittee discussed the SCCS letter which referred to ©
_ the recent trip of US students to Cuba. (Attached to enclosure 1) Itwas .
/apparent to all that criticism of the US could be implied from this letter,”
The Chairman stated he would provide. the SCCS with the substance of
State's telegram 647, which outlines actions undertaken by the US —
Government against the students. :

a. CIA, in coordination with the Esso Corporation's Chief of
Industrial Security, will prepare guidance data for distribution to Latin.
America which could be utilized by US commercial firms for the pro-.
tection of their facilities against sabotage. The DOD representative | 7
_ Was requested to ascertain whether ARPA had available some commer
cial protection devices which might be applicable for use in Latin
America against sabotage attacks. The CIA representative stated he

. .- believed ARPA had developed some devices for this purpose. .

BW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 40


--- Page 41 ---
rl

oe

|

©

. b.. State will prepare a circular telegram to all Latin American
. Ambassadorg requesting that an immediate review of Country Team

Emergency and Evacuation Plans be conducted to insure that plans were
- adequate to meet a stepped-up campaign of Castro-inspired sabotage.

r Agenda Item 4 oO , sO a

In lieu-of a written report on the Honduran guerrilla problem, oy

*. the DOD representative proposéd a firsthand report to the Subcommittee, ~~
Colonel Walter Hutchins, who has recently returned from assignment as
US Military Attache to Honduras, presented a review of the subversion
situation in that country and then answered questions from the Subcom- ;
mittee. The general thrust of Colonel Hutchins! remarks confirmed that
there has been considerable Castro subversive activity in Honduras. The
most serious inroads are achieved through communist radio and press
and communist educators. Colonel Hutchins commented that recent

.. Suerrilla activity along the Nicaraguan border was probably limited to

~ groups totaling between 100 and 200 men, He emphasized that Cuban-

' trained Honduran guerrillas are successfully transiting by air through
_Grand Cayman Island and British Honduras with some transiting Havana :
to Jamaica via Belgrade. In response toa query from a State representa- |
“» tive, Colonel Hutchins pointed out that he believed that both Honduran.

_ military and commercial interests were genuinely concerned with Castro
‘subversion and that some of their leaders were perfectly capable of
discerning the true nature of the communist threat to Honduras.

: Agenda Item 5

The Chairman stated that the paper for training Latin Americans -
‘in the United States (included in the "Krulak Report''*) was too broad in .
scope for implementation by the Subcommittee and Proposed that it be | 7

rewritten under narrower parameters. inthis regard, the Defense
- representative was

Miscellaneous”
eee

The Chairman stated that preparatory actions on the Isthmian
meeting at San Salvador tentatively scheduled for the second half of

‘November would be held in abeyance pending further developments in
the Honduran situation, .

bonPoeioT

CE

: A. is Aig Colonel, GS
- *Report prepared by the Subcommittee o Castfo-Communist Subversion .
(Al containing a series of action programs de igned to impede the Castro- .

__Communist_ subversive effort i i erica,

HY $0955 Docld:32276192 Page 41


--- Page 42 ---
corre Oe

CONFIDENTIAL ©

" October %, 1963

"MEMORANDUM POR? Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion.
: SUBJECT: Meeting of October 10. a

Bue

S. You dre invited to a meeting of the Subcommittee on .
Cuban Subversion of the Interdepartmental Coordinating
Committee of Cuban Affairs to be held on Thursday,
October 10, at 2:30 P.M. in Room 6263, State ‘Department
GRA Conference = Room).

AGENDA

. Consideration of draft of monthly report for September.

“Discussion of letter (copy attached) from SCCS. of
Pan American. Union.

Status of papers on contingency plaming.
Report by DOD on Ronduran guerrilla problem..

Consideration of the paper on training | of Latin
Americans in the United ‘States.

CONFIDENTIAL

HW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 42


--- Page 43 ---
-
Ww

Pep ECiaL cORS surat DONMITTEE OW SECURITIC
episod ESPECIAL BE CONSULTA SORE SESURIDAD
“EOMISSAG CONSULTIVA ESPECIAL DE SEGURANGA

COMMISSION

“Cable address

presently holding the firet of ite regular meetings, in accordance with oS
“the statuted ‘approved by the Council of the Organization on April 2 23 of y
this, years, o ao . , : :

O13 af thes¢ statutes, the Commities intends to request of the governments
“of the, member statas of the Organization any information that. they may have.
. Tegarding specific activities of international communism in th ha he hemisphere,

: individuals make to Cuba for well-know ulterior purposes, In thie connec~

vegarding ‘the trip that a large group. of U.S, citizens recently mada to “Cuba.

7 Me. “Ward Pe, Allen, | car
Alternate Reprecentative of the United States oo
- Council of the Organis atioa of American States

sPeclal ‘DE CORSULTATION SUR LA SECURITE~

AR ASSERICAM LEON |
iD, c., wu. Ss. A.
(PAU WASH oC

ashington. 6

October Let,, 1963: |

“As you know, the Special Consultative « Committee on Security 1 ia

“Por the better “fulk iliment of ita work, and in accordance with Article,

° Among the important activities of this kind ; are the trips that many

tion, ‘should greatly appreciate it if you would furnish the Committee with: :
whatever information your government may deem it advisable to present.

at the jnvitation of that country's govermment, about which the Committée
has learned’ through newspapar reporte that have recently appeared in: this:
em untry and in Latin Aruerica. Thie information would be treated with the:
nfl lence that your goverament deemed appropiais.

Thaak you in advan nce for your valvable assistance in this mattér,

cept, ‘Sir, the agsurance of my highest consideration,

ullo Caesar Doig Sanchez
Chairman ee
Special Consultative Committee _
: oD, Security ;

Washington, D.C.

HY 50955

Bocld:32276192 Page 43



--- Page 44 ---
- SECRET

44 OCT 1863

HDUM NG. 71 FOR CAPTAIN Z. B. BUMWALT, IR., USN (OD)
MATOR GERERAL J. D. ALGER, UGA
REAR ADMIRAL W. WENDT, GON

BRIGADIER GENERAL W. HK. JONES, USMe.

SUBIECT: jaterdepavtimental Courdinating Committee of Cuban Affsira:
Actions Token During July-August 1963 tu Curbing Caban
fabversion im Latia America.

Attached ie the final report of the Subcommittee on Eubversicn on,
A&ctiong Taken Byeving July-Auguet 1963 in Gerbing Cabana Subversion in

Latin America.
a
siened A. Califane, Ive
Joseph A. Califane, Jr.
Geseval Counsel
Attachment
As Stated
ce: Ge. ol i Nigra)
Mr. Califano
nS Col Haig
ac
| ” om)
OSA, ASG Control [Need 32 et H. FILE couereten 0 os
SEGRETRE® nae ayASSTFI TED THOLOSURES

BW 50955 Docld:32276192 Page 44

MATION GENERAL 7. W. GARPENTER, IL, usar

NORE SO

£9/°T/OT_

_£9/0e/t_ a



--- Page 45 ---
yee

ae

GSA, AG Co

“IN. CURBING

ve,

‘ACTIONS TAKEN DURING’ JULY-AUG

‘CUBAN 'S

AMERIC

ce

aR



--- Page 46 ---
SECRET:

- Control of Travel_to and from Cuba s
; Central Intelli ence Agency

a. Developed highly useful information on frequency
of Cuban "chartered" flights to Brazil, names and nationali-
ties of passengers and crew, and lax measures of control |
followed by Brazilian authorities. Transmitted this informa-.
tion to station chiefs in the Latin American countries of the

non-Brazilians travelling on those flights.

be “Maintained close watch over travel to and from
Cuba. See Annex B for table of known travel of Latin ~
‘Americans during July and August. ;

c. Asa result. of information furnished to him by
he: ‘CIA Station in Buenos Aires and with the Station's urging,
‘the Argentine Minister of Interior indicated that he would
make. every effort to prevent Argentine delegates from attend
ng the International Union of Architects Congress in Havana

i d. At the urging of the CIA Station and the Embassy,
‘the Bolivian Minister of Interior issued in mid-July an

xder prohibiting the granting of travel permits to Cuba’ or.
other bloc countries to Bolivian nationals.

: e. Partly as a result of the efforts of the CIA
‘station in Santiago, the Government of Chile prohibited the-
entry into Chile of organizers of the Cuban-sponsored Second
Latin American Youth Congress, which had been scheduled to
‘take place in Santiago in August. This was one of the |
factors which led to postponement of the Congress.

£. After considerable prodding by the CIA Station
“and the Embassy the Minister of Public Security of Costa --
Rica presented legislative proposals to the Costa Rican
Assembly which will require all persons intending to travel
‘to Communist countries to have their travel approved by a:
newly created Costa Rican security agency. —

Be CIA Station -in Mexico City developed information’:
concerning . the clandestine arrival of. passengers in Vera’ Srue



--- Page 47 ---
on Cuban merchant ships. Efforts are being made to obtain
more information and to encourage stricter controls by the
Mexican authorities. ‘ F os .

. Department_of State CO,

a. Instructed Embassy Conakry to try to persuade
Guinean authorities to deny use of airport facilities by
‘flights on Habana-Moscow route. These efforts achieved a.
“temporary withholding of permission for future regular lights:
at least until such time as the Soviets develop their own.
refueling facilities at. Conakry. ;

b. Instructed Embassy Rio to approach Brazilian
authorities to express. our deep concern at the growing
frequency of Cuban non-scheduled flights to Brazil and request:
their cooperation in curbing them. Also instructed our
Embassies in several Latin American countries to work with cL
station chiefs in furnishing the names of nationals of those.
countries travelling on these flights to local authorities’ .
and urging them: (1) to institute tighter controls on their
own citizens travelling to Cuba, and (2) to express their
concern to the Brazilian Government over Cuban use of Brazil
as a way station for transporting subversives.

c. As a result of representations made to the :
British Government about Cuban flights to the Cayman Islands.
carrying Latin American subversives, the British developed

an administrative scheme which will effectively prohibit the
use of British Caribbean dependencies by Cubana as transit

points for passengers. The British intend to require transi
visas of passengers passing through their areas, and to :
reject applications. for such visas except in certain special
cases. Persons not possessing visas would be prevented from
leaving their aircraft, or F would be returned to their. point

of, origin. : .
: a.’ Instructed Embassy Mexico City on August 29 to
‘inform the: Mexican airline CMA that the United States is

opposed to'a proposal that CMA operate charter flights.to



--- Page 48 ---
earry refugees from Habana to Central America.’ CMA, as.
result, stated that they: had-no. intention of proceeding -
further with this project.

e. Instructed our missions in ‘Curacao: and the Hague
to investigate a report that KLM was planning to renew.
scheduled Curacao-Habana flights and to reiterate US -
opposition to resumption of air service to Cuba. . KUM assured
our Embassy that there is no plan to initiate. service,
scheduled or non-scheduled, to Habana.

£. Instructed Embassy Ottawa to express” our " strong
objections to a proposal; that a Cubana charter flight pick:
up a second group of U.S. students in Montreal to fly them*
to Cuba. The flight. was not authorized.

g. Instructed Consulate Georgetown to investigate
Cubana approaches to secure flight facilities. Mission
reported on August 1 that the Governor bed no knowledge of |
any talks between the B.G. Ministry of Communications. and.
the Cuban Government regarding landing rights for Cubana.
planes. The Governor indicated his intention to inquire
further and to keep us advised. London reported that neithe
‘the Cuban nor the British Guiana Governments had raised the

issue of landing rights with H.M.G.

h. - Urged the governments of Mexico, Canada, Jamaica
and the Netherlands to refuse to assist the Cuban Government
‘in its efforts to find a short route for return of the 58
‘American students who illegally travelled to Cuba. Also

nformed Pan American Airways that we were opposed to a Cuban
equest for a PAA charter’ flight to fly the students from
abana to New York..

ie ‘Instructed our missions at Port of Spain. and
arbados on ‘several. occasions to approach these governments
‘o"express the. concern of. the U.S. at. indications of. Cuban:
nterest in: the use: ‘of their aviation. facilities. hee

‘Embassy. ‘Port ‘Of. Spain “discussed with the Foreign ‘Secretary
arious. legal moves available : hat would enable |



--- Page 49 ---
GOTT to control movements of aircraft within their territory
citing examples of such controls instituted by Mexico, Canada
and Ireland. He indicated receptiveness to the proposal tha
‘the list of suggestions be made available to the. aviation |
officials concerned. “ .

5. During a previous reporting period Embassy :

antiago urged the government of Chile to refuse visas to:
Cuban delegated to a preparatory meeting for the II Latin
American Youth Congress scheduled for August in the Chilean

apital. Inability of Cuban delegates to obiain Chilean

isas for this meeting is one of the contributing factors to.
the Cuban sponsors announcing during August that the meeting:
‘had been postponed.

k. Sent general instructions to our missions in
countries which participate in the International Union of
“Architects asking them to urge the coopzration of governmental

uthorities in preventing. or discouraging the attendance of
‘their nationals to the VII UIA Congress in Habena, September:
29 '~ October 4, 1963. Followed this up with instructions ‘to
individual posts to try where feasible to dissuade oe
architects from free world countries from serving on the -jury
for the selection of a Bay of Pigs monument. ;

1. Urged Canadian Government to block a plan to.
ommence food parcel shipments to Cuba on a commercial basis
_that would have required the establishment of. scheduled.
eekly charter flights by Canadian planes.

“Control of Movement of Cuban Propaganda
Central Intelligence Agency

Responding to the urging of the CIA Station, police
£ the State of Guanabara seized large quantities of bh
propaganda brought into Brazil by passengers on the. special
Cubana flights. For example, some 50° pounds of. printed -
propaganda was’ taken from the various passengers | who. arrived
on: ‘the 16 August Cuban. a flight. .



--- Page 50 ---
ontrol of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas and Arms

Department of Defense

ae Continued surveillance of the area eurfounding.
Cuba during the months of July and August at the same rate
and with the same emphasis as prior to 1 July 1963.

: b. Continued to maintain U.S. “Forces, primarily’ from
within the Atlantic Command, available to assist other -
Caribbean governments in the interception of suspicious craf
in territorial waters, as might be requested. No such :
requests were received from any other government during the
period covered by this report. However, U.S. Forces did keep’

strack of the location of the Soviet merchant freighter
MITCHURINSK, which was suspected of carrying subversives and
arms from Cuba to British Guiana in mid-July. MITCHURINSK.
was under U.S. surveillance: from its departure from Habana
until United Kingdom forces assumed the task of keeping this
ship- under surveillance upon its approach to Georg:town,:,
British Guiana. Subsequeatly, British police search of -
MITCHURINSK in British Guiana waters revealed nothing of a
suspicious nature.

Central Intelligence Agency

At the repeated urging of the CIA Station in Lima,
the Peruvian Government late in August published a new anti
terrorists law providing a penalty of no less than five
years imprisonment for persons who participate in guerrilla -
activities or in the illegal manufacture of. weapons or woe
explosives. 2 . 7 :



--- Page 51 ---
between British Guiana and. Guba
have been negative.

“Control of Transfer of Funds -

Department of State

oo Cooperated with the Foreign Assets Control Office
‘of the Treasury Department in developing blocking controls
with respect to Cuba which went into effect on July 9s 1963.

, Strengthening of Counter-Insurgency Capabilities:
> Depar tment of Defense

; a. Continued the installation of military communica
tions facilities in Latin America. Operational dates for
‘the multi-channel radio stations to be installed in Managua
Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa, Honduras have been delaved to 15
October 1963 and 15 December 1963, respectively because of:
‘new engineering and contractual requirements. Negotiations
‘are.continuing with Colombia and Ecuador for installation:
£ U.S. military radio facilities. Completion of a new
ommercial trans~isthmian cable in the Panama Canal Zone
within the coming month is expected to improve military
communications within the United States and the Commande
n-Chief, U.S. Southern Command. °

; be Continued the surveillance of Cuba by U.S.

orces, reporting as before to U.S. commanders, veganiza

ions and agencies. Reports of surveillance have been
‘disseminated to all who have a requirement to know.

5 ec. Established a 24 hour per day, 7 day per week
duty watch at the U.S. Military Groups in the Caribbean |
‘countries in conjunction with implementation of the military
alerting system. Continued efforts to staff the U.S.
Southern Command Intelligence Center with properly cleared
‘trained personnel (this center is the military focal point
for relaying information concerning the movement . of
‘subversives)... Filled partially, the authorized. billets i



--- Page 52 ---
the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence Center and took :

under consideration the problem of an increase in. the bille
structure in the Center. The: Commander-in-Chief, U.S.
outhern Command together with his intelligence officer

wisited Honduras and Nicaragua and determined that no
significant problems existed which would interfere with
ffective operations in those countries. .

7 ode Action previously initiated by the Commander,
-8. Naval Forces, Southern Command (COMUSNAVSO) to establish -

a Small Craft Inspection and Training Team (SCIATT) as a

‘contribution to the Caribbean Surveillance System-is progress<

.ing satisfactorily. Permanent assignment of U.S. Coast Guard

-personnel to SCIATT in: the. Canal Zone has been approved: cand. ‘

“the U.S. Coast’ Guard has taken appropriate implementing
ctions.

Be During the period of this report, the SCIATT con.
lucted: an on-the-job training course at Puntarenas, Costa
Rica. - Training was given to 13 members of the Guardia Civil
£ Costa Rica who were either newly assigned to the 40 foot:
Coast Guard utility boats (CGUBs) or were to be assigned. a8.
eplacement crew members. -- : :
f. A quarterly inspection ‘and evaluation of the “ccUBs
‘provided other Central American countries was conducted
‘during the period 17. to 31 August by a mobile training team
MTT) made up of SCIATT personnel.

g. Continued efforts. ‘to improve the internal security
£ Latin American armies through the provision of Intelligence
Advisors. Presently there are such advisors assigned to 14
Latin countries, emphasizing counterintelligence’ and counter=
‘subversion. : . . oe,

he ‘During the reporting period MTTs conducted ‘train:
ing in counter insurgency. for the armed forces .of Colombia
Bolivia, Venezuela, Peru and El Salvador’ :



--- Page 53 ---
Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Subversion: |
* Central Intelligence Agency - “

. CIA Stations throughout Latin America continued in
a great majority of countries to furnish to the local interna
security organizations with whom they are in liaison informa-
tion concerning travelers to and from Cuba, as well as such
information as came to CIA's attention concerning the movement:
of funds, arms and propaganda material. In. many instances,
the’ furnishing of information to the internal security
“service by the CIA Station was paralleled by the furnishing: ‘0:
similar information to the Foreign Office by the Ambassador
or his representative. The response to this information has
varied greatly. The Central American countries, in general,.
began to pay greater attention to the information and act on
it. At the other extreme; the Brazilian Government: during
the reporting period showed little inclination to follow up
on the information. as ! : : . .

Dep artment of State

. a. Reiterated to the Foreign Minister of Peru. our

mterest in having the facts of the Puerto Maldonado inciden

rought to the attention of the OAS, and urged that. this :
tion be taken as soon as possible. ; ; °

be Urged the Government of Guatemala: ‘to. submit.
vidence of communist activity to the OAS. ; .

"Surveillance of Cuban Diplomatic, Commercial and Cultura

“Missions

‘Department of State

"Instructed Embassy La Paz to follow : up closely | on
chaz?ges of involvement by the Cuban mission in. internal .
policies of Bolivia, and, at the Embassy's discretion; to’
point out. to Bolivian officials the opportunity for a. possible
break. in relations with’ Cuba. Embassy L La. Paz was, “not able:-to



--- Page 54 ---
did not prove to be as conclusive as’ “originally: reported.

Other Special Actions »

Department of State

ae Obtained action by the COAS .on July 3 ‘on the
‘Lavalle Committee Report transmitting the document to the
governments and urging them to implement the’ spect in & and
eneral recommendations contained therein as soon as -

“Through Embassy Managua informed the Nicaraguan
Government of the matters which we wanted to have considered
during the informal meeting of the Ministers of Security and
Interior of the Isthmian countries held in Managua, August °
26-28 in preparation for the second formal meeting of the .
Managua Security Conference countries later this year.

. . Explained: in detail the nature ‘of th -Cuban..
threat and the related policy objectives of the ‘ULS.,- during

United States Information Agency

a. The Agency's press service during the reporting
period transmitted 12 articles, commentaries, and back-—
grounders on its wireless file service to USIA posts through:
out Latin America for placement in the local newspapers and
the Voice of America Spanish broadcasts to Latin America ||
carried a total of 28 commentaries and features on the subjec:
of Cuban-based subversion. These stories were designed to :
alert people in Latin America, ‘to the _dangers of this se
subversion. 7 .

b. ‘In response to standing | Agency instructions to.

‘subversion, USIA posts in. Latin America were prompt in -
reporting incidents and . in providing editorial comments. from



--- Page 55 ---
the Latin American.press, all of which was used. in the
Agency s radio and press output.

; ‘The main developments treated in the Agency’ 8 radio
and press coverage included Castro's July 26 speech urging
revolutions in Latin America, the discovery of terrorist
weapons factories in Guayaquil, the Ecuaderean Vice
President's accusation’ of Cuban responsibility for terrorism
-the Cuban use of Grand Cayman as a way station for subversiv
‘elements from Cuba, the expulsion from the. University ofa.
Bolivian youth leader for receiving funds from Cuba,
Castro-trained guerrillas in Honduras, and Bolivian protests
against meddling by the Cuban Embassy in the miner's strike.
A-Voice of American roving reporter in Latina America

rovided several. reports on the subversion picture in coun- .
tries. he visited. _ oo .

c. In support of the Agency's effort on Cuban~based
subversion, the publicaticns center in Mexico began work on”
three pamphlets during the period based on Castro's report —

of his visit to the Soviet Union (showing that he contradicte
himself in some of his extravagant claims of Soviet progress)
the ‘losses suffered by Cuban®*labor under Castro, and.the
fate of political prisoners in: Cuba. When’ ‘completed,, thes



--- Page 56 ---
*

‘Chartered Cubana airlines flights between Cuba and -
Brazil have become a major means of transporting non-Cuba
Latin Americans to and from Cuba. The five such flight :
since late July have carried nearly ¢ 400 non- Cubans. °

The first of the. recent series -- on 25 July -- :
brought 7i Latin American passengers to Havana for the
26. July celebrations.” The other four flights -- on 15,
22, 28 and 29 August -- transported over 200 Latin
Americans to Brazil from Havana. Some of the aixcraft
involved. returned to Cuba with smaller numbers of passen
gers. Many of the 200 Latin American passengers had |
been delegates to the 26 July ceremonies, but others had
apparently been in Cuba for longer periods and some had
probably received training there. Of the passengers on
these four flights to Brazil, 75 were natives of
Caribbean area countries. “Their: ‘circuitous travel throug
Brazil was evident ly designed to help. conceal the fact

Costa Rica

Two Costa Ricans were among the passengers on a
chartered Cubana plane which was turned back to Havana
at Grand Cayman on 11 July. 1963. One was Luz Marina
Hernandez Salazar, the only Costa Rican woman known to”
-have been sent to Cuba for training as a guerrilla -.
warfare instructor. -She had been in Cuba since September
‘1962. ~The other Costa Rican passenger was Carlos Guillen
former head’of the Costa Rican Society of Friends. of ©

Li



--- Page 57 ---
The CIA Station in Quito reports that the military
junta, which assumed power in Ecuador on 11 July, can -
be expected to follow the guidance of the Embassy and.
the Station in controlling travel to and from Cuba and
the Soviet bloc. .The-activities of Cuban subversives
in Ecuador, at least for the present, have been greatly
inhibited by the mass arrests of Communists and pro-
Cubans and by the outlawing of the Communist | Party: by.
the © junta.

- Honduras

It is reported that ‘the Honduran: ‘Communist: Party
has issued.orders to its members not to. attempt to.
travel to Cuba at the-present time. This action is
apparently the result of the inereasing wigilance of -
thé Honduran government and the greater. implementation.
of. stricter travel controls.

“Movement of Cuban Propaganda
Guatemala

According to an unconfirmed report received in July
a Bureau of Information of the Communist Party of.
Guatemala is being. formed in collaboration with Prensa
Latina and is to be managed clandestinely. It expects
to receive news by shortwave radio from Cuba and print
‘bulletins for distribution by radio stations. . This may
‘indicate a pattern by which Prensa Latina will attempt .
to distribute on 4 more clandestine, basis int other areas
in: Latin America.

Honduras.
It was reliably reported ‘that in mid- july 1963, a

mall coastal freighter landed 14 large boxes of Communis
propaganda on the northern coast of Honduras, the boxes:



--- Page 58 ---
-3-

» Movement _of Guerrillas and Arms”

~ Argentina

“Extremist members of the Peronist Party, ‘apparent ly
under the leadership of such figures as Hector Villalon
and John William Cooke, were repoxted to be receiving
“encouragément, and promises of large sums of money from
Cuba in support of their efforts to train and organize
subversive groups in Argentina. Villalon has stated.

hat his plan-calls for expanding. and accellerating
subversive activities in Argentina culminating in a
‘complete take over within two years. There is no indica
ion that Peron himself has agreed to this plan. It has
een reported that leaders of the Communist Party of ..
rgentina have been greatly annoyed by the tendency of
he Castro regime to support the revolutionary Peronists..

. It is . reported that the so-called Army of
‘Liberation (ANL) of Argentina, which is a relatively
“small Castroist organization directed from Cuba by -
John William Cooke, has in recent weeks been negotiating
for the purchase of arms and has been offered submachine
guns, bazookas and other weapons by two or three ‘private

uppliers. It was reported, however, that the ANL wa
aving difficulty getting enough dollars from Cuba 't
make” -significant purchases: possible.

- Bolivia

The Bolivian Ministry of Foreign Relations on 23
.August protested formally to the Cuban Chargé d’Affaires™
‘in La Paz against the Cuban Embassy support to the - miners
‘during the recent crisis. Subsequently, however, Foreign

inister Fellman informed the Cuban Chargé that he need
not fear that the Government of Bolivia would break- ~
diplomatic relations with Cuba... There has, . in fact, been
te) hard. information linking the Cuban Embassy - with. ‘th



--- Page 59 ---
Brazil ;

Cuban Ambassador to Brazil, Raul Roa Kouri, is.”

eported to have attempted to encourage peasant league
‘leader Francisco Julio to revitalize the leagues in .
orthern Brazil. ' According to some reports efforts are.

eing made to unify the leadership and bring dissident.
elements under the general direction of Juliao.  Other:.
reports indicate that, although the Cuban Embassy is... :
providing guidance and possibly. financial support. to the.
‘movement, it had not yet resolved thes internal dissension
in the Leagues. ‘ cae

Colombia

From Colexbia reports have been received of incre-
asing Cubau assistance, primarily in the form of training
,courses by instructors who have been trained in Cuba,

o the Worker-Student-Feasant Movement (MOEC). A small
guerrilla band encountered by the Colombian arny in
uly 1963 was broken up when five members of the hand
ere killed and two others captured. A small quantity:
farms and a considerable amount of books and pamphlet
m revolutionary warfare, photographs of Fidel Castro,
Camilo Cienfuegos and Mao Tse-tung, and bulletins ‘of
the MOEC were found at the camp site. Recent reports.
-have ‘indicated an increase in the terrorist efforts o
he MOEC and increased promises of assistance from’ Che
Guevara with regard to the training . of. additional MOE

Costa Rica

There have been a number of unconfirmed reports
alleging small-scale training of revolutionaries on ©
‘Costa Rican territory. for guerrilla activity in :
“Nicaragua. . For example, in mid-July an increased number’.
of guerrillas were reportedly being trained in Costa Rica
by Adolfo Garcia Barberena, well-known Nicaraguan “.'
Fevolutionary leader and member . _of the Seas (fat iona?



--- Page 60 ---
-5-°-

vanti-Nicaragua revolutionary group). In ‘early August ,
Alberto Serrato,’ leader of the FLN in Costa Rica, ©:
(reportedly left with a group of Nicaraguans for the -.
Costa Rican-Nicaraguan border. Another report indicated
that Hector Bogantes Zamora, Costa Rican agitator was...
supposed to have left San Jose in mid-August -for the .
Nicaraguan border to supervise’ the passage of Nicaraguan.
guerrillas from Costa Rica into Nicaragua. Bogantes,
who recently returned from attending the May Dey celebra
tions in Cuba, is said to have been assigned this - :
responsibility by the Costa Rican Communis t Party.

‘So far as we know, the GON, which is norma lly wells
informed and highly sensitive to such activities. on its”
borders, has not made any complaints or otherwise. ‘signifie
concern or awareness of these reported. activities.

“Hons auras

’ The Honduran amed forces began to move agsinst a_

group of pro-Castro‘guerrillas operating against the

icaraguan Government and active in the vicinity of the ™|
.Nicaraguan-Honduran border. The Micaraguan National Guar
has been conducting operations on its side of the border
against the insurgents since July. The dense jungle and
difficult terrain, however, will impede the efforts of
both forces to eliminate the guerrillas.

‘Information on the guerrilla force is scanty and:
onflicting. It is apparently composed of members of t
National Liberation Front (FLN), a Communist-dominated
‘and Cuban-supported revolut tonary organization active
primarily in Honduras and Nicaragua since the fall- of
1962. The strength. of the. force . is not known,

A captured guerrilla of the FLN- (Nationat ‘Liberation
Front - a Communist= =dominated, Cuban-supported, anti-:.
Nicaraguan group) confessed that’ he was a member of a)
group. of .46 who entered Nicaragua from Honduras on - 22 ‘July



--- Page 61 ---
He said that their mission was to establish a base ‘camp |
n the Isabella mountains, “Department of Jinotega, ‘in
rder to indoctrinate the peasants and to train them in.

guerrilla tactics. He admitted that he ha -received. six

months' guerrilla warfare training in: Cub
LN leaders‘had received -similar. training.

British Guiana

s

In British Guiana, Guiana Import- Export Corporation .
(Gimpex) received a one million doilar advance payment
deposited by the Cuban Alimpex Corporation for goods to
be delivevted to Cuba in the future. Gimpex has, in turn,
loaned this money to the Government of British Guiana.
Cheddi Jagan's People's Progressive Party is the major .

tockholder in Gimpex. Mohammed Kassim,: Manager. of Gimpex,
has indicated that Gimpex will be able to secure additional
loans from Cuba in amounte sufficient: to tide the Jaga
overnment over any. foreseeable crisis. It. was also
reported that Gimpex plans to buy. aircraft, spare parté

nd other machinery in the. United States ‘for reshipmen'

¥o Cuba. . a

General

' Reports continue to be received from many places °



--- Page 62 ---
. ARGENTINA : —).G - . } 26th :
3OLIVI ee i 26th of July

VcHiLE P99 P| a6th of suly Cc
COLOMBIA 26th of Jul
| CosTA RICA i Sy 2. | 0° 26th of July Celebrations
DOM, REP, 371.0 ft 26th of July Celebrations
‘26th of July rat

26th of July Celebrations

NICARAGUA

a Celebratior
| PARAGUAY oe _ of July. Celebrations:
|= ee : a

| TRINIDAD

coe ; . a ne a “a Most attendi ng wil
furnucuay <a fas of ‘July Celebrations." "to work

VENEZUELA ® eit) 22 2} ne of July Celebrations



--- Page 63 ---
Physical Ed. Seminar - 1-Secking funds ~ 10~-Returning
from 26..July Celebrations

c

COSTA RICA
DOM. REP.
ECUADOR

EL SALVADOR
GUATEMALA

&
<3]
ia
o
23)
n

July Celebrations

-Returning were

RINIDAD-

URUGUAY:

| (VENEZUELA. -| “3:4. 0, 7 26th July,


