
--- Page 1 ---
198-10009-10098) | 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |
JFK Assassination System Date: 6/24/20)
Identification Form

Agency Information

AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER: __198-10009-10098

RECORD SERIES: CALIFANO PAPERS

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: ARMY
FROM: JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
TO: MULTIPLE

TITLE: ICCCA: REPORT ON STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS DESIGNED TO COUNTER
SUBVERSION

DATE: = 11/26/1963
PAGES: 19

SUBJECTS :
ICCCA - SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
CUBAN SUBVERSION
RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION

DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: — Secret
RESTRICTIONS: 1B
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: 05/15/1998

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS : Califano Papers, Box 2, Folder 25. Memo from Califano to Wheeler, Sloan, Alger, Wendt, Carpenter.
Quilter re: attached paper concerning status of implementation of actions designed to counter Cuban
subversion.

TFK Bete

artment of the Army EO 13526
Declassify “ Exclude Exempt
Authority.

©] Refer To > Gy
Review Date 5 / /9/ 94 SBy, ES, V

v9.4 21
HY 50955 DoclId: 324274708 Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
_ SECRET

26 NOV 1965

MEMORANDUM NG, 0) FOR GENERAL EARLE G. WHERLER (9CS)
MB. FRAME 4. SLOAN, Dep deat Secf/Del ISA
Qegionsl Alfaire)
MaAIGR CEMERAL J. ©. ALGER, USA
. u LW. F. A. WEERDT, USK
Baa PG CENERAL ad. W, GARPENTER, Hi, USAR
SHIGADIER GENERAL €. 7. QULTER, Usst

SUBILCT:

ipiricantal Coordinating Cecamlitee of Cuban Affaiss:
Report om | Statue af leenlementation af Actlong Besigned to
Counters Vubversion ()

Beference: DA Meme G64, subject ag above, dated September 16, 1963

Attached herewith ie a final drei of the Repowt to the President of
the Bubcommdttes on Cuban Subversion on Progress dinde During September
1963 in Gerbing Cuben Gubversion in Latin America.

itis requested thet commncate, if any, be provided tis office ty
S200 hours, 2 December 1963. The Department of Defeuse portion of
sabject report ic haged on subzclosions provided in reeponee te releranced

menorandaa,
Signed
Josepn A. Califane, Tro
Joseph A, Califane, Jr.
General Counsel.
Euciosare
Ae Stated
ce: Mr. Yarmolinsky (OSD)
Lt Col Haige. eeipcse
Mr. Califano oN
ASG : . : EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING

por CECRET pop DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY

OSA, ASC Central iniezeadl

HW 50955 Docld:32424708 Page 2

ST SS



--- Page 3 ---
| £82

| 88

7 “gan s

Pe eae

“Repoae OF FRE

SUB-COMMITTEE =

QUAN SUBVERSTON

STORM TARE DURIES SEPTEmER 1963, aN CURBING

BEVERSION BN LATIN AME sRIGA


--- Page 4 ---
 BRorer

oe Le Control of. Travel to_and. Fron ‘xb
-- Department of State .

“ Enstructed Eabacey Tanis to eal te. the attention

(9 the Foreign Miniotry | our concern at increased evidence

OP” 9g Aszeflot attempts: te establish North Africa routes to

: 7 Cuba, especially throvgh Algeria, and our ‘conviction that a .

“Teniela has a valid case tn Parting any Blee civil aiz :

: "penetration of Afniea, oe

: be instructed Enbassy Conakry to contact Guinean Covern~

“ment: officials, ‘reninding chen of thelr past assurances

| that uo Aetetloe Eights to Guba would be pemttted to.

a eg Conatey facilities, aad te exprees. our contern at

‘yesent indications that Secotlak was Preparing to establish

. 2 service tery tubs via. Conakry. , -

- " Ge Instructed Consulate fort au France to snvestigate

“and ‘seport om alleged jandlag and refuelling of Cubana

 aiverafe at Guadeloupe, Also double-ch ecked sisectly

° with the Shell Company, the supplier of the fuel.

: instructed Eabassy Yaris te query the French Government a
about alleged Subene use of the Guadeloupe facility, and
£0 express cur concern at this evidence of Cuba's attexpt :

- to use Prench caribbean dependencies for eights ‘to. ‘and ©
. ne tee ‘Brom

‘Ww 50955. doca:32424708. “Page a.



--- Page 5 ---
8 SEGRE

we 2 ow

 tzon Latin dnertoa. oo

- . de , Instructed Echassy Rio ¢ to make @ tew approach to oe
: : the Beacilian foreign Ministry to express our concern i
at Cuba's continuing wae of "eharter" flights ae .

and the laxity of Brazilian officials in the control of.
“ps ssengers. : Bering, the course ef the month the Brazitian
Covernment! began’ tightening eontrels agatase ‘Cybana ao
ligt nts, Specifically, all requests for landing permlasion : . i .
: were henceforth to be processed by the Foreign Office, | nae
with appropriate delays. Also tigh nter passenger, erey. - a

i snd cargo controls were to be lnotitated vhen a Cubans *

; vs flight is permieced to use Bragilian feeilities.. .

- - bee “Determined that the G,K, had specifically warned AR,
oe “eeu that no aviation facil was available in Barbados and
that BM, would, in the future, respect Shell 1 Company S
decision te deny fueling to Cubena planes, a
oe g. Continued inter-Departmental efforte to Prevent
. vesunption of foxy service between Cuba and the u Be _ :
which a Br teish et tleen, Maxold Berber, has been attempt- :

ing te eatablish daring the past several month,

HW -50955 Docla: 32424708 Page 5-)*


--- Page 6 ---
AW “50955

SHORE
SECRET

"
wae
¢

as . Bs “Instructed Consul Georgetowm to investigate and -. oe :
- veport on evi dence the Department xeceived which indicates

that cuba is planning to sell merchant vessels ‘to British a

-. Guiana in order to facilizate the establishsent | of fo

a regular service for. passengers é and cargo...

ta connection with the Seventh Congress of the”

7 Internetions! Taion (UTA) hed in Habsns Septenber 29 = a
 eetober 3, 1963 the Suenos Aires Station: -
: =) encouraged the Aegentios Rati ional Yoderstion

: : of Architects to oppose Argestine attendance at the a _
- Babane nesting, with the serult that 25 of che 39° :
ractieing architects whoo had plauned to attend can~ - : :

cell ied thet xe sartieipation; .

(ay arrenged to prevent the attendance of any .

officially authorized Argentine delegation at the abana”

7 seeting » but encourag ged che attendance of an official

Argentine delegation of ent t-Commmnd st coloration at an
international architects mecting to be held an a Mexico

ih Cotober} >

“pevldi324aza7e8.


--- Page 7 ---
“MW 50955 DocTd:32424708. Page 7°: Semttotm,

-@) delivered a nemorendua to the Minister of,

7 Interior concerning Coban charter flights to Brasil which

ee supported the. Ambsesador'g kequest that ‘the Avgentine
7 government express concern over such flights.

be Rio ae Janeiro. Station continued to furnish !

ee the Embassy with date on Cobens stighes te Bravit used

- M in representations te the ‘Brasilia : Foreign Office,
: Also induced Rio aizport officials ta impose stringent : cae .

: passport control and baggage efforts. ‘These efforts -

= contributed to the Brazilian Governneat® & failing to.

7 igs auc landiag permits fox Cubana flights on September. : :

- 21, 24 avd 25, 1983 toreing their cancellation, When
“ Gabans, because of harassment at Rio, began wsing the :
landing facilities in Saa Paulo where controls were _
“nea existent, CIA initieted and obtained a local, ‘itateon
egvecuent fox sinilas harassment in the event of fatare
7 Gubans fligt nts to Sas Paulo. OO TesS ;
: Ge Mexteo gity station inspired & press 2 caapatea
of hoof and mouth and smallpox epi denies dee Cuba, prior a
te the Arehivecta Congress to dise courage participation :

iu the Sebana necting. The geoulting qaarantines and



--- Page 8 ---
. innoculations were a factor in discouraging $2 of the |

” 69 Hexic an professional arel nLtects vaho. were expected to

“gy to Hak bang fron attending the Congress.

Zl. Control of Nevexent of Propayanda

Teper OB Cates, UR

Ww 50955 Docld:32424708. Page 8


--- Page 9 ---
» EEL.

AW 50955

_ assistance. to the fionduran Arny in its effort to locate
~ and eliminate the hand of guerrillas allegedly operating

da the Pataca | River area slong the Honduxan-H “BMosraguan |

Me operations: Ra: the Pataca River area, A total ot 27: sorties.

' Derartmen

. border. *

Bepaxtrent of Defense

7 Honduran armed forces conducting counter-~insurgency

” SRA lS h

re

Contre of Slandestize Movement of Guerrillas:
ang arms “a —_

State

Py

_ Made the n@vessary Brrangements through Embassy

Tegucig salpa with the Goveriment ef Hoaguras for the

: dispateh of th LER uv. 3. helieopters to give logistical —

Three Cl-13 hellcoptexe ‘ivan USSOUTECOM cupported

oo were Shown resulting Ey delivery ef 39: 28 pounds of supplies, . .

oo pas sengers to points in the operational area, and .

. - recovery of 409 Pounds ¢ of cupplis fren ‘the  eporattonat

‘“Docld:32424708: Page 9. 1

evacuate we (of =a sick Hoadaran soldiers, airlife ct 19

SECRET



--- Page 10 ---
exo ee of Stat 2

ae Instoucted Embes “7 Mexteo City to inform the - —

Moxtean aixline SARSA that thelr proposal te purchase
sucpise Cuban aireraft would in fact resuit in the.
7 accrual to Cube of a ‘significant anount of herd currency, © 7
and the Us. wont have to oppose the trans meaction. :
. ; Further, Fa dollars were Lavolved ia the purchase,
de vould be a violation of the Cuban Assets Control
© Regulations,
B. Informed Departuent. of treasury, Foreign Assets ;

. Centred of Stee, of the activities of Semondelp Enterprises,

a Miemi fiea engaged in sending renietances te ‘persons es

~ in Cate 4n victation of the Caban Assets Control :
Regulations. . .
‘e. Ine ‘tracted Goaculate, ‘Beltz ze to inform . - ‘ —

Mr. Richard Joyce, an an American national, ‘that his -

. commercial € transactions with Gaba were in violation

of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations and that he

s ds prohibited from engaging in euch trede.

HW 50955. DocTd:32424708. Page 10-0 -.  k ;


--- Page 11 ---
| Avay School fox Latin America in tle Panama Canal Zone

- eG “20 Septenber. | Daring. che conth, & toval of OL Latin:

Department of Defense

SECREL
sm Boe

Strens shontes :

of Comter-Insurzeney Capabi Uittes -

a. Thirteen Latin Aserican officers graduated from

the counter-ingurgescy Operations Seurse of the U.S.

evican officers encolled in courses stressing counter -

a

neurgency at the Aray Canal Zone school.

ye 'b. Eight U.S. Amy eounter-insurgency mobile -

. ; training teams were provi iding training to the Araed .

oO BoB. Ade Force cowiter-insurgenc y teataing teans vere, aan

HW 50955 DocId:32424708 ‘Page 11

 wekiier patrol exait used for coastal surveillance,

ersining in the UnivedSseates

Foreas of five Latin émerLoan - countries daxing the period.

in tuo counterles.

co is the Genal Zone, 13 students fron five countries |

@ under ineteuntion an the operation ef coast guard ©

Siz studen tS ‘Seen fue countries were undergoing « sinilar

a. AUS. Bavy countersineur; gemcy eraining cea -

2s in Venecueia to aselet dn lopwoving the ceeurlty

of off installations in Lake Maravaibo, Hs

‘SESh a
SECRES



--- Page 12 ---
HY. 50955 |

Gersna 185 aireraft each for wedical civic action and

tnternal seourtty purposes.

's€ the lean and a SOeday extensiou has boon approved.

- Ceneral Inceollisence Aceacy

: group and debriefings axe in process. Negotiations

, “eontinae with the Goverment of Guatemala for the a

te deere 28S ‘their partol capability on vivers crossing -:

the Bolivian “Exontier. our infers mation is chat. the:

"of personel and weapons inte Fers.

DoclId: 32424708 - Page 12

os 8
. SECRET ws

@. Costa Rica and Honduras were provided one _

£. Oa Hay 25, £953, three M-43B RAMAN helicopters a

were provided te thea goverment af Coloxbia on @ 60-day. a

loan. the Colombian Gavermaant requested 8a extension |

LB savy Station has reerulted, on &

o. trial basis, & fomer menber of the a Noventber geensste

formation of a now interns] eceutity sexvice.

b, Lima Ststion has agreed te faraish the Peruvian _

investigations Police WIP) with an, outboard moter:

vivers erassing this eve at ntler wave provided ed the primery

avenues for recent attempts to gain cl stine entry

‘, . sonar
Ll. . SEQUEL
- SronSawan oreo



--- Page 13 ---
Wn,

"Levevtnaent of Befense

Euchonge of inte elilgence on castan Subs sersion

Engineering installation work continued ¢ on radio

stations for Managua, Risaragua and Teguelgelpa,

Honduras. ilo farther progress hes been mide in reaching

agreane ents with Colombia aad Eeaador for rights to

establioh radio stations in thee countries. Ine tallatioa

of the new transe2s thalan commercial ‘cable in Panans . ,

is neésrhag ccempletion.

ne Areney

gentmal tntedié .
Cra Stations continued i the ele exchange of ¢ tntedigence -

“iafomation with Zoeal intelligence agencies. The

foltes BES UTA actions ace of special significances — a

a. The CLA Starion in Buenos Aires furntcted the . ‘

. Argentine State Tutelligense 6 exvice | GRE) with.

HW 50955  DocId: [32 Owto vee 13 - . SEGRE?

information on the travel of. Axgent ings te Gaba, and ree

queate ted that SIDE provide new traces and debricf these me

2

iene SIDE after the maar ¢ govenument is inntalled on

ellere om their return whenever feasible: SIDE.
previded the traces, but did mot conduct any debrie? ings.
e Station bas net fe Lt it feasible to try to remedy - |

this onlesion in view Gt che personel, ehenges espected 7
° :



--- Page 14 ---
bh As a vault of information phased by the Bogota

‘Scacion to the adainistra tive Department of Security

as} concerning Golembian travellers to cuba, a gumbo
£ passport winlations pave ‘be been discovered in which
travellers to Cuba are using pag sporte ismed to other
persons. Thexe is @ reluetanse, however, on che part
ot the Coloubian Governmcnt: te prosceute this type
: of violation, ae . eS
- oe At the urging of the CiA Station In Line, the a
: Rattonat Intelligence Sexviee {SIN} inetwwcted one of
its penetrations of left ist groups to campaign for a exif
to Cuba ta order to rece sive guerrilla warfare training a

Thie asset has been offered, and hes accepted, an conor

ta mike the trip by che Leftist Revolutionary Movement

(8), primary vakiele of Coban subversive: activi ties
20.&

"

‘ta Sera, Beiefing aad de briefing ¢ ef th 1 asset will be.
dome ay she Sis, _

thes Peruvian Naval in¢edlsonce Service 2 e aus) is
da response to the efforts of the e Station da ‘Lina, sent
ono of its agents ta Chile ‘aess he will sign aboard a
Chilean freighter calling at Habaea. The asset bas been
giver specific tatetligesse seqeszenents te £01£111.

The

“HW 50955 - Docld: 324294708, . Page 14.



--- Page 15 ---
; the Prime Mindetes and Minister of Government and a
- Police hes requested from the CIA representative in
. Lim any informst lon thet he mig ant supply ont subversive
‘elensats posing @ throat to che Goverament of Feri. -
Tales sequest has opened an eddictonal shenael te the
nda Os level of the. Gove garranemt wheh a concomaltant
prospectior effective action when needed.
a a. “ throwgh tegular Lintsoa ‘shannels, - the Venezuel ar 7
General Divestorate oe Police (OLGEFOL) has been provided
. by CIA with the names of il Yonenwelans known to have:
travaliad te Cuba fram Pete saey ‘through August 1983,
Tala activity whit be eareled eat on a cont vinging potas. _
: the names ave tow being integrated into the vegelar

. wateh Pee kepe at invermetional alxporta ia Venesuela.

Thus fat, at Least thc sKee Fe ete witea haye been arrested =
. on the basis of the infermstion Supp lied te DIGHEOL, :
BUGEPS! is Bas indicated ite appreciation of ‘the data _

“being wupplied wed desires that the arrangement be

soatinusd.

seretal gid Catenral

n

: a es a . . ce oe aa i
HW 50955 : Dood: 32424708 | Page i5--



--- Page 16 ---
| VELL,

HW 50955

ether Snqelal Actions

Uoited States Information Arspey

a. The Agescy's press service tranemitted seven

articles rélating to Cuban. subversion ea its wirelesa |

file service te USIS offices throughout Latin America

. ¥or placement ia the lecal new paperz. Developments

geported fa these articles included demands by the Bolivian _

®

Sesete for the oustex of the Guban Chareé | d'affaires,

- tervorisa and ¢ goverment comberaction in. Venenuela, ~

the neizure in Ecuador of an ars and explooives cache |

. reportedly ‘received Evom Cuba, several articles on the

-, Enternations) Caden of 2a wend teccs ; Coneresa in Habens

oagsess as @ forum for ite propagands claims}, and
Assietant Secretary Nartia’ @ Los A Angeles pe oh in whieh

he pointed out the regine’s aifiniey § for chines 2 communist os

‘Comps asizing the intent of the Castro regime to use the |

aunt subversion, In ali, the presse service teanealtted |

pert with econanie and polleieal condi¢iens inside: the.

the reports or velugece..
pocta: 32424708 ‘Page 416 : . Seen

secre and tes emmtinued exphasis on violent revolution -

27 articles and commentaries dusting Sentember ca the

counksy @3 evidsuced hy the regime's own a admissions and



--- Page 17 ---
ao iho
|B. She Yolea of Amerdon Seanish beroadsaste to Latin

fearica during September carried a tatal of 20 news

2

AMBiVSes, Commentaries, press round-eps, and interviews .
velated ta the sebjece of Cuban subveraion. Some of

the developpents exeated Ineloded the following:

?

cary on commmist ombaseles ag chaenels for

4 gawsen

subversion; '< news sunlysie on the U.S. students whe

visited Cuba; assistants Seerotary Martin's Les Angeles —

hy & Reve analyeds on Cuban subversion as an obstacle —
an the norsalization of U,5.-Sovier relaciens: a threes
part gerias ou university sutenaey in Latin America;

| @ festere on the latter of a Colombden ceudent whe.

- Werk bo Gebe om a sehoiavship and was diaiilesiened by. ° -
the commaalst indecerimation; o comentary on Che Gueverals
_ fecent article dn revplutienasy stietegy; and a cometary

we guercilla training Im Guba. Many of thete items were  --

4

wepented several tiene fa the broadeasta. The “Rendeavous °°
with Guba" hour carried fouz or Five gommentaries seam. 0 ol. |

Sake and imterviews nightly on acomemtc and political

weote inside Guba. Of epeeial note, the Cubes
ic aad Castro himself resected aneediy mo VYolce of
A anories brandeagte about Che Geevara’a arricte and to come

nentarles thar Guba bad eesepred on agelowlturel cole in

HW 50955 Docld:32494708 Page 17 °° | | 6 SEGRE : the -


--- Page 18 ---
UMW 50955 DocId:32494708 Page 18

phe ccumimist | bise and hed postpone se 4 tes plans to

c. oa September 27, the Ageucy issued a ciresier
bas struction to Siilite Latin American teste urging .
graater attenti tion te opportuniel eo fox publictetog Cubans
atianlated subversion, cussestiag the various types of

int rormatd Lot activi 283 25 aupE sorr this effort, and recuesting

“gont®ly coports of field actions taken te implement the
ina truction. This was done as a. follow-up to the original
ins truction ea Cab Bon subversion which wag isgued April 3,

“a
€

BOB,

: BS

Senex aL inte teilicence Ag
By. GIA in Byeelieeestisted im the. defection aad
emlioitation of @ Osban athelete ober @ Boren Ondarse

in Porte Aleg se on 4 Septembar 1963. Peso wis & menber :

@

ef the Gehan baghet~beld team which gar icipated ie the’

Wortd Univ evalty Gawes (FISU) held. in Ports Alegre _
Bratt tn early Septanber 1663,

«Be Aeshetancd was given to the Covernaent of
Sastemala in the intervegation of seme of those whe

were Q¢vested im wameckioa with the Comamdat Parcy

thet were confiscated im Late May 1963...

x

SUCRE Galy



--- Page 19 ---
ante, the Commantst Pax “ty, :

wh i ¢he captuved ase
guercilias, ox asgthing else that could be constsued -
». The one whe 4 id adatt knowledge ©

. Gerd adk that he wae involved din

y wey, The Goverment |
pag Guatemala wants to intern ogate thie person agein at

@ later date.

Ge cA Station bas Kontev ide arranged far an
inter Few betwee 2 on Uruguayan wb Licacy. inte elligence
effiaer ead & teoenk éatester from the Montevideo |
‘Saban Eubasoy oy ee ing which extensive information regarding
vitiee wae revealed. The Seugesyan
: vtetoee erepared @ -geport contains ng this data and
presented EE te bhe Metlonal Coune el Eas Govereent vite
Res bien slow te indicate concern over comamist stb .

wversive 4 evivity in Ueugusy. Ag a vesult of this eeports

£ laterios to appoint —

problen of Commmiat
s subs yeouton and to mile tecomnene cicions as to what course
of actien showid be token by the Uruguayan Gove erent...

Should the Govermmcat wis

HW 50955 Docld:32424708 Page 19

poo Only one of those int eareagated admittes te ary tavalvensnt we,


--- Page 20 ---
i

brought to “Lght.-

i HW 50955 DoclId:32424708- Page 20

gtronger anti-gubversive legislation the Station hag taker —

: eteps to prepare euguyvan public opinien by plantas

eimalbaneous the salient °

features af the defector re th ataiia sr bres a

reporting ia th : ates where the defector wilthe


