
--- Page 1 ---
198-10007-10029 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 |

JFK Assassination System Date: 6/24/201

Identification Form

Agency Information

AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER: — 198-10007-10029
RECORD SERIES: CALIFANO PAPERS

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

Document Information

ORIGINATOR: = CIA
FROM:  C. TRACY BARNES
TO:
TITLE: | REPORT ON THE COLD WAR USE OF RADIO BROADCASTING BY CIA
DATE: 06/25/1953
PAGES: 15
SUBJECTS :
RADIO BROADCASTING - CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION: — Secret
RESTRICTIONS: 1A; 1B
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: — 04/03/1998

OPENING CRITERIA :

COMMENTS :

Califano Papers, Box 1, Folder 2. Memo from Barnes re: Report on the Cold War Use of Radio

Broadcasting by CIA.

WEA Kav: dur

Department of the Army EO 13526
CA Declassify “ Exclude | Exempt
Authority,

& Refer To

Review Date 42615 By hadead G Mg

v9.1
HW 50955

DociId: 32424022

38

Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
~ . oe SECRET
Security Information

At : . 25 June 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR: (See distribution below) .
SUBJECT + Report On The Cold War Use of Radio Broadcasting by CIA

‘Le We have made a complete survey of the use of radio broedeast~ :
ing in the cold war mission of CiA. The essential parts of the report .
and recommendations are contained in the attached memorandum dated
15 May 1953 and entitled "Report On the Cold War Use of Radio Broadcaste
ing by CIA". (Operational information and other sensitive matter con~ ;
teined in the original, but deleted from the attached, will be sep= |
arately supplied where appropriate to the interested area divisions.)
25 The policy outlined in the attached memorandum has been approved
by the) Deputy ‘Director for Plans, who has diréeted the following actions:

ao Undertake, in collaboration with each area division, 3
country by country analysis of all indigenous broadcasting and
television systems for the purpose of devising plans for their :
penetration, where feasible, or-an explanation where it appears
not to be feasible. . .

bo Develov and submit, in collabcration with the appropriate
personnel and training offices, a plan for the recruitment and
training of officers qualified for covert broadcasting operations.

co: Explore with the State Department the possibilities of a
joint undertaking to exploit fully, in the interest of efficlency
and economy, material derived from escapee interrogations and other
intelligence sources, covert as well as overt, to support all U.S.

propaganda eZforts. ; .

d. Develop and recomend, in collaboration with area divisicas,
an improved method for the issuance and dissemination of policy
“guidance to. the field. .

e. Prepare and submit, in collaboration with General McClelland,
&@ project to produce broadcasting devices capable of electronic
intrusion inte Commmist broadcasts; to develop special techniques
for their uses and to contime research and development of other
unconventional methods of broadcasting suitable to our miasione

3. Chief of Op: rations,

. SECRET
HW 50955 DocId:32424022 Page 2 ; ;


--- Page 3 ---
SECRiIT
Security Information

¢

.. 3e Chief of Operations, DD/P, has authorized the circulation of
the attached material with the request that -you cooperate in the carrying

out of the DD/P's directive. Particular attention is called to. itom 2. a.
aboves — . .

. Le Mr. Cs Lloyd Egner, assisted by Mr. Stanley P. Riclardscn, huve
been assigned the resvonsibility for staff coordination of these matters

on behalf of CPP and will be available to you for assistance in planning
and sunnorting broadcasting onerations.

/s/ C. ‘reg Barnes
(Co TRACY LARMS

Chief .
Political and Psychological
Werfare
_ Attachment
As stated above —
Distribution.
ar/P el . ’
AXXO e 2 .

Criefs, All Areas - 1 ea.

Chiefs, Senior Staffs - 1 ea.

c/Te ad

PF/C/OPE 2 1 /
re/CFY -2 :

re/C/PAD = 1 -

«Ar. Femr <2

RI #1

a

: ; . SECRET
HW 50955 Docld:32424022 Page 3-


--- Page 4 ---
SECRET
Security Information

15 May 1953

MEMORANDUM FCR: CHILF, POLITIC AL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE. -

SUBJECT @ Report On The Cold War Use of Radio Broadcasting by CIA

Attached hereto is our report on CIA radio broadcasting a5 a cold
war weapon. It is grouped into the following sections: an

i. Section 1, Page 1, deals with RADIO AS A MLDIUM IN VHL CCLO LAR.
It shous in the nain. that the countrics having the most to féar from
Commniam are doing the least to counter its radio propacanda o

. 2. Section 2, Page 2, deals with CAPABILITIES. It embraces a.
discussion of the techniques available to TTI,

3. Section 3, Pare 3, discusses broad TARGUTS and appraises our
current and nlanned activities arainst them. :

4. Section i, Page h, deals with the principal PROPLEMS peculiar
to covertly direeted broadcasting, and their solution.

Se. Section 5, Page 10, contains RECOMMENDATIONS for a bedy. of
princivles to govern over-all CTIA noliey In Its prescnt and future
activities in this field. . ;

(For a detailed statement, of present CIA radio broadcasting

assets, reference is made to CPY te CPP memorandum of 25 February 1953,
entitled "Preliminary Survey of Radio Broadcasting Media", TS E6HE9.)

(The original "Report On The Cold War Use of Radio Broadcasting
" from which this document is excerpted, was dated 15 May 1953,
Se) 7
‘ (The data on broadcasting hours by countries was obtained from

FBID and YOA, that on available receivers from OST/ORR and VOA, and that~
on Soviet jamming transmitters from OND.)

By CIA,
TS ORY

/s/ Co Lloyd kgner :
— C. LLOYD sGHFR ©
Attachment, as stated. — — yO
PP/CLE sha .

HW 50955 DoclId: 324274022 Page 4

o
tt
O
t
“3


--- Page 5 ---
“SECRET
Security Information

15 May 1953

REPORT ON THE COLD WAR USE OF RADIO BROADCASTING BY CIA

le EBadio As a Medium in the Cold War

ao The USSR and its satellites, including China, broadcast
to countries outside the Orbit 15395 hours per week of aggressive psych= :
olegical warfare.

The free world Fesponds with 1,015 hours per week.

Co ‘This gives the enemy a numerical, advantage of” approxinetely
seven to five. In reality, the Communist advantage ig mech greater oo.
because of their successful interference with free world broadeasts to the
Orbit through jamming and the penalties they impose on their own peoples
for Listening to foreign broadcasts. It is estimated that these measures
reduce the effectiveness of free world broadcasts to the Orbit by as much,
if not more than, 50 percent. An illustration is that the Commmists
devote an estimated 909 transmitters to the jamming of free world broad=
casts, There is no jamming of Orbit broadcasts. to the Western world, nor
any restrictions on listening to them. —

. ds Orly the English spealcing world holds its own numerically in
the over-all radio war with the Orbit. OA, BFC and Canada together
broadcast 238 hours per week against the Orbits; whereas the Orbit countries
combined direct 222 hours per week to Fnglish language audiences in North
America, the United Kingdom, and the Pacific areca.

‘Go In the rest of the world, the balance is drastically in
favor of the Commnists. They broadcast 1, 173 jam-free hours to all
other countries around the world in multiple languages, compared with a
mere 26), hours broadcast to all Orbit countries by non-English speaking
nations of the free world, ,

f. Of the total of 1,015 broadcast hours beamed by all the free
world to the Orbit, CTA, through TPTCNIC and other quasi-clandestine
stations, breadeasts 513 hours, or more than half, in the name of exlles
from Communist dominated areas.

go The greatest disparity in effort is most noticeable in
Western Europe. France, which receives &9 hours of broadcasts per week
from the Orbit as-a whole, responds with only 35 to the Orbit. Italy
receives 97 hours from the Orbit but broadcasts only hh to it, Spain 94
to 12, Greces 89 to 9, Turkey 3 to 7. Even relatively aggressive
Yugoslavia receives 19) brcadcast hours from the Orbit against its outout

to the Orbit of o &9 hours.
my 9 ox he The one~sided

HW 50955 DocId:32424022 Page 5


--- Page 6 ---
SECRET
Security Information

he The one-sided contest is even sore marked in a comparison
of the breadeast output of the USER alone, without the satellites,
against Europe. It subjects Spain, Greece and Italy together, for
instance, to 1)0 hours of broadcasts per week. ‘The combined broadcasts
of these three countries to the USSR, however, number only 19 hours per
weeks France and Turkey who, together, receive 61; hours per week from
the USSR, make no broadcasts at all to the USSR. - :

i. Appendix I gives a compilation by country or area of the
international broadcasts to and from USSR and the satellites. It shows
that the Commnists are outslugging the free world, and that Westera
Europe, in particular, is doing far less than it should in the radio
prepaganda battle with the Orbit. o

26 Capabilities

Several techniques are available to CIA for the use of radio
broadeasting in its covert psychological warfare mission.

a. Overt international broadcasting on fixed frequencies under
cover of covertly controlled emigre groups. This technique normally
would be calculated to reach wide audiences by means of high power and
the use of miltiple frequencies; but it invites heavy jamming, is costly
and presents security, control and political problems in the acquisition
and maintenance of suitable bases and frequency allocations. :

Ree HH

bo Quasi-clandestine broadcasts in the name of notional or
"eaptive" resistance movements using relatively low power and employing
a frequency switching technique to evade jamming. This technique presents
more manageable security and control problems, delivers a signal in spite
of jamming and costs less than high power, but it places a burden on
listeners and presents special problems in avoiding interference with
broadcasts of friendly countries. .

ee HR OK

Ce. Subsidization of overt nonpolitical, but anti-Communist,
religious broadcasts, . “+ % :

. da. Through covert penetration and/or support, the maripulation
of free world domestic broadcasting systems for the purpose (1) streng=
thening their anti-Commmist broadcasts to the Orbit and/or (23 influenc-
ing them to more aggressive anti-Communist, pro-Western attitudes in their
domestic services. =

This technique lends itself naturally to clandestine
operations. It requires a minimum of U.S. personnel, presents no

problems concerning
2

tt

SECRET

HW 50955 Doocld:32424022 Page 6


--- Page 7 ---
ne SECRET
= Security Information

problems concerning bases ‘and “naneganent, and requires relatively
agli investments and. expenses It would be advantageous beyond the
iumediate PP field, Jn such 4 post an agent could observe communist
infiltration, spot forthcoming polities changes by observing changes
in government prepagands directives, recruit agents with reliable
cover for other covert undertakings and cooperate in planning for
dental of the facilities to an enemy in the event of hostilities.

te believe ait should be the agency's established policy
te carry out such penetrations wherever opportunities offer or can
be created. A glance at the vorld map is sufficient to indicate the _
immensity of this field of potentialities, ‘both as concerns the = -
countries on the peripheries. of the USSR and Communist China in -
Europe, the Near East and Far Easts and in Latin America as well. .
We prepose that an immediate start be made, in cooperation with Aree
. Divisions, on a country-by-country survey of possibilities in this
_Srea and that action be taken to achieve Penetration wherever this
study indicates 1% may be Feasible.

Ree RRR Re

/  -@e, Use of purchased or free. tiie through covert channels
on existing radio syetens in friendly, COUNEFIES o HH

fs Electronic penetration of enony ‘proadeasts. f geo
the "Ghost® Voice operations of World War IT./. This techniqu @ is
discussed in. pars. $aeo(6) below.

- ge Po exploit ‘the amateur Poaat7 broadcasters, large
numbers ef whom eiist in Russia. + # % A Drojeet is being drafted
© explore the posdibilities of this technique, — .

; he Broadcasting from airplanes. This has been carried out a
‘experimentally in two areas with disappointing results due primarily -
to operational and equipment-limitations which make for limited aude ~
dence coverage at best. It is, moreover, very costly and.alse pre~
gents special security problems. It is not recommended, except for
possible hiteand-run. operations. Airborne transmitters might be used
on oceasion to simlate messages from agents inside “the USSR or sat=—
ellites. This is a deception technique rather than broadcasting’ bat

shoul ds we bekteve, | be explored: ; -

’ USSReo-ftadio is the only consistent medium for pierc~ ——
ing the Soviet. divon curtain. It.is estimated that there are approxi@
“mately 45000,000 receiving sets in tho USSR, of which 75 to 80. per
‘cent are believed %o be equipped with frequency bands capable of |
yeseiving foreign shortwave broadcasts. Virtually all of then. readily
receive Long” and medium wave signals. Not al] of these receivers are

in the hands of
HW 50955. DocId:32424022 Page 7 " 8 E “397 E®


--- Page 8 ---
_ SECRET
_ Security Information .

in the bands of private individualé; howevers and the number of those

: having eecesg to shortwave receivers is estimated to be constantly |
decreasing due to Soviet efforts to, increase group listening by means
of wired networks. Nevertheless, it would appear that there will be a
sizeable potential audience for foreign broadeasts in all three

‘weve bands for some time to: come. ‘One indication of this is the
fact, that at present the USSR is broadcasting approximately 900 hours
perday over 160 transmitters in 26 or more languages to its own peoples

"Many of these transmissions are to areas and over Frequencies which, lie
within our transmitting capabilitics.. _

Car assets. for exploiting this potential audience,
; AeLasin projects still, ‘in the planning stager are far from adequate o

: bo ‘Communist Chinas<Like tlie USSR, the Communist government,
of China relicS heavily om radio broadcasting for commmication with
_ the pesnle. It utdligés more than SO ational ‘and: regional stations
. for this purposs, operating chiefly, on necium and, long wave bat to
some extent, also5 on shortwave. * # e

errr

oe Ge puropesti SatelLites..The preponderance of CIA broade
casting efforts are centered on 116 areas e a

* d. The Free World.--Hany countries , afford opportunities .

for relatively inexpensive exploitation by covert penetration of

indigenous broadcasting systems and use of free or parehasod: time» al
(See. Parse 2ede) _

=. ‘He Problens of Covert: Broadcasting
- Go Cover , se

(1). & radio transmitter that « ean 1 be heard cannot be
hidden. Put another way, there are no known methods. for concealing
f¥on technical monitors the ‘geographical. - ‘gource of broadcasts, although
an the non-technical listening public can te:and often is deceivede
_ . Cover for broadcasting operations, therefore, presents a formidable.

oe probiem. Autonomous emigre organizations, which offer the most, .
eredible cover, generate. factionalism as well as ‘control, security —
and managemcnt problems. ese difficulties could, however, bs
minimized by positive agency r control through a compartmental ization
wiieh separates the cover organization from program and transmitting
L : ; operations and lays down strict requirenents on security, budget
i control, and high professional standardso/ See Chart, Annex Ilo

(2) Religious broadeasting presents few cover hnead=_

aches, but is of doubtful propagenda value o —_
i) The best cover

ea 4 o . a :

HY 50955 DecId:32424022 Page 8 SECRET


--- Page 9 ---
SECRE®
Security ‘information

“ay ‘the best cover is afforded by covert penstration
of friendly systems, (a Western European nation ‘talking back to > USSR
CtCo, a8 discussed. in’ 2ode above)s .' ; ;

. : ¢ 4) Commercial proadeasting cover * presents some: , possi
 pilatzes in the free ‘world but none for brgadeasting to. the Soviet ;
Orbite- oe :

“Be o Bases,

Te (2) > Because governments object to oroviding bases for
aggressive psychological warfare which they do not influence or control,
it is difficult to find bases in areas suitable for broadcasting to the
Orbite ‘Furthermore: adequate breadcasting facilities take time to
Plan, build, and staff and leng tenure is therefore important. Howe:

. ever, the political climate of a country can change abruptly, with -

 pegulting. uncertainty as to length of tenures . Munich, for. instafice,
‘which once furnished-an excellent base for a variety of broadcasts
targeted t to the Orbit, appears to be becoming | less and less ‘satisfactory.

. : : ‘Cover and control problems are ‘closely: related to ;
this. .A base for a secure and competently managed operation should be
less diffieult. to obtain than for a loosely organized | One e

ay Seaberne transmitters offer mech in mobility but,
‘antenna Limitations restrict their éffective power. As in the case
of the VOA COURIER, | stationary antennas on land are’ required for
maximum effectiveness. Thus, the political problem becomes: the ‘same
as for land tranamitter bases, and: costs in investsent and maintennance
ave. considerably. ‘higher: than land. based operations. Moreover, the...
difficulties: of providing ‘eredible cover for a covert segborne operation
are ‘manifest. While this office will. contime to study VOA experience
in this fields it, sees no Prospect ‘of any. agency use forite ~

; GQ) the vOA. presently controls numerous broadcasting
bases and are developing additional bases, dn areas of the world |
suitable for our purposes. The necessary agreements with host: ”
countries have already been negotiated; power, housing, transporte
tion and. other. logistics. have been provided. The present: manage=
ment ‘of VOA are. sympathetic to sharing these bases’ with CTIAg 9. -
In addition to the’ saving in cost, this would furnish ug secure.
‘areas for transmitters with the minimum of housekeeping problems
If the difficult but not insurmountable problem of cover canbe —
mosolveds euch. Locations: would be - ideal’ ‘for: our. Purposes.

“Information Support

: qQ) To supplement available normal news | sources, a.
woadeasting ¢ to Orbit countries is dependent , for program material —

upon. intelligence | .
= 5 =

SECRET:
HW 50955. Docld:32424022 Page 9 j so


--- Page 10 ---
. SECRET
Security Information

upon intelligence reports, interrogation of defectors, escapees

and exiles, indigenous newspapers and a regular flow of intercepts
from enemy broadcasts. These are indispensable to eredible, intere
esting, and timely broadcasts. Despite our vast potential resources
and large U.S. expenditures in these fields, the effective "take" is
far from adequate, rarely timely, and unnecessarily costly. FBID, VOL,
and several others monitor the same foreign broadcasts to extract the
sane or similar information. Several U.S. agencies interrogate the
same exiles for PW information, whereas a single interrogator, trained
in Pu needs, could supply most, if not all, the requirements not only
for all radio but all other Pu activities better and faster. A cleared
consultant, on behalf of one of our more successful operations, pro-
duced on abundance of excellent support information and evaluation
data. The same data, properly sterilized and speedily disseminated,
could equally serve the VOA and any other covert or overt Bi effort
tergeted to the same area.

This complex problem needs a high level decision
by State and CIA and the appointment of a small team of officers
experienced in both PW and interrogation work with power to devise
an effective and efficient program to exploit our rich resources,

do To Deliver a Signal. That Cam Be Heard

(1) Soviet jamming of propaganda broadcasts raises
serious questions concerning our ability to deliver a signal that
can be heard above the jamming. Ye be sure, some of our breadcasts
get through because they are unable simultaneously to jam broadcasts
in all areas nor do they in practice jam a given broadcast trans=
mission at all hours.

For future plarming purposes, however, these factors
seem clear:

(a) Soviet capabilities for jamming are large and
on the increase. :

(b) The degree of their jamming seems to be re=
lated to their estimate of the harmful effect of the broadcasts on
their interests. Hence, the more effective parts of our propaganda
are Likely to be jammed even though other parts get through.

(c) We have no present capabilities te monitor
their jamiing if they use-=as they probably do in congested areas-=
lowspowered local. jammers.

(2) Prudent planning would, therefore, require that
any substantial future investments by CIA in radio broadcasting
transmitters include provision for all possible techniques te ensure
our broadcasts being heard to the maximum in spite of jamming.

(3) What techniques

26»

Eon
HW 50955 DBocld:32424022 Page 10 SECRET


--- Page 11 ---
SECRET
Security Information

(3) What techniques are available to meet this require:
ment? :

(2) To deliver a signal of such power as te be
heard above the jamming. Here we are at a disadvantage in that a
Low<powered and inexpensive lecat jammer is capable of rendering .
unintelligible a signal of substantially higher power from a distant
Points The greater the power of our transmitter the more complicated
the installation and the mere expensive the investment. And the more
diffieult becomes the cover and security problems as well as the
political considerations involved in base negotiations. Since the
eneay is not required to equal our power with his jammers, we would
therefore be fighting a losing battle if we attempted to "slug it out!
on & power basis only. ,

; (b) Jamming evasion through the device of vary- :
ing the frequency has so far proven to be an effective means of lay~
ing down a signal that can be heard clearly despite jamming. Tnis
method requires constant dial changing by the listener and must
assume therefore a desire on his part to hear the program sufficient
to overcome the annoyance of dial twisting. When used in combination
with appropriate programming techniques and the use of tuo or more
frequencies simltaneously this has so far proven to be the most
effective means of jamming avoidance. .

Such frequency shiftings cannot be accomplished
within the Lega). rules laid down for international broadcasting.
These mst, therefore, be “black” broadcasts in the sense that they
can be credibly denied by our Government as well as the goverment
of the host country. The movement at will through various frequencies
produces an annoying interference for the listeners to broadcasters to
whom those frequencies are legally assigned. This interference, while
fully justified in the case of USSR and satellite assigned frequencies,
must be avoided in the case of frequencies assigned to our friends.

: Our broadeasts using this technique have so
far avoided annoyance to friendly countries by the use of very low
pover, This Limits us to 4 small part of the total Soviet Orbit
target and that only on the periphery. The same techniques can be
used with higher power and at greater distances from the target. —
fo-aveld interference with friendly nations' broadcasts the base
most be lecated in an area which, with the proper antenna adjuat=
ments, permits our signal to "skip* over the territory of friendly
countries in its path. An example would be that, given a transmitting
‘bass in Saudi Arabia for broadcasts to the USSR, the facility would
have to be engineered so that its signal would not interfere with.
local, broadeast recepbion in Turkey and other friendly countries in

betucen.
(e}) The development of unconventional broadcasting
techniques for

-T-

HW 50955 DocId:32424022 Page 11 SECRET


--- Page 12 ---
S-E-~C~R-E-P
Security Information

techniques for the penetration of enemy domestic radio broadcasting
services might well enable us to overcome the handicaps imposed by
the jamming of our conventional .breadeasts to the Soviet orbit and
seize the cold war initiative in the radio sphere. It is a field
which has been neglected thus far.

; ” Soine possibilities in this area are described
in the otProgest froy" report of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Vol. Ww, Annex 26) of 1 February, 1951.

an _fmong then: is the “intrusion,” or "side-band
injection,® technique which was used successfully by the Russians
against Germeny during World War Il, It would enable us to intrude
our own propaganda messsges into radio programs being broadcast on
“enemy home channels. It would enable us in effect to talk to the -
' Soviet, satellite and neutral radio audiences. over enemy facilities
_ or compel the enemy to disrupt his own broadcast service in an effort —
to prevent it. It could also be used in turning Soviet propaganda
broadcasts to Western Europe toe the advantage of our friends. The -Troy
report observes as to’ the technique itself: an
: “This would be an effective and annoying
tocntque which would be extremely difficult to counter."

Utilization of this technique appears to. be
within our. capabilities at the moment. It has been fiéld tested
_and is ready for use ag soon as the necessary technical adaptations
ean be made to conventional transmitters. The time and cost involved
in mounting a facility for utilising this technique is now being ;
explored by ADCO at the suggestion of this office.

. . Another unconventional technique being devel~
oped by ar agency consultant and now almost ready for field testing
‘is the so-called "cuddling" device. This operates on the theory that
we can tranamit an interfering signal into an orbit domestic radio.
service which will cause the listening audience to shift.to our —
nearby program in endeavoring to tune out the interference on his
own home program. .

Other unconventional means of carrying the
cold war to the Orbit by means of clandestine radio might. be cap-_
able of invention and development, and the scientific and practical
potentialities in this field should be explored to the utmost.

This office is convinced that emphasis must
be placed more and more on unconventional radio broadcasting tech-
niques if the cold war of the air waves is not to become more one-
sided than it already is in favor of the Commmists. Properly devel-
oped and utilized, those techniques already perfected or in the pro-
cess of perfection and those which might be invented might even be

“the means of
a:

HW 50955 Docld:324274022 Page 12 S-E-C-R-E-E


--- Page 13 ---
SeE-CoR-E-P 1k,
Security. infomation _
the means of ahi fting the whole radio propaganda war balance in our
favor. They would be indispensablé in the event.of hot war. We,
therefore, aré_ impressed with the necessity of developing our capaci-.
ties in this direction to the utmost, and proceeding immediately with
the covert Procurensat. of bases ard equipment, indeed fer the task.

 . fo seeapitulate, rr would eéem desirable for .

GIA to Limits sie present and future conventional, radio broadcasting
acitvities to:the absolute nininun and that any new: undertakings.

» should provider :

. > A mastimum transnitter power of
200,000 watts copa of eecommodating: ;

2 Built in Jeaming evasion capabili-

9

‘ties; and

oe oe, 3 Built in unconventional proadeasting
Sapepinitieee ;

be Bases in secure and 1 protected areas:

whieh permit the use of the jaming evasion teshiiique without inter-

ference with friendly countries. A study of base possibilities is
now being madi by this office. .

Bo eed Time

Q) (a) Radio: “proadeasting facilitiés camot be created |
over night. From the time that plans are finally. approved, it tekes
' :12 to 18 months to design, construct. and install 4 tranamitter.
.Prior to’ such approval time is required: for the planning oveles negotia=
tion for bases, the staffing problem, CHE ;

(e) | Deep. cover penetration of existing radio sta~
tions or systems likewise require tine for development. °

.. (2) ain all; it would be prident, to. extinate that
upwards of two years aro. required from the conception of a project
for broadcasting and its implenhentation. Hence, the planning must
bs long-range. It is not possible to improvise broadcasting capabil—

ities for targets of opportunity, such as Stalin's death.

£.

(2) Control by era of the substance of broadeast and
the management of broadcasting operations should be absolute and through
officers directly responsible to agency control. :

(2) The doctrine of. compartmentalization should be
strictly enforced. No. ones excepting the handful of technicians required

to operate .
Jo 7
‘S-E-C-R-E-P

HW 50955 DBocld:32424022 Page 13


--- Page 14 ---
_ SeBCoRET
- . - . Sseurlty Information

to operate a transmitter, should'be allowed near the trananitter

site, The delivery of tapes, ete., should be through a cutout. Likes
wise, the studio and programming activity should be separated from the
operation of the transmitter ae well as from ‘any other activities of —
the cover organization... If two or more language groups use the same
facilities they should be compartmented from each others ® # #

(See Paras 4sa.(2))

* g. Htvaluation - ae
(Q) In the Preliminary Sarvey of Radio Broadcasting

| (25 February: 1953-—TS 86889) -attention was called to the need for a

continuing ‘evaluation of al] radio broadeasting-operations with partic=

ular referencé to coverage and impact, and sources for the essential
information were outlined,  ~ ; OO

_.. , (2) PP/oPs, in collaboration with this office, has -
initiated this much-needed undertaking. :

he ° Personnel

(1) There is a shortage of proféssional. and technical
personnel qualified for covert radio broadcasting. A program of

selective recruitment should be undertaken in coordination: with any
plans for new radio projects. . tt

“+ " (2): A training program in covert broadcasting techniques
should also be initisted: This training should be undertaken in safe
houses by detail- of qualified instructors from covert training for basic
indoctrination; te be supplemented by area-instruction by the area desks
and specialized radio training by Commo, and this office, .

5.

Recommendations o :
Pending clarification of CIA's future responsibility in the
_ cold war we have made certain ‘assumptions ag to. the criteria which

should govern agency ‘activities in radio broadcasting,
Our thésis is that CIA should use radio broadcasting in
covert Psychological Warfare only under the following conditions:

- & That the task cannot be performed by YOA or other -

overt media.* -

b. That any contemplated operation follow strict cone
septs for clendestine operations, including - ot a

So (2) Positive and direct agency control of both
management and policy. . re ott

. ‘.. ' (2) Strict security requirements ineluding com
partmentation of all elements of broadcasting operations. .

=10- (3) Maintenance of

SoH-C-R-BL

HW 50955 Docld:32424022 Page 14 ©


--- Page 15 ---
SeE-CoRel=-T
Security Information

@) Maintenance of sufficient. sover to permit ..
credible deniat of offiedal connection by U.S. or host: * country govern-
ment. e

e, That no direct bidadeast oparetion be undertaken by
OTA untal every possibility has been exhausted to have the tagk under
taken by another country (or countries) through penetration, manipula—
tion and/or contrel of or covert: ‘purchase of time on, ‘Andigenous radio
facilities.

Our foremost objective should ibe to ‘exploit the
; broadeastiny, syatens of felendly and neutral countries. This generally
is possible in ty wiyss / ;

(1) fo stimlate. our friends. ‘te greater agsressive ;
effort in their international, broadcasts to the. Soviet orbit;

(2) To influence the ‘output or the domestic sex.
vices o! friendly and neutral states in | the interests of the: Western
‘eause.

- wathin this frane. of reference we made the following
recemendatians: . a

“. (2) Proceed 8: aeioit the ning possibilities to.
Be. indigenous ratio systens in endly and néutral nations with the
objectives of '(a) increasing the amount and effectiveness of thair ..
propagenda éfferts. against USSR and the satellites, (b) exposing and
_dihibiting Commun/.st fifth column activities and () the madntenanes.
cf PrO-U.S. and pro-Hestern attitudes.

These migs%ens should be undertaken in closest
7 colleboratdon with the USIS fiipelons to the end that all that. can be
Secamplished overthye

(2) Undertake. & recruitment and training program to
make availabe highly qualified and thoroughly indoctrinated officers .
preferably with natural. cover, to undertake and to support ‘such ‘missions.

G3) tn eoopere“ion with State, develop a ponttive
pro. oem: for information ‘support of all propaganda activities. through
neximm use of intelligence and defector Bourees. | /

(}). Strengthen and streamline the machinery fox
policy guidance, with Washington headquarters responsible fer. broad
policy only end the. field missions to be given the widest. poaaible .
datitude in the application of: those policies to: local Fequireménts .
ard the exploitation. of targets éf opportunity, A mature staff officer.
experienced in-P.W. should be-available:in the mission to (a) feed
propaganda Mnea,, (») expedite Palle eapport (ec) coordinate with USIS

and (a) generally ;
ole

HW 50955 Docld:324940292 Page 15 SoEC-R-E-T


--- Page 16 ---
S-EC-RE-P
Security Information:

and (4). generally backstop the operation.

. 5) Beteblish nachingry’ for evaluating the substance,
eoverage, dnpact and management of radio operations. : _

2. (6). Procesd with thio: developnént of capehilities to

eleetionically imrude upon and othervise exploit the Commnisct Fedio -

breadeasting to their own and foreign ‘audiences. It is important to.

. . have these facilities reacy at the earliest possible date for possible ;
. use. in the cold war--let to have them available at the outbreak of

hot: wer. would bo a tragic mistake...

ee cers Be

fore: Recommendations with ‘edpect to speed fic
targets been tranaitted. to the Ssppropriste
adivisions .

(10) a ‘sna staf? element should be ereated to
supervise CIA planning and cperationa in: eovert radio broadcasting.
This’ staff. should bé. Lastructed to expedite the implementation of
the above recommendations and provide a continuing review of CIA
Policy and Program for the use of thid Media.

Rak Cc. “Hoya Egner
C. LLOYD EGRER

25 May 1953

ede
S-E-C-R-EoB

HW 50955. Bocld:32424022 Page 16

