
--- Page 1 ---
198-10007-10013)

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992)

JFK Assassination System
Identification Form

AGENCY :
RECORD NUMBER :

RECORD SERIES :

AGENCY FILE NUMBER :

ORIGINATOR :
FROM:
TO:

TITLE:

DATE:
PAGES:

SUBJECTS :

DOCUMENT TYPE :

Agency Information

ARMY
198-10007-10013

CALIFANO PAPERS

Document Information

CONTROL OF TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA

00/00/0000
17

CONTROL OF TRANSFER OF FUNDS

CONTROL OF MOVEMENT OF CUBAN PROPAGANDA
CONTROL OF CLANDESTINE MOVEMENT OF GUERRILLAS
AND ARMS

EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
SURVEILLANCE OF CUBAN DIPLOMATIC, COMMERCIAL
AND CULTURAL MISSIONS

STRENGTHENING OF COUNTER-INSURGENCY
CAPABILITIES

PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT

CLASSIFICATION : Secret
RESTRICTIONS: = 1B; 4
CURRENT STATUS: — Redact 5
DATE OF LASTREVIEW: — 04/09/1998
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : Califano Papers, Box 4, Folder 6. Draft report concerning control of access to and surveillance of
Cuba.
nt of the Army EO 19526
Coe aesty 3 Exclude & Exempt
: ee
NO STATE OBJECTION A noter To F fbb
Review Date By.

TOD
BY.

v9.

HW 50955 DoclId: 324274006

SSIFICATION
DATE CY yy

Page 1


--- Page 2 ---
DRAPT stomn - <2. of 1. copies
: -. GRo| Nn -
. ge tom aut matte
‘St ading an Onathy)

i. -

ASSP cat ton a

a. Developed highly useful information on frequency
of Guban “chartered” flights te Brazil, names and nationalities
of passengers and eres, ond lax weagures of control foliewed
by Brasilien authorities. Tranemitted this information te
gestion chiefs in the Letin American countries of the non
Bregiliens travelling on these £iighes.

b. Maintained close watch over travel to and from
Gabe. See Amaex B for table of Imewn travel of Latin 4merieons
during July and August.

€. Ag @ vesult of information furnished ty his by the
Cia Station in Buenes Alves end with the Station's. urging, the
Argentine Minister of Interior indicated that he would meke
every effort to prevent Argentine delegates vom attendiag the
International Union of Architects Cengress im Havana.

ad. At the urging of the CIA Statten end che tabesey
the Bolivien Minister ef Interfer issued ia mid-July an order
prohibiting the granting of travel permite to Cuba on other

bloc countries to Bolivian nationals.

SSeREr

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 2



--- Page 3 ---
@, Partly as a cesult of the offerte of che CIA
station in Gantiago, the Covermant of Chile prohibited the
entry fate Chile of ovgeatvers of the Cuban ssonsered Sacead
tatie American Youth Congress, which had bean acheduled to tsle
place ia Santiago im dugust. Thie was one of the factors which
led to postponement of theConare

£, After considerable prodding by the CIA Station
ané the Embessy the Meister of Public Security of Costa Rica
Bee presented legislative proposals to the Coata Rican Assesbly

which will wequiire el persons intending to travel te Comunist
 eounteles to have thedy travel approved by a aewly created

' esta Rican wecurlty agency. |
g. CHA Station fa Hextes city developed information
sonnereing the elandeatine exerivel of passengers ta Vewa Ceus
on Gubaa merchant ships, #fforte are being wade ta ebteia more
inforuation and to encourage etrieter contrela by che Nextcan
authorities, |

a, Ineteucted Exbasey Conakey to tey to pereusde -
Guinean sutherities to deny une of aiepert feellicies by flights
en Habana-Koseoh route, These efforte achieved « temporary
withholding of porniesion for future regular flights, at least

BW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 3


--- Page 4 ---
«Qu.

until euch tine es the Soviets develop their ow refueling dacilities
et fomakry, ,

b>. Tnecwucted Enbassy Blo to approach Brasilien
authorities to express our deep concern at the growing frequency
of Gubun non-scheduled flights to Sraztl and request their
cooperation in curbing thea, Alse laserected our Eubaseies
in geverel Latin Anerican countries to work with CIA station |
ehiefs in furnishing the names of metionale of these comneries
travelling on these flights te local authorities and urging
than: (1) to inetituce tighter controle on their own citizens

travelling te Cuba, aad & te exprese their concern te the
: £ Brazil’ Uvex estan ase of Bragdl ae a way station
fev transporting subversives.

@. As @ Peeult of representations wade to the Brigich
governsent about Cuban flights te the Cayman Ielends carrying
latin Anerican subversives, the Bririeh developed an sdminteteative
sehone whieh whll offactively prokibic the uee ef British
tavibbean dependencies by Cubana es transit paints fer passengers. .
The British intend to require tranelit vieas of passengers passing
through their arese, and te weject eppldeations for auch visas

eucept in certain special eases, Parscus aot posecosing vieas
would be prevented from leaving thele alrereft, or would be

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 4



--- Page 5 ---
ade

ed te their point of origin.

é, Instructed Sabassy Mexico City on August 29 te
inform the Mexieaa airline GMA thet the Vaited States 1s
eppesed to a proposal that GMA operate charter ‘PMghes to carry
gefugees from Havana te Central Asmerlos. etn, as @ regule,
stated that they hed wo intention of ereceediag Gather with
| thie project. |

@, Insteucted 0.5, Niselone im Curaces and the Te gue
$0 investigate a repewe thet REM was planeine ce yenew ah
scheduled Curasao-lakens Slighte ond to relwerate 08 oppositien
to resumption of aie service to Cuba, KLM aseured cur Exbessy
thet there is ad plan to initiate gerview, acheduled or nou
sehedoled, to Eebane,

. Iseteusted Embassy Gttava to express our strong
objections te @ proposal ebae a Cybang charter flight pick up
& geoond group of ULB. stvdente ta Montreal ta Oly then te cuba,

gS Inetwucted Consulate Ceargetewe te davesti gate
beng appreaches to secure flight fackiities. Mlesien reported
om August 1 thee the Govarner had no knowledge of aay talks.
between the 8,6. Minkeery of Comeualeatiens and the. Cuban Governe
ment regarding landing righte for Cubsna planes, ‘The Covernor

separate ein

cs

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 5


--- Page 6 ---
sao

ation te inquive further and to keep wa
adwised. fondea reported thar aclhther the Gubsm eer the Beltich
Gulane Governments had vaieed the issue ef landing vighte with
BUG, | -
&, Usged the govermmenta of Montes, Canada, Jenaies

and the detherlands to eefusa to acetet the Cuban government
im dee efferee to fiad 6 short route for satan the 8 Anerieen
students who illege lly travelled co tvbe, Also deformed Pon

Slee 1 Aixways that wo were copesed to ¢ Cubon raquest fax
a PAR charter flight to fly the students from Habana to Hew York,

i, ineerusted our missions at fort of Spain and

Barbados on suveral ecessions to approach theses goveranents .
euprané the concern of the 0.8, ot indlestions of Gubeo dnteresc
in the use of thet aviation meilicias.
/wheb the Toreign Secretary
lable that would emable

Gt to control soverents of aigeraft vithta their tarwi
_ siting exavples of such controle feetitwtead by Hextes, Caceda

aod Leclaed. Ue fadteated eeseptivences to che propose] that
the Het of suggestions be ade aveilable ta the aviation official

HW 50955 DocId:32424006 Page 6



--- Page 7 ---
unt of Chile to gefuss visas to Cuban delegetas:
to a preperatery meeting planing for the If tatia Awarteon
Youth Congres scheduled for August in the Chilean captnat.
‘Inobility of Coban delegetes to obtain Chiltan vieas gor this
| mesting te one of the conertbucing ieetors te the Cullen sponsors
wuncing during Auguat that the aeetiag bad beea postponed,

k. Semt general instructions to eur wissions im countries
whieh participate du the Intermational Unien of Architects eating
then to unge the eooperation of gevermentsl eutherLties in

. preventing ov dieeoureging the attendance of their citizens to
the VIE UIA Ceageesa fa Babaua, mbar 29-0eteber 4, 1963.
Polliewsd this up with ineteuecdone to individeal pects to oey
uhere feasible ty dissunde arehitects from feee world countrica
fron serving on the jury for the seleecion of a Bey of Pigs

commence food parcel ehipmentsa to Cubs, on a flomorctal haste,
that would heve gequéwed the eotablishuent of echedwied weekly
ehavter flights by Canadien planes.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 7



--- Page 8 ---
Responding to the urging ef the CIA Station police
of the State of Guensbare seized large quantities of prapa-
gends brought into Beard) by passengers on the epoetal tubes
flights. For example, some §0 pounds of prdated propaganda
was taken from the various peseengera who arrived oa the 16
Augast Cubena flight.
3.

% Continued eurveillenee of the area sursounding Cuba
dsving the mouth of July at the sews cate aud with the sane
euphasle ag peler to 1 July 1963.

&. Continued to maintain U.S. Forces, erimarliy f2on
withie the Atlantic Command, available to assist other Garthbesn
geverimentse in the interception of suepicioug crave in
territorial watere, ag might be wequested. Be euch vequests were
veceived from any other goverment during the ported covered by
thie cepert. However, U.S, Ferees did keep evack ef tho .
location of the Soviet werchant freighter MITCHURINSE,

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 6



--- Page 9 ---
wae suspected of Caxrying subvexsives and emue from Ocha te
British Guisne tn sdd~July, METCSURINSR was under U.S.
surveillance gon its departure from Havana watil United
Kingdom forces atgumed the tack ef keeping this ship under
survelliance upen ite eppresch to Georgetow, British Gutana.
Subsequentiy, British police search of MITCHURINGK in British
Gulona waters revealed nothing ef 2 suspicisus nature.

At the vepeated urging of the CLA Station in Idma
the Peruvian Government lam in August published a new anti-
terreriste Law providing a penalty of ao lees then five years
‘impetsorment for persona whe pereielate fn guerrilia activities
ex in the illegel memufacture of weapons or explosives.

The Pemivien Natioual Intelligence Service ts werking
sti a igad furmished by the CIA Station in Miva concerning a
200 ton vessel cepertedly involved in arse tratiic.

Inetryeted owe Conunulate General in Georgetown to
investigate geperts thet commercial eargoce (which sould conceal
illielt amuse traffic out of Cuba) had developed between British
Gulana and Cube. Investigations to data have been negative.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 9



--- Page 10 ---
Cooperated with the Foreign Assete Control Office of
the Treasury Department in developing blocking controls with
respect to Cuba which went inte effect on Jely 9, 1963.

8. Gontinued the installation of ailinary cemuntea-
tions feeilities in Latin America. Operational dates for the
sulti-channel radio stetions to be tneteiled im Nenegua,

"Wiearagua and Tegueigelpa, Hoaduras have been delayed to 15
Octeber 1963 and 18 Decesber 1963, feepectively because of sew
engineering amd contractual tequigemente. Negetiations: are
continuing with Colombia aed Keuador for installation ef U.S.
wilicary tadie fsellitias. Conpletion ef * sow enmmereial crans=
istioian cable in the Panama Cone? fone within the eening meath
is expected to improve militery eemamientions within the
Gnited States and the Conmander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern Commend.

b. Centimed the eurveillance of Guba by U.S. Forces ,
xeporting as before te U.8. commanders, organizations end agencies.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 10



--- Page 11 ---
Reports of survedileneé Keve been dieseximatad to ali who heve

& Teqdirenent to know.

@. Betablished a 24 hour par day, 7 days per week duty
‘wateh et the 0.8. Militery Greups fn the Caribbemm couertes ts
eonjunction with implementation of the military alextiag system.
Contlaudd efferss to staff the U.S. Southera Command Intelligence
Center with properly cleared, trateed personne] (this center is
the wilitery focal point for relaying information eonceraing
the movement of subversive). Pilled, partially, the authocized
billets is the 0.8. Southern Command Fateliigence Castex and
tock wider consideration the problem of en imexesse in the billet
eeructuse in the Center. The Commander-in-thieg, 0.8. Seuthern
Commend together with his iatelligence officer visited Boaduras

and Nicaragua and determined thar wo cignificent probleme exieted
which would interfere with effective eperacions in these
eguntries.

a, Setion previously initiated by the Commander, U.S.
Raval Forees, Southern Commend (CQMUSNAVSO) te establish a Small
Craft Inepeetion and Training Team (SCIATT) 26 « contribution te
the Caribbean Sumved lance Syatem ie progressing satiefeetorily.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 1i



--- Page 12 ---
who
Perugnent assignment of U.S. Coast Guard persesmel to SCIATT
ie the Canal Zenc hee been apereved and the 0.8. wast Guard
hag taken appropriate implementing actions,

@. During the period ef this zeport, the SCIATY con
dugted en om-the-jok training course at Punterenes, Cesta
Ries. Yraluing wee given te 13 mewbers of the Guardia Civil
af Coste Blea whe worn either eawly asciened te the 40 foot
Coast Guard utility beats (CCUBe) or ware to be abeigned as
eeplacemint crew monbers.

fs A quexterly inspection and evaleation of the ceuns
provided other Central American couteries was sondueted during
the peried 17 te 91 Angest by a wotdle training team Gert)
mate up of SCIATT persomel.

&» Contiwuad effexts to improve the interne] security
of Lovin dmerican armies through the pravieion of intelligence
. &ivisete. Presently there are such advisers aesigned to 14
‘Latin countries, emphasizing eounterintel Ligence aud counter
subversion.

bh. Ooving the reporting peried MiTa conducted tralaing
in eounterineurgesey Cox the armed forces of Coloubia, Bolivie,
Venesuele, Peru and £1 Salvader.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 12



--- Page 13 ---
i. Givie Asticn MTTe were sent to Cuatenale, Bolivia,

GIA Stations throughout Letin America continued in a
great majority of counteies te furnieh co the leeal daternst
security orgenizations with vier they aro in Liaison informe=
Siow coneerniag ttavelers te and Gram Guba, ad well as auch,
information as came te CIA's attention concerning the movenent
of Cunda, ates gad propagends wateriel, Ya many taetances, the
fumnishing of information te the internal security services by
the GTA Station was paralleled by the gumlehing of eimilor
information to the forelen office by the Avbcsoader er bie
representative. The response te this infermation hea varied
greatly. The Cental dmeriean countries, in general, began to
pay attention to the inferwstion and take action on ic. At the

Guming the reporting period
other extreme, the Brasilien Coverement/showed little inclination
te follow up om the daformation.

@ Belteretad to the Foreign Minister of Pera our
imtexest in having the facte of the Puerts Meldonada ineident

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 13



--- Page 14 ---
Seough? te the attuntion ef the O88, ead urged thet this action
be taken ae goon oe poseibie.

Be Beged the Cove ib of Gustemale te submie evidence
of cemumiet aetivity to che GAS.

fe ca ses Le &

wee ee . eee - feet ete fees,

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 14



--- Page 15 ---
Inditeucked ‘mbassy La Pan to follow up elusely on
charges of involvement of Cuban mission tn intemal politics
of Bolivia, aud, et the Euhersy's disexetion, to paint out te.
Bolivian officiale the opportunity for a possible bresk in
eelations with Cuba, Eabasey ie Fae wae not able to press
fer a break whem the evidence of Cuban intervention did aot
prove to be sa conglusive a6 eriginslly reporeed..

Se

& Obtained setion by the COAS on July 3 on the Levalie
Committee Report trensuitting the decument to tha geoveramentes
aad urging then to inplement the epeedfic and general recom
mendations contained thereia as econ. as possible.

bh. Threugh Embasey Managua ieforsed the Hlearaguen
Goverment of the matters which wi wanted te have eoneldexed
duving the infernal meeting of the Mintecars of Security end
Taterior ef the Iethuiea countries held in Manegue, duguat
26028 iw preseratian for the second formal meeting ef the
Nanagua Security Conference countries later this year.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 15



--- Page 16 ---
& Reagsured President Sebich of Nicaragua in the
west eophatie terme that tha Nuclear fest Bas Trenty did met
wean thet our attitude toward Castro hes altered in che
lightest, ead etrassed our interest in seeing steady progress
by all the istheden comertes to implemeating the cecoumenda~ |
eieus of the Managua Seeurley Conference to beck: Cuban
subversive akforte..

& Snpletned tn detail the astwre of the tuba thereat
end the elated policy objectives of the U.S. during eonversa-

| @fon in Lender end ta Washington with Me. Adem Watson, newly
apgoiated Usitieh Aubassader to Suba.

@. The Agency's press service dering the reporting
period trenemitted 12 articles,

commentaries, aad backorousder's
on ite wireless file eexvice os USIA posts throughout Latin
dmexicd for placement in the Lowa newspepera and the Volee of
dnevles Spanish broadeasts to Latin Americs carried a total of
20 commentaries and features on the subject of Cuban-based
mibyeresion im addition ta the segulae maporting of develosments
im the hourly newecasts.

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 16



--- Page 17 ---
b. in tesgones to steading Agency instructions to atve
. @Pecial attention te develosments velated re Cuba-baned
gubversion, WSIS pests in Latin America were promt ia reporting
ineidents and in providing editerial coments from the Latin
fmeriesn press, ali of whieh was used de the Ageney*s radio and
Tike gain develoom:

ents treeted in tha Agency’a tedio ad
presse coverage included Gastre's July 26 apaech urging revelu-
tiene in Latin America, the Gecowery af terrorist eeagons
factorieg im Gaayauetl, the locean Vier Pracideat's eecitshon

* e€ €uban tespensibiliey for tersortan, the statemmnt by Gate
Department Prades Offieer Richerd Paillips that “potential
‘subversive agente” fren Cuba ta the Caribbean area were pase ing
theongh Grom Caymen, the expuiaiion of a Bolivian youth leadex
for receiving funds fron Cuba, Castro-ttained terrorists ia
honduras, /Polteien protests ageines onddidag by the Coben Eobaany
in the miner"s strike. A Voles of Amerles roving raporter tn
Letin dueries provided several teports sdzteee
eubvertion pletuce in countries he wisited.

¢. Te guppert of the dgeney’s effort en Cuban-besed
subversion, the publicationa center in Mexico begen work on

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page i?



--- Page 18 ---
. - as

three penphbete during the period basad on Centwa's ceport. of 5

his vielt to tha Soviet Union (showing that he contradieted

himself in cope of bis extravagant cleias of Soviet progress) ,.

the losses eulfered by Guban labor wader Castre, and the fete

of political piisonere in Cube. When completed, theae pamphlets

will be reproduced and distributed in quantity throughout the -

GEO s

| REERES..
L : . wget me tee ch

HW 50955 Docld:32424006 Page 16

