
--- Page 1 ---
(202-10002-10124

| 2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992

AGENCY :

RECORD NUMBER :
RECORDS SERIES
_ AGENCY PILE NUMBER

ORIGINATOR :
PROM ¢

; TO

. EETOR
DATE

PAGES
SUBJECTS

DOCUMENT TYPE ;

CLASSTFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS

CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW
OPENING CRITERTA
COMMENTS

DATE EXEMPTED: MAR

HW.50955 Docld:32425002 Page 1

7 Date : 99/14/98

Page : 1

JPK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM

AGENCY INFORMATION
JCS
202-10002-10124
JCS CENTRAL FILES

DOCUMENT INFORMATION

OSD
CYRUS R. VANCE

: MULTIPLE RECIPIENTS

CUBAN AFFAIRS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
06/26/65

27

ICCCA, ADMINISTRATION

PSYCHOLOGICAL PROGRAMS ~- CUBA

“SECOND LATIN AMERICAN YOUTH CONGRESS

POSSIBLE RETALIATORY ACTIONS BY CUBAN GOVERNMENT

PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CONFIDENTIAL

LA, 1C

RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
05/15/98

4 of 15. Memo from Vance to
and ASD(ISA) re: Cuban
ICCCA report on

JCS Central File, Box 3,
Seckrm, SecNav, SecAir, CICS,
Affairs in the Dept. of Defense.

Possible Retaliatory Actions by the Castro Government.

TR} - ITEM IS RESTRICTED



--- Page 2 ---
3) December 1963,

we eee
MEMORANDUM FOR COLONEL HAIG
OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL , DA

Subjects Payohological Programs Subcommittee - Cuba

1. An informal meeting of the Interdepartmental Subcommittee
(Psychological Programs) on Cuban Affairs was convened in i
‘Room 7519, New State at 1430 hours, 30 December 1963. The
agenda for the meeting was not pre-announced, Present from A
State were Chairman Bowdler, Sylvester, .and Montenegro; COE
from CIA, Tilton and Hol Lowa ‘from USIA, Murphy; and the —_ oCDe. |
undersigned.- |

2, The feulowite topics were discussed:

Mr. ROnT revel tate laber advisor for Latin meri ce; ;

described the anticipated meeting as a "founding" assemblage

of left-wing Labor leaders, socialists, and communists who

will attempt to resolve their differences. State believes .

that. there will be a concerted effort by the communists

te wrest the Leadership of whe or pedgling federation from
Mexican socialist elements. Following actions were

/ discussed:

(1) State to. cable US Ambassador to Brazil to
. aseertain the degree to which local (mot national)
-> governmental elements will support disruptive and
harassing - actions before and during the meeting.

. (2) State to circularize Latin American posts ;
“with the suggestion that local influences be brought
to bear in order to discourage country delegates

from attending ‘the meeting. |

(3) USTA to consider VOA broadcasts to Latin
poe America in order to exploit exposes of Cuban, :
pv. Bags German, and Chinese. Communist labor conditions.

(4) CIA. to continue black propaganda operations | '
we “snfnackt hich suggest | Postponement of the meeting. - COI
i - wee

ws

DOWNGRADED AT 3 YEAR INTERVALS; - ay
a OECLASSTPTED AFTRR 12 YEARS. | y
DOD DIR AL00.10 .

. err sotsninereny erates feerenss

Id:32425002 Page 2



--- Page 3 ---
September 21, 1963

. MEMORANDUM FOR MR, JOHN H, CRIMMINS
Goordinator of Cuban Affaire
Department of State |

- SUBJECT: interdépartinestal Coordinating Coramittee of Cuban | : . € se
; - - Affaive: Possible Retaitatary Actions by the Castro oe
; Government {DB}

References Mernorandum from. the Coordinator of Cuban Affaire — ee ke
Co Dept of ‘State, subject as 8 above, 13 Sep. 63 0 0

eo

: In response to reference memorandum, outlined below is the
. Status of existing contingency plans for those priority situations agreed _
|, Wpon at cur meeting of September 12, 1963, The numbering of the para-
_ "graphs below corresponda to the format utilized in the attachment to
.  €eference memorandum and includes those actloas for which Department
of Deiense specific or related military contingency plans, exlat,

a

“WAL Actions Against U.S, Targets in Guba
an Havaasment of Guantaname

‘"{a) Cutting off of the water supply"

: f ould be iroplemented ¢ on order.
- of CINCLANT La In addition, evacuation of non-sssential personnel
in 24 hours or leS® can be sccomplished if directed.

ib} Closing accéss to the base by Cuban workers
whe commute!"

oe ae

tro Nh ths Oa

_SYrEuanonty REVIEWED i

i TICALLY DeDLassifigo
ss ow" ; i) Ss GORFIDENTIAL = ROT AUTOMA’
= ane " _ me yop pig $200.18

oops 7 21/6 84

ce ~
. DOWNGRADED AT: 12 YEAR INTERVALS

HW 50955 Bocld:32425002 Page 3



--- Page 4 ---
955 Doold:324295002 Page 4

Hokter airoraft to Pench the scene, Such overdlights may be auth
lized only by specifically Goslgnated comimandere,

Be Attack oa winging arese employed by exiles in the
Caribbean" : :

‘"E, Actions Against Targets inthe US

7 Sahotere o¢ tesroristtd bombings" a

. COMMENT: The level of intensity of such actions contemplated within
the content of the poper is not considered te exceed the capabilities of
daw enforcement agenctes ta contxel, Thowe are military contingency

plane to protect agsinst this tyne of activity ata much higher level of ©
intensity. oe oy Ls
oa

"G,. devaming of US gadlo stadena

2 COMMENT: There ate glanding operating procedures to overcome
~~. Snterfereace and jamming methods exaployed against railitary communi=
“ eationa, ant BS ae

The semenavies of actions sat forth above are essentially defensive

reactions to Cuban iniialves, There are, of course, existing and related a

. mllitery plavs, retallatory innsiure, which range up te and include = dali
‘Stale military iavacion of Guba. ; : ee

itwas ganerully agreed at the September 13, 1963 meeting of
the Gommmilter that the enoet Hkely actions of the Cuban government are.
| those which would not provole United States vetallation seriously and
junncdiately endanseriny the Castro regime, It appears more Ukely
that Castro might intensify his support of subversive forcea in Latin

¥ A Se

4

oc a

(| BB®DOGe of substantially reduclay the time required for the Us. het |
ee eas



--- Page 5 ---
os

REPORT CONCERNING POSSIBLE RETALIATORY
ACTIONS BY THE CASTRO GOVERNMENT

i. The numbering of the subparagraphs below corresponds
_ te the numbering of those actions Yor which specific or

related military contingency plans exist. A brief summary

of the action contemplated by those plans is also provided,

"As Actions Against U.S. Targets in Cuba

“h, Harassment of Guantanamo

"Ca) Cutting off of the water supply"

implement order ICLANTPLT | [E
non-essential persomn n2h houreér less if
directed and consistent with national policy.

"(b) Closing access to the base by Cuban workers who
commute!

COMMENT Provision is made for t
sailored Naval Constructi
containing necessary skills

| force, and the possibie sta doning Sp
\ Ship at Guantanamo’ Bay aboard which ire p
fwith appropriate skills, Critical rsornnel
would be transported by air, to ai ive within
48 hours, when ordered by INCLANTFLT.

"(o) Staging detionstration and riots at the gates" —

COMMENT Execution of measures appropriate to the
aegree, kind, and exact location of the disturb-

or death"

"(d) Sniping at base sentries resulting in injury

COMMENT Measures may be taken appropriate to the

DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVALS;
NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED.

Enclosure



--- Page 6 ---
&
. BRS
Newse*

circumstance and situation Tanging from no action,

through action taken in self de nse by a wounded
entry or those assisting him, through increaséa
£ nT

GCC)

“"Ce} Sabotaginie of base facilities™ -

COMMENT Extensive security measures are taken to
prevent such sabotage by the Commander U.S,
Naval Base, Guantanamo. The nature of the action
taken would depend upon the nature of the

Sabotage and be designed to assure the continued
functioning of the Base.

"B. Actions Against U.S, Aireraft and Shipping

"1. Harassment of U.S. Shipping using Yucatan Channel,
Florida Straits, Windward Passage"

COMMENT The rules of engagement, which have been
approved by the highest national authority
provide that ships or aireraft ordered to the

area may take immediate protective measures.

; i “e Aah vaCuban aly,

mman are:
wor ately a
not authorized

3. pilots ar f

eae 8 either they or the ship t /
are defending is endangered by Cuban attack,  —
An the event Cuban aircraft limit their action ._
to harassment, U.S. pilots are iimited to making
‘their presence known by flying close aboard the
Cuban plane.

60)

"CG. Actions Against Cuban Exiles.

"1. Shooting down of pirate planes, possibly of US
registry.

"2. Hot pursuit of or attack on raiding planes over
the high seas or another country's territory. ane

(QeiDEN 2 Enclosure

| NW 50955 Boold:32425002 Page 6

RR NCR RTT rae Rae. EEE! |



--- Page 7 ---
"3. Hot pursuit of or attack on raiding boats on the
high seas or another country's territorial’ waters

"™, Attack on mother ship or exile raiders on .the
high seas or in another country's territorial waters

COMMENT It is noted that it is contrary to national
policy to permit raids on Cuba originating from
U.S. territory, however, at the time a ship or
aircraft is discovered to be under Cuban attack
it may be difficult to identify it as a "pirate!
"raider", "mother ship" or “exile raider", even
though this, in fact, may be-the case. All the
situations, set forth above, are covered, at
ieast in part, by the rules of engagement which
have been approved by the highest national
authority. However, the action summarized below
is authorized only in the case of U.S. ships and
aircraft and those not clea

being of foreign registry.
Suthorized to oreanize deli
force, however Al 8.0 ra
area of the attack take immediate protective.
measures including pursuit to, but not inte,
“Cuban air space or territord. ters. U.5,
ilots are not authorized to attack :
ip: ‘taft they are defending.
itta In the event Cuban:
n to harassment, U.S.
a heir)
fesehce Known by. flying close aboard the Cuban
plane. Overflight of Cuba by fighter aircraft |
is authorized only in those instances where it.
has been established that Cuban attack is being
made on a U.S. ship or aircraft and then only)
for the purpose of substantially reducing the ©
time required for the U.S. fighter alreraft —
to reach the scene... Such overflights may be
authorized only by specifically designated ©
commanders. —

pursuing,
ordered to the

a

—— GY)
ak

"5. Attack on staging areas employed by exiles in
the Caribbean

commen [fit tn regara to:

erica, plans

astro attacks on areas in Latin] _

w

Stance.by Latin
mer Loar rane: bject to US governmen
approval. There “is also an arrangement for the

oCWC)

3. Enclosure

we



--- Page 8 ---
po

HY 50955 DBDocld:32425002 Page 8

patie TIM

interchange of information between the U-
Coast Guard and British naval forces witr
fegard to possible Staging areas which m4

ed by exiles “in the Bahamas,

VE. Actions Against Targets in the Us

"L. Sabotage or terroristic bombings"

COMMENT The level of intensity of su
within the context of the

. There are military contingency
Plans to protect against this type of activity
at a much higher Level of intensity.

"2. Jamming of us tadio statiorist

COMMENT There are Standing operating procedures to
overcome interference and jamming methods
employed against military communi cations.

26 "Any additional pertinent information on existing
OF related plans" and "recommendations , if any, on other
likely actions which might be taken by the Castro govern-
ent In retaliation for Cuban exile raids" was also
requested. The furnished list of

CLO% were of "the level of
intensity which the committee agr

Aikely category, tt is inferred that what the committee
[ "level of intensity"

There are, however, existing
and related military plans, retallatory in nature, which
qenee up to and include a full seale military invasion of
aba. 7 ;

3. If it is assumed that the most likely actions of the
Cuban government are those which would not provoke United
States retaliation seriously and immediately endangering
the Castro regime, it appears more likely that Castro might
intensify his Support of subversive forces in Latin America

4 Enclosure



--- Page 9 ---
‘.) 7 J

b 9 2 DyOR,
31 December 1963.44 vis a ron AY ye

fs | oo . 0

=f READ
oe vee MEMORANDUM FOR COLONEL HAIG &

conn OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL, DA

Subject: Psychological Programs Subcommittee - Cuba

1. An informal meeting of the Interdepartmental Subcommittee ~ |
(Psychological Programs) on Cuban Affairs was convened in po
Room 7519, New State at 1430 hours, 30 December 1963. The
agenda for the meeting was not pre-announced. Present from Q
euabe were pretrman Bod or Sylvester, and Montenegro; GO

rom Tilton endjgmmagl from USIA, Murphy; and the
“undersigned. , PRY GCI)

2. The following topics were discussed:

a. CUTAL (Unified Labor Federation for Latin Sete ;
aa ee

meeting scheduled for Rio de Janeiro, 2h ~ 68 Januar
Mc. Montenegro, State laber advisor for Latin America,
described the anticipated meeting as a "founding" assemblage
of left-wing Labor leaders, socialists, and communists who
will attempt to resolve their differences, State believes .
that there will be a concerted effort by the communists
to wrest the leadership of the fledgling federation from
‘Mexican socialist elements. Following actions were
discussed:

(L) State to cable US Ambassador to Brazil to
~ ascertain the degree to which local (not national)
—- governmental elements will support disruptive and
harassing actions before and during the meeting.

(2) State to cireularize Latin American posts
with the suggestion that local influsnces be brought
-. to bear in order to discourage country delegates

from attending the meeting.

(3) USIA to consider VOA broadcasts to Latin
America in order to exploit exposes of Cuban,

— wes East German, and Chinese Communist labor conditions.
, (4) CIA.to continue black propaganda operations =
ti ; in vnkeh suggest postponement of the meeting. COM)

MS. oF

3 ;

. se niruon aurmeceerenc una .
| DOWNGRADED AT 3 YEAR INTERVALS; |
ARS. :

DECLASSIFIED APTNR 12 YE.

OSA, ASS Costnl Nae prep
rok Ae WORE NaS OO Y--— DOD DIR 6200.20’

ohare emi mp

HW 50955 BDoocld:32425002 Page 9



--- Page 10 ---
BY JOINT: ras : ATION i” < 7
SREMPTION, cw) (o. September * nee - | :

—WAYE5 1999

os MEMORANDUM FOR MR, JOKRN H. CRIMMINS : a ey Be
Coordinator of Cuban Affaire 7 |
Department of State

SUBJEGT: — Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban) gos
— . Affaire: Possible Retallatory Actions by the Castro oe
Government @) co

Reference: | Memorandum from the Coordinator of Cuban Affaiva 00.
Dept of State, subject as above, 13 Sep 63. ard a,

In tesponse to reference memorandum, outlined below ie the
. status of existing contingency plane for those priority situations agreed
|), wpon at our meeting of Septersber 12, 1963. The numbering of the paras
- "graphs below corresponda to the format utilized in the attachment to
o relerence memorandwn and includes those actions for which Departrnent
» > @f Defense specific or related millitary contingency plone exiet, =

Yo HAL Actions Against U, 3. Targets in Cuba

“4. Harassment of Guantaname

(a) Cutting off of the water supply"

evatuation of non-essential personnel
+ Gan be accornmplished if directed,

“ib) Closing access to the base by Cuban workers
who commu

l-hot poet Sarlal rower Q) ootelees b

Ts OR RS)

~ SYSTEMATICALLY REVIEWED vot unos neous

corte ee |

OCOESE 7 21/684 :

. Mozy
° DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVALS

av 0955 Docld: 32425002 _ Page 10



--- Page 11 ---
‘TONFIDENTIAL

cel  GOMMENT: | Provision is made for the introduction off_iliams .

| 4} Staging demonstration and widte at the ates”

COMMENT: Execution of measures appropriate to the degras,
Bod exact location of the disturbance, saazing from no action

*(@). Sniping at base sentries resulting in injory or

_ 82 situation ganging frou no action, through action tuken in self defense
. by a wounded sentry or those acalating hixa/

Tate

“4e} Sabotsging of base facilities"

/ SOMMENT: Extensive security meseured are taken to prevent such
i -gabetage by the Commander U. S. Naval Base, Guantanamo, The nate ©
; of the action taken would depend upoa the nature of the sabotage and be
: denigned io aesure the continued functioning of the Base.

death"

COMMENT: Measures may be taken appropriate to the circumstances

x “B, Actions, Against U. S, Alrceat and Shipping

an “i, Havassment of U. S. Shipping using Ucatan Channel, |
eel Florida Straite; Windward Pea sage"

COMMENT: The rules of engagements whieh have heen approved by ; |

the hishest hast national authority p peovide that ships or aircraft ordered to

Fem -
- : ;

‘ascents iguana nian uh Aa nannies nr mite sen

HY 50955 Docld:324295002 Page 11



--- Page 12 ---
HW 50955 Docld: 32425002 Page 12

: ”—_ 6OREtNERTIAL QD

om Actions Against Guban Exiles =~

"42, Shooting down of pirate planes, possibly of US reglatry. rae -

2, Hot pursult of or attack on raiding planes over the high _
_ §ORs OF another country's territory. ae ee

"3, Hot pursuit of or attack on raiding boats on the high seas
oF another country's terviterial waters, ; .

"4. Attack on mother ship or exile raidere on the high seas
or in guother country's territorial waters, ©

SOMMENT: itis acted that itis contrary to natioval policy to permit
waids on Cube originating from U. 5. tervitery, however, at the time
a Ghip or aircraft is discovered to be under Cuban attack it may be diffie
cult to identily it as @ “plrate," “raider, * "mother ship" or "exile raider,"
even though this, in fact, may be the case, All the situations, ‘set forth
above, are covered, at lesst in part, by the rules of engagement which
have been approved by the hishest naticasl suthority. However, the action

fummigrized below lg authorised only in the case of U.S. ships and. gine

ak and those not clearly identified as being of foreign registry. /



--- Page 13 ---
HW 50955 DBDocld:32425002 Page 13

. “8. Attack on staging areas employed by exiles in the
Caribbean" ; -

NEL Actions Against Targets in the US

"1, Sabotage or tervoriotic bombings’

COMMENT: The level of intensity of such actions contemplated within |

the context of the pooer ta not coneldered to execed the capabilities of -
law enforcement avencles to control. There are willitazy contingency
plans to protect agains this tyac of eeclivity at a much higher level of —
intedity. es

“d. Jaxnming of US vadlo ctutions't

COMMENT: There are standing operating proceduves te overcome
interference amd jamming methods employed againet military communis
eatiorun, ; .

The sumreavies of actions e&t forth above are eesentially defensive -—

reactions to Cuban initiatives. There are, of course, existing and related
military plane, retallatery in matare, which vange Up to and include a full
ecale military invasion of Cuba. .

it was generally agreed at the September 13, 1963 meeting of
the Committce that the moet Hkely actions of the Cuban government are
| those which would not provoke United States retellation sexiously and |
immediately endangerlag the Castre regime. It appears more likely
‘that Castee might intenwlfy his suppert of subversive forces in Latin

FA pe

4

-—CONFIDENTAL



--- Page 14 ---
REPORT CONCERNING POSSIBLE RETALTATORY
ACTIONS BY THE CASTRO GOVERNMENT

i. The numbering of the subparagraphs below corresponds
to the numbering of those actions for which specific or

- related military contingency plans exist. A brief summary

of the action contemplated by those plans is also provided.
"A, Actions Against U.S, Targets in Cuba
‘4. Harassment of Guantanamo

"Ca) Cutting off of the water supply"

i

ie a less if

One vial personnel in 2+ now
ational policy.

ee
directed and consistent with n

“(b) Closing access to the base by Cuban workers who
commute!

COMMENT Provision is made for the introduction of
: Sey

"(o) Staging demonstration and riots at the gatés"
COMMENT Execution of measures appropriate to the

degree, kind, and exact location of the disturp-
CO, Pave inc f onwaotion §

"(d) Snipiag at base sentries resulting in injury
or death"

COMMENT Measures may be taken appropriate to the

DOWNGRADED AT 12 YEAR INTERVALS;
NOT AUTOMATICALLY DECLASSIFIED.

Enclosure.



--- Page 15 ---
circumstance and situation ranging from no action,
through action taken in self defense bya wounded
sentry or those assisting him, %

COW)

-'"Ce) Sabotagine of base facilities -

CONMENT Extensive security measures are taken to
prevent such sabotage by the Commander U.S.
Naval Base, Guantanamo. The nature of thé action
taken would depend upon the nature of the
Sabotage and be designed to assure the continued
funetioning of the Base,

"B. Actions Against U.S. Aircraft and Shipping

"1. Harassment of U.S. Shipping using Yucatan Channel
Florida Straits, Windward Passage!

3

COMMENT The rules of engagement, which have been
approved by the highest national authority _
provide that ships or alreraft ordered to the

rea tay take immediate protective measures...

nC, Actions Against Cuban Exiles:

"1. Shooting down of pirate planes, possibly of US
registry.

"2, Hot pursuit of or attack on raiding planes over
the high seas or another country's territory. “

egneinenill 2 Enclosure

5. Docld: 32425002 Page15__



--- Page 16 ---
 GONADENHIAL ; |
"3. Hot pursuit of or attack on taiding boats on the
high seas or another country's territoria?’ waters

"4, Attack on mother ship or exile raiders on the
high seas or in another. country's territorial waters

COMMENT It is noted that it is contrary to national
policy to permit raids on Cuba originating from
U.S. territory, however, at the time a ship or
aircraft is discovered to be under Cuban attack —
it may be difficult to identify it as a "pirate!
"raider", "mother ship" or "exile raider", even
though this, in fact, may be the case. All the
situations, set forth above, are covered, at
least in part, by the rules of engagement which
have heen approved by the highest national

authority. However, the action summarized below

is authorized only in the case of U.S. ships and

aircraft and those not clearly i eK Weer

; peing of foreign registry...

OO

=

nS, Attack on-staging areas employed by exiles in
the Caribbean

3 Enclosure

5. Doold:32425002 Page 16



--- Page 17 ---
penitent

"B. Actions Against Targets in the US

"1. Sabotage ot terroristic bombings"

COMMENT The level of intensity of such actions ecritemplated
within the context of the paper is not considered
to exceed the Capabllities of law enforcement
agencies to control. There are military contingency
plans to protect against this type of activity
at a much higher level of intensity.

"2. Jamming of US radio stations"

COMMENT There are standing operating procedures to
overcome interference and Jamming methods
employed against military communications,

2. "Any additional pertinent information on existing
or related plans". and "recommendations, if any, on other
likely actions which might be taken by the Castro govern~
ment in retaliation for Cuban exile raids" was also
requested. The furnished list of possible retaliatory
actions by the Castro government were of "the level of
intensity whieh the committee agreed to be in the most
likely category." It is inferred that what the committee
had in mind by the most likely "level of intensity"
was that level which would not provoke the United States
into taking extensive countermeasures which might seriously
endanger the Castro regime. The summaries of actions
set forth above, which might be taken under existing
military contingency plans are essentially defensive
reactions te Cuban initiatives, There are, however, existing
and related military plans, retaliatory in nature, which ;

once up to and include a full scale military invasion of
uba. :

3+ If it is assumed that the most likely actions of the
Cuban government are those which would not provoke United

intensify his support of subversive forces in Latin America

u Enclosure

5 Docld: 32425002 Page i?



--- Page 18 ---
HW. 50955 DBocld:32425002 Page 18

than risk direct confrontation with the United States. © In
the long run, such action is more dangerous and difficult
to combat, and in the short run is less idkely to provoke

immediate and effective United States retaliation. Such

actions would be in keeping with Castro's repeated declara-
tions that Cuba is the main source of guidance inspiration
for the “inevitable” Latin American revolution. Whereas an
inflamed American public opinion over the killing of even a
few sentries. might require strong countermeasures, the
training of a greater number of Latin American guerrillas
than the 1500 or more trained in fiscal year 1962, probably

would not. Nor is it likely that the reburn of those trainees

to Latin American countries, their establishment of guerrilla
training bases, recruitment of additional personnel, and
engagement in insurgency actions would be as immediately
provocative as interference with the water supply at Guantanamo.
Similarly, closing access to the naval base Cuban workers who
commute would deprive Castro of a source of foreign exchange,
While such items as, ‘the harassment of air traffic into and out
of Guantanamo," or "the harassment of US aireraft operating in
the vicinity of or overflying Cuba," might be added to the list,
it is considered that specific provocative actions are less
likely and less Gangerous than the intensification of support
to subversive forces in Latin America. Such action not only

is in keeping with the declared communist intention to support
‘national liberation movements of oppressed peoples" but may

be done by means which avoid an invitation to overt Us military
countermeasures which would endanger the Castro régime. Thus,
they are considered as of that level of intensity which places.
them in the most likely category as well as being in the
category of most dangerous to the long range interests of the
United States.

5 Enclosure


